IMPERIAL GERMANY, 1871–1918
Economy, Society, Culture, and Politics

Germany in 1914: political and economic. Reproduced with permission of Cambridge University Press, from V.R. Berghahn, Modern Germany, Cambridge, 1987, p. 2.

IMPERIAL GERMANY
1871–1918
Economy, Society, Culture, and Politics
Revised and expanded edition

V. R. Berghahn

Berghahn Books
New York • Oxford

First published in 1994 by
Berghahn Books
www.berghahnbooks.com
Revised and expanded edition published in 2005
©Volker R. Berghahn 2005
All rights reserved.
Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of criticism and
review, no part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information
storage and retrieval system now known or to be invented, without written
permission of Berghahn Books.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Berghahn, Volker Rolf.
Imperial Germany, 1871–1914: economy, society, culture, and politics /
V. R. Berghahn.—2nd. rev. and expanded ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-84545-011-6

1. Germany—Economic conditions—1888–1918. 2. Germany—Poli
tics and government—1871–1918. 3. Germany —Social conditions—
1871–1918. 4. Germany—Intellectual life—19th Century. I. Title.
HC285.B395 2004
943.08’3—dc22

2004056003

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Printed in the United States on acid-free paper.

Contents

List of Abbreviations
Introduction: Imperial Germany and Historical Research

ix
xi

Part I: Economy
1. Economic Sectors and Structural Change
A. Agriculture, Industry, Commerce, and Services
B. Wealth and Incomes
2. National and Regional Economic Developments
A. Gründerboom, “Great Depression” (1873–1895), Expansion
and the Onset of Recession (1896–1913/14)
B. Regions and Regional Shifts, Infrastructural Change
3. The Organization of Industry
A. Labor Markets, Capital Markets, and Cartels
B. The Development of Enterprise, Labor Conflicts
C. Industrial Research and Applied Science

1

10

19

Part II: Society
4. Demographic Structure and Development
A. Population Growth and Patterns of Migration
B. Town and Country
5. Social Stratification and Inequalities
A. Basic Issues
B. Social Mobility
C. Marriage Patterns
D. Life Expectancy and Health
E. Nutrition
F. Housing
6. Women and Men
7. Issues of Generation and Socialization
A. The Young and the Aged
B. Generations and Generational Conflicts

38

44

58
71

Contents

C. Agents of Socialization: Family, School, Churches,
Apprenticeship, Military Service, High School, University
8. Minorities and Majorities
A. Basic Issues
B. The Catholic Minority
C. The Jewish Minority
D. Anti-Semitism
E. The Polish Minority
F. Alsace-Lorrainean and Danish Minorities
9. Basic Patterns of Social Inequality and their Milieus

87

113

Part III: Culture
10. High Culture and Popular Culture
A. Basic Issues
B. The Arts in the Bismarckian Period
C. The Rise of Modernism
D. Popular Culture, Workers’ Culture, and Industrial Design
11. The Sciences and Humanities
A. Basic Issues
B. The Natural Sciences
C. The Humanities
12. The Press, Its Readerships, and the Role of Intellectuals

121

158

171

Part IV: The Realm of Politics
13. The Constitutional Framework
A. Basic Issues
B. The Evolution of the Constitution
C. Civil, Economic, and Financial Codes
14. Parties and Elections in a Period of Dynamic Change
A. Problems of Parliamentarization, Party Structures, and the
Sociology of Parties
B. Electoral Systems and Electoral Behavior
C. Ideological Main Currents
15. Organizations and Movements in the
Extraparliamentary Sphere
A. Basic Issues
B. Lobbies
C. Trade Unions and Professional Associations
D. Agricultural Associations
E. Nationalist Associations
vi

176

189

208

Contents

F. The Political Organization of Minorities
1. The Peace Movement
2. Religious and Ethnic Minorities
3. Women’s Associations
G. Pluralization and Bloc Formation
16. Structure and Functional Changes in the Executive Branch
A. The Government Apparatus: The Kaiser and his Court;
Reich Government; Federal States and Local Governments
B. Infrastructural and Social Policies; Repression (Police,
Judiciary, Army)
17. The Evolution of Domestic Politics, 1871–1914
A. The Early Years Up to Bismarck’s Fall
B. Stabilization and Crisis, 1890–1914
18. Foreign Policy
A. Bismarck’s Diplomatic Balancing Acts, 1871–1890
B. The Wilhelmine Period, 1890–1914

225

244

254

Part V: World War I
19. The July Crisis of 1914
20. Strategy, Diplomacy, War Aims As Seen “From Above”
A. The Military
B. Neutrality and Alliance Politics
C. Economic Elites, War Aims, and Domestic Politics
21. The World War As Experienced “From Below”
A. The Outbreak of War and the German People
B. The Totalization of War at the Front
C. The Totalization of War at the Home Front
22. Military Defeat and the Collapse of the
Hohenzollern Monarchy

264
273

Conclusion
Appendix: Statistical Tables
Notes
Bibliography
Index

296
301
347
367
381

285

291

vii

To Marion

List of Abbreviations

AEG
BASF
BDI
BGB
BRT
CDI
CV
DMV
GNP
HAPAG
HKT
KWG
NDP
PTR
R&D
RM
SPD
TB
TH

Allgemeine Elektrizitäts-Gesellschaft
Badische Anilin- und Sodafabriken
Bund der Industriellen
Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch
Bruttoregistertonnen
Centralverband der Deutschen Industrie
Centralverband deutscher Staatsbürger jüdischen Glaubens
Deutscher Metallarbeiter-Verband
Gross National Product
Hamburg-Amerika Paketfahrt-Aktiengesellschaft
Society of the Eastern Marches
Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gesellschaft
Net Domestic Product
Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt
Research & Development
Reichsmark
Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands
Tuberculosis
Technische Hochschule

Introduction

The German Empire, founded by Otto von Bismarck in 1871 and lasting until the end of World War I, has been the focus of intensive research during the
past four decades. To an extent that should not be underestimated even today,
this no doubt welcome development was due to the arguments about the war
and its origins that the Hamburg University historian Fritz Fischer advanced
in the 1960s. The controversies that he unleashed shifted research from the
Weimar years and the Third Reich toward the pre-1914 period and the question of continuities and discontinuities in modern German history “from Bismarck to Hitler.”1
However, this is no more than a partial explanation of the rich scholarship
on which the following chapters were able to rely. Our understanding of the
Imperial period has also been expanded by research and debates whose scope
went far beyond Fischer’s original concerns. Above all, the historiography of
this period has benefited enormously from the pluralization of perspectives
and methods that the discipline of History has experienced internationally. If
political history continued to be at the center of academic teaching and research during the first two postwar decades, economic, social, and cultural
history soon began to catch up, moving the discipline in many new directions. Indeed, what continues to characterize historical writing around the
world today is its methodological and thematic diversity. There may still be
“fashions,” but their influence is no longer comparable with the hegemonic
position that political and diplomatic history once enjoyed.
These developments have also provided us with a more colorful and sophisticated picture of modern German history. Historians began to research
topics about which virtually nothing was known only a few decades ago.
Whoever tried to write a comprehensive history of the years 1871–1918 in
those earlier years would have found it impossible to synthesize developments in the country’s economy, society, and culture in ways that, at least
theoretically, are available today.
This dramatic change poses a great and daunting challenge. Those critical
readers of this book who believe that we live in an age of specialization and
fragmentation will presumably point out that the days of grand synthesis are
over. I happen to believe that we should not—indeed must not—abandon the

Introduction

attempt to write the history of an entire society in a given epoch instead of
merely examining one or two of its microscopic parts.
At the same time it would be naive to think that the richness of contemporary scholarship opens up the possibility of producing a perfectly wellbalanced textbook. Any general text is bound to take positions on past and
current controversies; it will deal with open and perhaps unresolvable questions. When such points will be reached in later chapters, I will attempt to be
fair and provide enough historiographical context without dubbing a particular argument that I happen to disagree with unceremoniously as “wrong.”2
Knowledge is too precarious to permit such apodictic judgments. It also
seems to me more honest to clarify up front the most important premises that
run through this study, as I certainly would not wish to mislead the reader
into believing that I have all the “right” answers.
What are these premises, and what is the larger historiographical context
of this book? If the Fischer Debate was initially centered on the decisionmaking processes of July 1914 that triggered World War I, subsequent work,
perhaps inevitably, turned toward the underlying causes of that catastrophic
conflict. In this process, firmly held convictions about the basic principles of
German foreign policy between 1871 and 1918 to the effect that they were
exclusively determined by the country’s exposed geographical location “in
the middle of Europe” came to be challenged.3 According to the older view,
both Bismarck, the first Reich chancellor, and his successors had been haunted
by the nightmare of foreign coalitions and by 1914 in fact felt “encircled” by
a hostile combination of Britain, France, and Russia.
The historian Eckart Kehr was the first to counter this view in the early
1930s when he rejected the notion of a “primacy of foreign policy” and put
the concept of the “primacy of domestic politics” in its place.4 He agreed that
the international predicament of the Hohenzollern monarchy was quite desperate in the years before World War I. But to him this was the result of a policy initiated by the Kaiser and his advisers in the 1890s. It was in those years
that Germany embarked upon tariff and armaments policies that permanently
antagonized Russia and Britain, the two major powers to the east and west of
the country. Both responded by trying to contain the Kaiser’s ambitions.
However, according to Kehr, German policies of the 1890s were not in themselves defensive reactions to an increased foreign threat; rather they resulted
from a domestic pact that industry and agriculture concluded at this time
against the perceived threat of a growing working-class movement at home
that had begun to demand, ever more persistently and loudly, changes in the
distribution of wealth, power, and influence inside Germany.
It was Hans-Ulrich Wehler, above all, who subsequently applied Kehr’s “primacy of domestic politics” argument to the Bismarckian era.5 Like his successors, Bismarck, too, was assumed to have been driven not by a cauchemar
xii

Introduction

des coalitions, but by the nightmare of a threatening social revolution. At first
he attempted to deflect foreign policy dangers to the periphery of Europe by
posing, in the wake of his wars of unification, as a man of peace. By claiming that the newly founded German Empire was a satiated power, he could
concentrate on consolidating the internal power structures of the monarchical state. And when the success of this policy proved ephemeral at home, he
tried—Wehler continued—to divert attention from his domestic difficulties
by announcing a policy of colonial expansion. His main interest was not in
overseas possessions but in blocking shifts in the existing imbalance of
forces that favored the socioeconomic and political groups supporting the
status quo and rejecting the demands of the lower classes and the industrial
working-class movement in particular.
It did not take long for the “Kehrite”6 position to be challenged by the
diplomatic historians, who objected to the idea of seeing foreign policy as
one element of a more comprehensive “history of society” (Gesellschaftsgeschichte) and reasserted the autonomy, if not the predominance, of a “political history in modern perspective.”7 Like their predecessors, they insisted
that foreign policy making, operating, as it was forced to, in an anarchic international system and wedded to the principles of Social Darwinist power
politics, had a dynamic of its own. In other words, scholars such as Andreas
Hillgruber and Klaus Hildebrand refused to accept Wehler’s notion that foreign policy was an extension of domestic politics.
Accordingly, they revived, in the 1970s, the older interpretation of the
course of German history before 1914. They saw the containment of Germany
by Britain, France, and Russia not as a backlash to the ambitious foreign and
naval policies initiated by Germany at the turn of the century. Expanding on the
positions of the 1950s, they now interpreted the world war as a consequence
of the failure of the other powers, most notably Britain, to accommodate the
dynamic and politically unpredictable Hohenzollern monarchy within the existing international system.8 With the burdens of responsibility for the outbreak of war in 1914 already reallocated in opposition to Fischer’s views, the
British historian Niall Ferguson shifted the scenes even more radically. In a
book published in 1998, he developed the theory that Britain’s entry into the
conflict “was nothing less than the greatest error of modern history,” to which
he then added a counterfactual that most of his colleagues thought even more
dubious.9
However, the Fischer Debate also continued at another level. Even scholars
like Wehler never accepted the Hamburg historian’s notion that German foreign policy before 1914 was in effect an aggressive “grasping for world power”
that the Reich government had supposedly prepared ever since the famousinfamous War Council of December 1912.10 In this respect they found themselves in rare agreement with the diplomatic historians in their perception
xiii

Introduction

that Germany’s plunge into war in 1914 amounted to a Flucht nach vorn, a
flight forward from the impasse that the country was facing in those years.11
In other words, the Kaiser and his advisers did not exacerbate the crisis after the
assassinations at Sarajevo in an overconfident mood, seizing this opportunity
of establishing Germany’s leading position among the great powers; rather
they made their fateful decisions in a pessimistic spirit in the face of a seemingly desperate situation of turmoil and isolation both at home and abroad.
In searching for the causes of this impasse, some scholars have highlighted
the incompetence and pathological learning that, they believed, marked the
decision-making processes within the Prusso-German monarchy. Others
have taken a more structuralist approach and related the seemingly ever more
insoluble problems of the German Empire to the unstoppable advance of
long-term processes. They saw industrialization, urbanization, and the increasing participation of the “masses” in politics as the cause of the impasse
of 1914. What united the two historiographical camps was the conviction that
the country had sunken slowly into a “polycratic chaos” and that it had become less and less governable.12
Finally, the 1970s also saw a revival of an older debate concerning the basic character of the Bismarckian Constitution of 1871 and its reformability.
This time the issue was not so much whether or not the “personal rule” of
Emperor Wilhelm II amounted to a degeneration of a political system that was
basically sound;13 rather the question was whether the Prusso-German constitutional order had come to the impasse of 1913/14 as a result of a permanent
crisis that had existed from the start.14 Manfred Rauh argued against this latter interpretation that the Kaiserreich was on the path of gradual constitutional change and was experiencing a silent parliamentarization. The center
of political power, he maintained, was shifting from the monarchy toward the
Reichstag, the democratically elected national assembly—a position that, as
will be seen, was subsequently queried by Gerhard A. Ritter and others.15
However, more serious and more profound in its impact on the direction
of research has been the challenge that the Kehrites faced from a group of
British historians.16 Although, as confirmed social historians, they too had little taste for a return to a “primacy of foreign policy” approach, they began to
criticize the type of “history from above” that Wehler and others had been
writing. In their view, the history of the German Empire could not just be
seen as the history of small manipulative elites, dominated by the big estate
owners (Junker) and the archconservative captains of heavy industry, by an
“alliance of rye and iron.” They maintained instead that, if one wished to understand the development of Germany, especially after 1890, the focus should
be on the study of new social groups that were mobilizing themselves “from
below” and were becoming increasingly vocal and organized in Wilhelmine
politics.
xiv

Introduction

The strength of this approach, which was indebted to Edward P. Thompson’s
writings,17 was that it involved a shift toward the intensive study of living
conditions, lifestyles, and daily experiences of the lower classes. Thenceforth,
the door to this kind of social history was pushed wide open, encouraging a
younger generation to explore its potentialities.
More than that, Geoff Eley soon began to expand his earlier critique into
a more fundamental challenge by questioning the viability of the Sonderweg
hypothesis that was underlying not only the Kehrite view, but also much of
the early postwar Anglo-American writing on modern German history.18 This
older interpretation had postulated a divergence from the Western path and
had drawn a more or less straight line of continuity back from the Third Reich
to the late nineteenth century where, it was said, the roots of later disasters
were to be found. These disasters were supposedly the result mainly of elite
behavior and their politics that failed to respond to reformist pressures and to
put the country on a track of modernization similar to that of the West. To
Wehler this failure was a case of pathological learning.
Eley now rejected the Sonderweg position, asserting that Germany, too,
had undergone a “bourgeois revolution” like that in Britain and the United
States. Proposing to “depathologize” the course of modern German history
with its presumed failure of bourgeois liberalism, he also took the view that
the one-sided emphasis on the dominance of preindustrial elites and their
manipulation of the “masses” had obscured a more interesting and complex
historical reality. Although in the Kehrite view the industrial workers had
already found their own voice, causing much alarm among the elites, Eley
stressed the self-articulation and autonomy of other social groups, and the
lower middle classes in particular, that Wehler had seen as part of the antisocialist front.19
The Sonderweg debate with its various ramifications thus became the
other major controversy of the 1970s and 1980s. It continued into the 1990s
after Eley published an anthology that was designed both as a stock-taking
of what had been achieved and as a stimulus to future research. Wehler could
not find anything pathbreakingly new in the volume and expressed his disappointment in a sharply critical review.20 Overall, the situation therefore remains unclear. Thomas Nipperdey, agreeing with Eley, though coming from
a different ideological vantage point, has insisted that modern German history has many continuities rather than just one leading directly to the Nazi
seizure of power. Wehler and others have recently been more conciliatory and
moved some distance toward Eley. Still, in the view of Jürgen Kocka, “key
elements” of the Sonderweg hypothesis have “not been refuted by critical research, but have been confirmed.”21
This view is not shared by a younger generation of historians on both
sides of the Atlantic who moved even further than Eley in the direction of a
xv

Introduction

“history from bottom up” and away from broad structuralist perspectives of
the 1970s. In this respect they were influenced by larger trends in the discipline that stressed the fragmentation and indeterminacy of modern life and
modernity. Interested in the daily lives of ordinary people, in women and minorities, they tried to retrieve the agency of individuals and collectives. They
were seen to be in search of their identities, refusing merely to be swept
along by larger anonymous historical processes. Accordingly, these scholars
were looking for human subjects, often living at the periphery of the nation
rather than in Berlin and Prussia, who were forging their own destinies. In
short, many historians of Germany, like their colleagues specializing in other
fields, took the “culturalist turn.” At the center of their work is not so much
the analysis of the autocratic features of the Bismarckian empire, but its federalist diversity and its supposedly remarkable modernity.22
Accordingly, we now have studies that analyze not merely the no doubt
rich cultural products enjoyed by Germany’s urban elites, but also the many
varieties of popular and regional culture.23 In the course of this work, political culture also became a major interest. Following the arguments of David
Blackbourn, who had criticized the Kehrites for their excessive Prussocentrism, he and others produced studies on the “second Germany” in the south
and southwest. Soon came the Canadian historian James Retallack, who, by
homing in on the kingdom of Saxony, discovered a “third Germany.”24 Brett
Fairbairn, in taking up problems of voting behavior and political culture, argued against a narrow definition of the concept of democracy. Mention
should finally be made of Margaret L. Anderson’s important study on how
many ordinary Germans were “practicing democracy.”25 She shows that,
notwithstanding many legal and political impediments put up by local elites
and bureaucrats, Catholics, Left Liberals, and Social Democrats pursued
their rights as voters courageously and insistently.
This interest in processes of a fundamental democratization and of the
multifaceted character of German society and politics on the American side
was complemented and expanded on the German side by detailed work on
the role of the middle classes and on the question of nation-building in the
nineteenth century.26 After the industrial working class and their organizations had been at the center of research during the 1960s, the new focus on
the Bürgertum yielded many fresh insights into the economic, political, and
cultural history of this stratum in its various guises and into the emergence
of a civil society in Imperial Germany.27 In this respect, too, the historiography of the country has been part of a larger current that was further enhanced
by developments in Europe and other parts of the world since 1989.
All this research and these debates have had a major influence on what is
to be found in subsequent chapters. They will highlight the progressive pluralization of German society in this epoch. However, if the element of diverxvi

Introduction

sity is to be emphasized, we cannot ignore the slow formation of class lines,
the “pillarization” of the Kaiserreich, and the emergence of larger political
and ideological blocs. What follows revolves around the two concepts of pluralization and polarization, all the while also bearing in mind the question of
who were the winners and losers in the historical process up to 1918.
Indeed, in trying to assess the overall modernity of the German Empire
and its ability to change and adapt politically to the diversifications of its
society, economy, and culture, it is instructive to look at the losers. This is
particularly true of the situation of minorities whose history—studied in considerable depth by the “new” social historians—is given a good deal of attention in this book. Overall it is my hope that a synthesis of recent research,
that is, a history of German society in all its aspects, offers an opportunity to
clarify not merely the contradictions but also the broader outlines of the development between 1871 and 1918. In this sense, this study is also an attempt
to explain not why Germany ended up with Hitler in 1933 but rather why she
went to war in 1914 and lost that conflict four years later. This, it seems to
me, is an assignment that is difficult enough.
A final word about the structure of this book. As a glance at the table of
contents will show, it is not conceived in the tradition of a grand chronological narrative. Instead it is thematically organized, and, while each part follows a basic chronology, individual sections are designed to provide an
overview of a particular topic. Whoever is interested, for example, in housing or the Polish minority will find relevant information in the respective subsection rather than having to look for it throughout the text with the help of
the index. Among the various criticisms that the first edition of this volume
received was the complaint that it ended with 1914. In response to this, a new
section on World War I has been added. Finally, I hope that the statistical tables in the Appendix will be found useful. For easier use, their numbers appear in parentheses within the text, while cross-references in the footnotes
together with the index should help the reader find related information in
other sections of the book.
For the first edition, I benefited from the comments of Klaus Bade, Keith
Bullivant, Ute Frevert, Robin Lenman, Uta Poiger, Mark Ruff, and Hanna
Schissler. I continue to be most grateful to them and to the authors of many
excellent studies, both in German and in English, without whom I could not
have developed this synthesis. The second edition was read critically by HansUlrich Wehler, Jürgen Kocka, and, as the first edition, by Marion Berghahn.
It is again dedicated to her.

xvii

Part I: Economy

1. Economic Sectors and Structural Change
A. Agriculture, Industry, Commerce, and Services
It is of fundamental importance for an understanding of Germany’s economic
development in this period that the upward trend that had set in before the
founding of the Kaiserreich continued in principle until the eve of World War I.
There were, it is true, ups and downs, and there were also setbacks. But although these were perceived by contemporaries as severe depressions, we can
now see, with the benefit of hindsight, that they were in effect periods of retarded growth, not reversals of the general trend.
The net domestic product (NDP) provides a particularly clear gauge of these
shifts. It saw a moderate rise from the 1860s onward, before it began to shoot
up quite steeply from the 1890s. By 1890 it had reached a level of 20 billion
reichsmark (RM), and by the outbreak of the war the figure had more than
doubled again. Knut Borchardt, it should be added, has warned that the poor
state of the available statistical material undermines the reliability of many of
the detailed figures;1 but the task here is to discover the macroeconomic trend,
and that is clearly discernible.
The relative prosperity of the German national economy is also reflected
in the fact that the additional millions of people that the population explosion
of the late nineteenth century had produced were overwhelmingly absorbed
by the labor market without a decline in living standards. Although income
differentials remained large, in the long run a majority of Germans even enjoyed a higher living standard. Admittedly, the overall improvement was helped
by some 1.8 million people who left the country during the third wave of emigration in the nineteenth century.2
The contribution made by different sectors of the economy to the generation of prosperity varied considerably, however. If we take the respective
shares of the gross national product (GNP), we find that until the 1880s agriculture retained its lead at 35 to 40 percent over industry’s 30 to 35 percent.
Thereafter the primary sector (agriculture, forestry, fisheries, and market gardening) went into relative decline. By 1913 the share was less than 25 per-

Economy

cent. In that year the share of industry, mining, crafts, putters-out, and domestic manufacture amounted to 45 percent. Meanwhile the commercial and service sector hovered, more or less continuously, around a mark slightly above
30 percent.
These changes were indicative of a structural transformation, related to the
Industrial Revolution, that all European countries, sooner or later, began to
experience during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. However, it would
be mistaken to speak of a simple shift from an Agrarstaat, a nation based on
agriculture, to one defined by its industrial base (Industriestaat). Klaus Bade
is probably more accurate here when he spoke of a metamorphosis from an
“Agrarstaat with a powerful industry to an Industriestaat with a strong agrarian base.”3 For this reason, we do not immediately turn to an examination of
the process of German industrialization, but focus, in the first instance, on agriculture as the older sector of the economy. Indeed, up to a point it was the
emergence of an agrarian capitalism in the first half of the nineteenth century
that helped to pave the way for industry. Nor did mechanization and rationalization remain exclusively confined to the factory system.
If agriculture saw a quantitative expansion of its production in the second
half of the nineteenth century, this development was no longer due primarily,
as in the past, to an extension of land utilization, but to increased productivity (Tables 1, 2, 4). Between 1903 and 1905 the increases for animal products
and agricultural produce were even quite steep, before taking another dip toward 1914. In 1870 total agricultural output after deducting seeds, animal feedstuffs, and wastage reached 4,080 million marks in current prices. A peak was
achieved in 1912 with 12,348 million marks, after which the total declined to
11,740 million a year later. Considering that the number of those employed
in agriculture vacillated only slightly from 1895 to 1905 between 9,788 million and 9,926 million (Table 23), the above figures reflect productivity gains
that were stimulated in part by increased demand from a rapidly growing
population, but also by the more widespread use of fertilizer, better irrigation, improved winter feeding methods, and the introduction of modern agricultural machinery. If there existed some 268,000 simple threshing machines
and 75,500 steam threshers in 1882, their number had expanded to 947,000 and
just under 489,000 respectively by 1907. The number of mowers rose from
19,600 to 301,000 during the same period. In the 1860s, German agriculture had
been an exporter of grain, before being hit by the overproduction crisis of the
1870s when American and Russian competitors appeared on the world market.
For several decades Germany’s grain-growers huddled behind the protective
tariff walls that, at their prompting, the government had erected after 1879. But
after the turn of the century the Kaiserreich once again became a grain exporter.
Still, not even these favorable developments were able to mask the structural problems of German agriculture during this period of continuous indus2

Economic Sectors and Structural Change

trialization. Time and again, industry proved more dynamic and productive.
Employment figures mirror this very neatly. In 1913, it is true, agricultural employment reached its peak at 10.7 million (Table 23). But by this time industry (including crafts) had already overtaken the agricultural sector and now
employed some 11 million people. This was an impressive change, also considering that the national economy, in which 18.6 million people had found
employment in 1875, provided livelihoods for 31.3 million in 1914. Between
1900 and 1914 alone just under 6 million garnered jobs for the first time,
most of them in industry and the tertiary sector. While many of them were
children from the major cities, which had high birth rates, the rest were longdistance migrants, mainly from the agricultural northeast or the surrounding
rural areas closer by. Millions of people left agriculture hoping for a better
life in the cities and in industry (Tables 34–37). In his book Das Leben eines
Landarbeiters (The Life of a Land Laborer), published in 1911, Hans Rehbein has described what it was like when he and other migrants saw the lights
of the big city from their approaching train.
The economic superiority of industry emerges even more impressively if
we look at the expansion of production and employment in individual branches
and their investment activities. In 1865 mining employed some 209,000 people; thirty years later there were 432,000, and the sector experienced another
doubling of its workforce to 863,000 by 1913 (Table 23). The metal producing industries tripled their workforce between 1875 and 1913 from 150,000
to 398,000. Metal manufacturing saw similar increases. The textile industry
employed some 926,000 in 1875, a figure that declined slightly to just under
900,000 by 1913. However, the clothing industry witnessed an increase in its
workforce from a little under 1.1 million to over 1.5 million. The construction
industry also registered remarkable growth from 530,000 in 1875 to 1.63 million in 1913. The most impressive growth rate can be found in the chemical
industry, where employment increased from 65,000 to 290,000 during the
same period.
If we follow Rolf Wagenführ’s calculations, the annual industrial growth
rate between 1866 and 1872 was 4.5 percent.4 During the years 1873–1890,
which came to be seen as the period of the “Great Depression,” the average
rate remained at 3.0 percent per annum before jumping to 4.5 percent between
1890 and 1913. After the founding of the Empire, the growing demand for raw
materials and energy led to a further rise in coal production from 47 million
tons in 1880 to 191 million in 1913. Germany was now in third place in coal
production behind Britain and the United States. Meanwhile iron and steel
saw even greater production increases. In this field, Germany moved into
second place before World War I, outproducing the British (Table 5). Up to
the 1870s, demand for iron and steel was particularly strong in railway construction. During the 1850s the length of track in Central Europe had almost
3

Economy

doubled to 11,326 kilometers. Close to another 8,000 kilometers were added
in the following decade, only to be outdone by the addition of 9,000 kilometers in the first five years after the founding of the Kaiserreich. After this, the
network’s growth proceeded at a slower pace to reach a total of 61,000 kilometers by 1910, of which just under 12,000 kilometers of track had been laid
since the turn of the century. The length of the road system also doubled.
During the boom period after the founding of the German Empire, railways had been the leading sector. Thereafter it lost this role to other branches,
above all to steel, machine tools, and the new industries of the “second Industrial Revolution” (especially electrical engineering and chemicals). In
1861, some 8,647 machines had been manufactured in Prussia. In 1875 their
number had risen to almost 36,000. Later automobiles and electrics experienced their first boom period. By 1907 Germany had close to 26,000 cars and
1,211 large trucks. During the next five years alone these figures rose to 83,000
and 9,700 respectively.
Unlike the steel and automobile industries, chemicals had a very wide
range of products. In addition to the steep rise in its workforce, already mentioned above, the success of this branch is best reflected in two statistics. To
begin with, its average annual growth rate was 6.2 percent; second, so impressive was the expansion of the most successful chemical companies that
no fewer than 12 of them ranked among the 100 largest German enterprises
a mere twenty years after their first boom period. Concentrating increasingly
on the production of synthetic materials, organic chemistry quickly reached
a leading position on the world market for dyes and pharmaceuticals. In 1900,
Germany’s share in dyes was 90 percent of world production.
Another good indicator of major structural changes affecting the national
economy is provided by net investment rates. After 1870 the figure usually
hovered around 10 to 11 percent for agriculture (Table 7). With the exception
of a period of retarded growth between 1875 and 1879, industry’s share was
at least three times that figure, finally reaching a mark around 43 percent between 1905 and 1913. At the time of the founding of the German Empire,
capital invested in industry came to just under 10 billion marks in current prices;
the figure for 1913 was over 85 billion. This was also the year in which industry’s return on capital (including mining) was almost twice as large as that
of agriculture.
In view of the rapid overall growth of industry, it was almost inevitable
that the tertiary sector would also benefit. The connection is clearest with respect to commerce and banking.5 The abolition of customs barriers when
Germany became unified as well as the boom of the founding years are very
directly reflected in the expansion of financial institutions. As regards commerce, it must be remembered that Germany by the late nineteenth century
had become one of the world’s major trading nations. In 1880 it exported
4

Economic Sectors and Structural Change

products (including foodstuffs) to the tune of 2.9 billion marks, among them
finished goods worth 1.4 billion. By 1913, exports had risen to just under 10.1
billion marks. The share of finished goods was now almost 5.4 billion, that
of semi-finished goods 2.1 billion.
However, the trade balance remained marginally negative for most years
before 1914, reflecting the country’s great appetite for imported raw materials (Table 8). All in all the German Empire became an exporter par excellence
of high value-added goods promoted on the world market through repeated
export offensives. Meanwhile capital exports reached 23.5 billion marks by
1914, reflecting the growing importance of banking. Nevertheless, the share
of the tertiary sector in the number of employed or the NDP was never as high
as that of the industrial sector. While the number of jobs grew in commerce,
banking, and insurance, the figure for domestic servants declined sharply, even
if—as will be seen—there were not merely economic but also social reasons
for this (Table 23).
B. Wealth and Incomes
The macroeconomic processes that have been described so far had inevitable
consequences for the hierarchies of wealth and income in the Kaiserreich.
The differences were most striking with respect to wealth. In 1896/97 the top
10 percent of the Prussian population owned no less than 59 percent of all
personal assets. By 1911, this share had increased further to 63 percent.
These disparities, which were only in part due to huge income differentials,
provided the critics of the existing social order with plenty of ammunition.
The long-term structural changes that worked against agriculture and favored
industry can also be traced in this particular field. The developments of the
late nineteenth century demonstrated ever more clearly that ownership of factories carried with it greater productivity and higher profits than could be
achieved by the owners of agriculturally used landed property. After land prices
had been high in the 1860s in the wake of the agricultural boom, they declined
during the following two decades and recovered only marginally thereafter.
Only those who held land in areas with expanding cities saw their property
values rising sharply. Selling landed property was frequently also made difficult or even impossible because of high mortgages or legal restrictions (e.g.,
estates held as a Fideikommiß and thus subject to strict inheritance rules within
the family). Nevertheless, in the mid-1880s there existed close to 18,000 estates
of over 100 hectares in Prussia’s eastern provinces and some 25,000 in the whole
of Germany (Table 3). Among the wealthiest estate owners were the Pless
(83 estates with 70,139 hectares), the Henckel von Donnersmarck (58 estates
with 38,388 hectares), and the Schaffgotsch (939 estates with 31,011 hectares).
Many landowners were thus sitting on assets whose value was considerable,
if declining. But inheritance rules and other restrictions made it difficult for
5

Economy

quite a few of them to realize their assets. If, on top of it all, owners were ignorant of financial affairs or too conservative to adapt to changing conditions
in the marketplace, estates and farmsteads could quickly become a burden
whose weight was further increased by mortgage debts. Only through rationalization could the individual farmer hope to cope with the impact of the
above-mentioned structural crisis of agriculture. Some were astute and lucky,
and thus able to turn the corner. Many more did not prove competent enough
to operate successfully in the capitalist marketplace. They were now forced
to tighten their belts, if they hoped to retain their property and save it from
the great “butchery of the estates” that occurred.
Between 1885 and 1900 alone, some 5,000 large estates went bankrupt. A
telling example of the anguish that this engendered is the case of Udo Count
Stolberg-Wernigerode, descendent of an ancient noble family. In the middle
of the 1890s he had to sell his townhouse in Berlin because he could no longer
afford the high overheads of running it. Such experiences reinforced a sense
of bitterness and led to political activism.6 As Elard von Oldenburg-Januschau,
very much a Prussian Junker and Conservative deputy in the Reichstag, put
it in 1904, “being poor,” as large numbers of Germans then were, was in his
view “no misfortune”; but he had no doubt that falling into poverty definitely
constituted one.7 A way of life, so it seemed to many, was simply being obliterated by the forces of capitalism and modernity, with political consequences
that will be analyzed in Part IV below.
Meanwhile, those who had invested their money in industry and commerce no doubt found the long-term augmentation of their wealth very gratifying, provided they had spread the risk and were good at exploiting market
opportunities (Table 7). To be sure, there were also those who found that the
risks they had taken had been too high. They could easily lose all their assets
unless they had limited their liability in line with the provisions of the Commercial Code of 1861. Whoever was shrewd enough to survive the difficult
early phases of building a business or recurrent recessions could look forward to a bright future, especially if he had hitched himself to one of the
growth industries. It is difficult to know the exact increases in wealth to be
gained in industry, commerce, or finance.
The statistics of the Inland Revenue Service offer at least a few glimpses,
even if they presuppose considerable trust in the individual taxpayer’s honesty. Thus, in 1896 the Prussian tax inspectors counted 1,600 individuals with
an annual income of over 100,000 marks. That year also showed up 9,265 individuals who declared incomes between 30,500 and 100,000 marks. This was
a gigantic sum at a time when the average annual income from wages and salaries was around 740 marks (Table 14). Until 1912 the number of individuals in the two categories above increased to 4,456 and 20,999 respectively. If

6

Economic Sectors and Structural Change

in 1896/97 some 5,440 Prussian taxpayers were listed as millionaires, their
number had grown to 9,349 by 1911 (Table 17).
That those who were making their money in industry were doing very well
is also reflected in the impressive homes they built for themselves. In 1873
the Villa Hügel of Friedrich Krupp, the Prussian “Cannon King,” was completed, overlooking Lake Baldeney south of Essen in the Ruhr area. As square
and forbidding as it was ostentatious, the building had close to 270 rooms.
Benjamin Disraeli, the British prime minister and a man quite used to imperial splendor, has left us a description of a reception that he attended at the
residence of Gerson Bleichröder, Bismarck’s private banker.8 Walther Rathenau, who, together with his father Emil, was the driving force behind the rise
of the Allgemeine Elektrizitäts-Gesellschaft (AEG, General Electrics) and
who by 1909 had business links with no less than eighty-four other large companies, acquired a stately home, Schloß Freienwalde, near Berlin, and there
were others like him who bought up imposing country homes that had once
been in the hands of aristocratic families.
However, it is not even necessary to inspect these manifestations of rising
prosperity. It is sufficient to walk through the Hamburgian suburb of Pöseldorf today, through Bismarckallee in Bad Godesberg on the Rhine just south
of Bonn, or through the posher parts of Berlin to look at some of the Jugendstil villas to gain an impression of the wealth that the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie began to accumulate from the late nineteenth century onward.
Of course, not everyone who had started in a small workshop or as a retailer
made the leap into big money. For many of the self-employed it remained a
hard struggle. They lacked capital, initiative, or simply good luck. And many
craftsmen stubbornly put out goods that machines could produce much more
cheaply. Although they formed associations for their economic self-protection
and occasionally succeeded in obtaining government help, capitalist competition time and again proved too much for the less efficient. If, on the other
hand, a small workshop was able to become a supplier to a larger enterprise
or to move into a new business niche such as electrical installation or precision tool making, a firm base for further expansion might be reached. In the
meantime the existence of most members of this so-called Old Mittelstand of
artisans and small shopkeepers remained precarious. Accordingly, the share
of the self-employed declined from 25.4 percent to 18.8 percent between
1882 and 1907 (Table 22).
The New Mittelstand of white-collar employees in industry and commerce, whose share in the labor force rose from 4.7 percent to 10.7 percent
during the same period, presented a different picture. According to Prussian
statistics, the number of those who earned 900 to 3,000 marks per annum increased from 2.5 million to 6.8 million between 1896 and 1912, that is, by

7

Economy

167 percent (Table 16). To be sure, not all of them saw their salaries go up.
At Maschinenfabrik Esslingen near Stuttgart, for example, white-collar employees received around 1,800 marks per annum. During the boom year of
1900 salaries averaged around 4,151 marks, but between 1910 and 1912 they
declined to 3,500 marks (Table 14). The electrical engineering firm of Siemens
paid its white-collar employees around 2,800 marks in 1895, but barely more
than 2,620 marks per annum in 1912.
Civil servants were not only well provided for in their retirement, but they
also witnessed an improvement in their annual incomes from an average of
1,306 marks in 1870 to 2,607 marks in 1913. During that year Bavarian public servants even achieved an average of 2,823 marks. At the time of the
founding of the German Empire, postal employees, who had civil service status in Germany, earned 698 marks per annum; in 1913 the figure had more
than doubled to 1,550 marks. During the Wilhelmine period the head of a
provincial district (Landrat) could expect an annual income of 3,300 to 4,800
marks. On top of this he would receive some 6,000 marks in expenses, from
which he had to pay his assistants and entertainment. At the turn of the century, the famous physicist Max Planck disposed, as full professor at Berlin
University, of a salary of 4,400 marks to which was added a housing allowance of 900 marks per annum. His membership in the Academy of Science
gave him another 900 marks for expenses. Meanwhile, in 1884, the great majority of physicians practicing in Berlin earned up to 3,000 marks per annum.
All these statistics must be seen in context, however. They were average
incomes, and by 1914 the average annual earnings of the German population
as a whole (i.e., including top earners) had not reached more than 1,334
marks (Table 16). In 1912 there were some 8.2 million working men and
women in Prussia who took home less than 900 marks per annum and who,
except for a few pieces of furniture, did not have any assets (Table 18). This
represented no more than a 5 percent decrease on the same category for 1896.
It means that well over half of all the taxpayers of Prussia, where two-thirds
of the total German population lived, belonged to the lowest income group
and that these people participated in the wave of prosperity during the two
decades prior to World War I in no more than a very limited way. In 1870
the average annual income of industrial workers and craftsmen had been 506
marks (Table 14). Twenty years later, they earned 711 marks, and finally in
1913 they reached 1,163 marks. Miners, who belonged to the labor elite, saw
their wages rise from 767 marks in 1870 to 1,496 marks in 1913. The average wages paid in agriculture mirrored the general economic difficulties of
this sector. Annual earnings here (including forestry and fisheries) were a
mere 350 marks in 1870. This figure increased to 417 marks by 1890 and to
682 marks by 1913. In addition, land laborers and servants had free room and
board.
8

Economic Sectors and Structural Change

A high percentage of these servants were young women whose remuneration varied considerably but was regularly lower than the wages of their male
counterparts (Tables 29–31). Many of them therefore moved to the cities to
seek employment as domestic servants with middle-class families. Housework was often onerous, and the workday was long. In Berlin, the city with
the highest wages, an Alleinmädchen could expect 100 to 250 marks per annum. If the woman decided to find a job in industry, she could expect better
pay and also more leisure time, but suffered even greater wage discrimination
in comparison with men. There are a few statistics relating to gender-specific
wage differentials in Stuttgart in southwestern Germany for 1900. The average weekly wage there for men was 22 marks, for women a mere 9.57 marks,
that is, 43 percent of the rates for men. In some other occupations the share
was as low as 36 to 37 percent. Wage scales also reflect these inequalities.
Thus no more than 1.1 percent of the males—but 70 percent of the women—
earned below 12 marks per week. Among the professions (for example, in
education) discrimination was no less glaring, and in comparison with men,
women were also less frequently promoted.9
All statistics that have been quoted so far merely relate to nominal incomes and therefore provide an incomplete picture of the economic situation
of millions of people. They must be correlated with the development of prices.
Taking the period 1871–1914, it can be said that the living standards of the
majority of the population increased slightly, and certainly there was no recurrence of the mass pauperism that Central Europe had experienced before
the onset of the Industrial Revolution. We still lack reliable calculations of
real wages (i.e., inflation-adjusted) for the period up to 1914. Some scholars
have spoken of increases of 92 percent, others of 37 percent. In the 1880s the
index of real wages dipped repeatedly. It recovered in the 1890s, and in the
last years before 1914 wages and salaries kept just ahead of the rate of inflation. The figures that D.V. Desai has calculated give a more favorable overall picture (Table 13).10
More importantly, averages tend to veil the difficulties that many families
experienced, especially in times of recession. This becomes very evident if
we compare the above-mentioned average wages with the figure issued by
the Reich Statistical Office as a minimum living standard: 1,300 marks per
annum. For the city of Bochum in the Ruhr industrial district we also have a
list of welfare recipients (Table 71). According to this document, 20 among
every 1,000 inhabitants required permanent assistance, while another 20 on
average needed help on a temporary basis.11 Meanwhile many families, who
did not rely on welfare, time and again slipped below the poverty line, even
if the wife and children took up part-time or temporary jobs.
These conditions can also be reconstructed from a number of family budgets that have been found (Table 67). At the time of the founding of the Ger9

Economy

man Empire, workers spent some 60 percent of their income on food and
drink. After the turn of the century, the figure was closer to 40 to 45 percent.
In 1907/8, a skilled worker needed no less than 51.5 percent of his annual
wages for food, 16.8 percent for rent, 11.2 percent for clothing, and 4.2 percent
for heating and light. Once the sums for personal hygiene, insurance, and leisure had been deducted, there remained 1.1 percent for emergencies. This
was not much, and if unemployment or illness struck, the larger items had to
be cut back—with far-reaching consequences for housing and the nutritional
standards of the whole family.12 In this respect the consumption power of the
middle classes was not only considerably bigger, but their greater ability to
put aside savings also prepared them better for harder times.
The figures presented above appear to confirm the introductory statement
that the German national economy experienced a period of overall growth up
to 1913/14. But we have also found that there were ups and downs, and even
underlying structural problems. Furthermore, different social groups were very
differently affected by these developments. Finally, there were not only sectoral
but also regional shifts. The next section will deal with this set of questions.

2. National and Regional Economic Developments
A. Gründerboom, “Great Depression” (1873–1895), Expansion and the
Onset of Recession (1896–1913/14)
The above-mentioned ups and downs in the German national economy hinted
at the importance of conjunctural factors. Although the macroeconomic trend
was broadly upward, the economy was prone to overheating or spluttering
from time to time. The very long waves in the development of the world
economy since the Middle Ages are relatively well researched. More immediately relevant for the history of the German Empire are the more short-term
vacillations that Wassili Kondratieff and Arthur Spiethoff among others have
studied.13 They identified two phases during the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. The first phase began with an upswing that lasted from
1844/51 to 1870/75. There then followed a slowdown that came to an end
two decades later, to be replaced by the second upswing phase that continued, with various smaller vacillations, until just before World War I.
Economic and social historians have worked particularly intensively on
the years from 1874/79 through 1890/95, known as the “Great Depression.”
However, most experts agree today that these years were in effect a period of
retarded growth. Nor was it a deflation across the board. Industries were affected unevenly, some sooner and others later; some were on the road to recovery as others began to experience difficulties. If the years from 1874/79
through 1890/95 no longer seem to justify the term “Great Depression,” on
10

National and Regional Economic Developments

the basis of the available economic data, the question of contemporary perceptions still remains, and here it has to be said that many people firmly believed the 1870s and 1880s to be very bad times—an important point to bear
in mind, also to understand people’s political responses in this period (as examined in Part IV).
Looking at the more short-term oscillations, there is first of all the boom
that began just before the founding of the German Empire in 1871. The year
1866 was the last one to see a mild recession and a credit crunch. Thereafter,
helped by the prospect of German unification under Prussian leadership following the violent ouster of Austria from Central Europe, and also accelerated
by the magnetic force that the Ruhr, the industrial heart of Prussia, exerted on
southern German states, the economy began to pick up very quickly. A few
indices, such as the rapid expansion of the railway network, have already been
mentioned.14 Pig iron production, which in 1866 had reached 1 million tons,
had similarly experienced a 50 percent increase by the time of the founding
of the German Empire (Table 5). Coal production stood at 26 million tons in
1870—a 114 percent increase since 1860. Other indications of an impending
boom can be found in feverish investment activities and in the growth of the
banking industry. Railroad stocks were doing so well that some companies
were able to pay dividends of up to 8 percent, the Berlin-Magdeburg Railroad Company even 20 percent. Commerce and the chemical industries also
began to flourish. For the moment, agriculture was not doing badly either.
There was strong demand, and production of cereals, meat, milk, and eggs
went up (Table 1).
All this prosperity paled in comparison with the boom that set in after
1870/71. During the next four years the same number of iron works and machine manufacturing companies were founded as “in the seventy years since
1800.”15 The capital sunk into these and hundreds of other stock-holding
firms amounted to 2.8 billion marks, thus surpassing by 400,000 marks the
total of investments made in the previous two decades (Table 7). During the
twenty years before 1870 the coal and iron industries had attracted some 69
percent of investments, followed by textiles (16 percent). The share of metal
manufacturing and chemicals was a mere 8.5 and 2.0 percent respectively.
The years 1870–1874 witnessed a marked shift in these shares. Coal and iron
shrank to 38 percent, textiles to a mere 6.5 percent. Metal manufacturing now
attracted 22.5 percent, while chemicals more than doubled their share to 4.5
percent. Some companies in the industrial centers of unified Germany had
more orders than they could fill.
In Essen, Krupp expanded his workforce between 1870 and 1873 from 7,000
to 12,000. In 1846 the “Cannon King” had employed a mere 140 workers.
However, the upswing was much more muted in the textile industry than
elsewhere, and more generally it is important to bear in mind a highly differ11

Economy

entiated picture. As before, banks played a key role during those years, and
not just in the channeling of French reparations payments, which likely provided an additional economic stimulus. No less than 103 banks were registered on the stock market between 187l and 1873. The bigger ones among
them fared so well that they were able to pay dividends of between 12.5 and
20 percent (Table 9). The average dividend payments between 1870 and 1872
were 12.49 percent, implying an equivalent yield of 8.64 percent. The industrial boom coincided with favorable conditions in agriculture. The value of
cereal production rose continuously from 1,698 million marks in 1870 to
2,692 million marks four years later (Table 1). Meat production went up by
50 percent.
But the “crash” was not far away, ushering in the period of retarded growth
from 1874/79 to 1890/94. The coal industry was hit hard from the start. The
index of its prices fell from 116 points in 1873 to 49 in 1879. Prices for textiles meanwhile declined by a mere 23 percent, while other branches tried to
balance the shrinking of their domestic markets by increased exports. Accordingly, the volume index for German foreign trade rose from 17.7 to 24.9
points between 1873 and 1878. Other companies resorted to price fixing in
collaboration with their competitors and began to form cartels.16 Workforces
were reduced, in some cases quite drastically, and production was further rationalized. This helps to explain why the number of blast furnaces fell from
379 to 210 between 1873 and 1879, whereas the iron production that had
reached its peak of 2.2 million tons in 1873 never slipped lower than just under 2.0 million tons. Indeed, in 1879 it had almost climbed back to the 1873
figure, and it continued to rise slowly throughout the 1880s. Similarly coal
production only once fell below the 36.3 million tons of 1873, and this was
in 1874. It then hovered between 37.5 million and 39.5 million tons, until
reaching just over 42 million tons in 1879. Thereafter the slow growth continued during the 1880s.
These figures have led Reinhard Spree to argue that the “Great Depression”
first started as a trend reversal in heavy industry and began to affect the consumer industries only from 1876 onward.17 The economy restabilized from
1877, albeit on a lower level of production, employment, and profitability.
Spree also believes that the banking crash has been exaggerated. The retrospective analyst who looks at the available statistics may come to this conclusion
with equanimity. But there is also the fact that 73 of 139 credit institutes had
to close their doors and that the number of bankruptcies also rose in other
branches. The stock market reacted nervously, and some 444 stockholding
companies saw their prices cut almost in half. In the late 1870s, most large
banks barely paid more than a dividend of 6 percent (Table 9). Shareholders
in Berliner Handels-Gesellschaft did not receive any dividends between 1876
and 1878. Not everyone had enough in the kitty to absorb losses.
12

National and Regional Economic Developments

Above all, the psychological impact of this period cannot be overestimated.
Businessmen experienced setbacks; they heard what was happening to their
friends and competitors; they read about the crisis in the newspapers. The cumulative effect of all this influenced the economic climate for years to come;
much of the optimism of the early 1870s was gone; people were less inclined
to invest in risky ventures; above all, they complained loudly and constantly
about the low prices and the allegedly unfair practices of their competitors.
The depth of these feelings explains why the basic mood showed no marked
change when the economic situation improved for a brief period in the early
1880s. The next slowdown followed in 1886–1890, though it was less dramatic than that of the 1870s. If the net domestic product had been negative
during the previous ten years, in 1886 it edged back to 0.6 percent, rising to
4.0 percent in the following year and reaching 4.2 percent and 4.7 percent in
1888 and 1889 respectively. Yet, even now the business world did not regain
its former bullish mood. Whoever had capital to invest would put it into
bonds and securities. Investments beyond the borders of the Reich became
more popular and should probably also be seen in connection with the clamor
for the acquisition of a larger colonial empire.18
While the “Great Depression” occurred more strongly in the minds of entrepreneurs and businessmen, it is much more directly reflected in the period’s
agricultural statistics. Here the downturn after the years of prosperity in the
early 1870s coincided with a structural crisis that—as has been mentioned—
was a consequence of the fact that the wealth-creating capacity of industry
simply proved so much greater than that of agriculture. Despite continued population growth, the value of grain production declined from its 1874 peak of
2.7 billion marks by about 20 percent in the years thereafter (Table 1). Meanwhile meat production stagnated, while the total worth of milk and egg production oscillated around the 1874 level. Unlike in the industrial sector, these
figures barely saw an improvement during the temporary upswing of the early
1880s. A glance at net investment figures confirms this picture of stagnation
(Table 7). In comparison with 1865/69 they had declined by more than half
to 10.3 percent as early as 1874, and until 1895 they never went above the
average of 11.5 percent. Even during the most gloomy years, the rate in industry was more than three times this average. It was clear that, faced with poor
results, the agricultural sector lacked the means to modernize and thus to improve its prospects for the future.
In the early 1890s, the end of the “Great Depression” finally appeared on
the horizon. In 1891 the net domestic product (in 1913 prices) had once more
slumped to 0.0 percent. However, it reached 4.1 percent in the following year
and 5.0 percent in 1893. Thenceforth the economy experienced an upswing
that lasted until 1913.19 It was interrupted in 1900/1 and 1907/8 by two brief,
though serious, recessions. Next to the stock market figures, the period of pros13

Economy

perity can also be traced through investment levels in the industrial sector
(Table 7). In 1896 they reached 2 billion marks (in current prices) and climbed
to 3 billion marks in 1898. After the turn of the century, the average remained
below the 2-billion-mark level for several years, before rising again to an average of just under 2.8 billion marks between 1904 and 1906. Following a
peak of 3.7 billion marks in 1907, the average until 1911 leveled out once more
at around 2.3 billion marks. The highest level of the entire prewar period was
finally achieved in 1912 at 4.0 billion marks.
Many of these investments could not have been made without resorting to
the capital market. The issue of new shares may serve as a convenient guide
to the measure of industrial growth in this period. And indeed, total stockholdings increased from just under 6 billion to over 16 billion marks between 1895
and 1913. After the recession of 1907/8 Germany saw another “strong increase
in the issue of industrial shares” in 1909,20 with lower levels in the following
two years. But this did not affect profitability nor the level of dividends. The
year 1912 was the last year before the war with high rates of growth and investment, accompanied by many new share issues. It was a sign of a possible further reversal of the prewar trend that the volume of trade in industrial
shares witnessed a tangible decline thereafter. A contemporary explanation
of this may be found in the following comment by the Volkswirtschaftliche
Chronik: “Conjunctural influences can be recognized clearly here. It shows
at the same time that banks, in view of strongly rising inflation and unfavorable stock-market conditions, found it more difficult to convert short-term
loans to industry into stocks and long-term loans. This is also why they held
back with making new loans.”21
How well German industry had been doing between 1895/96 and 1912/13
may also be gauged from the fact that iron production doubled and steel production trebled during this period (Table 5). By 1893 Krupp had around
24,000 workers, in 1912 as many as 68,000. The production index for textiles
reached 63 points in 1900 and rose to 102.9 in 1912, before declining to its
yardstick of 100 a year later. The ascendancy of the industries of the second
Industrial Revolution has already been mentioned.22 Cars were manufactured
in larger and larger numbers. If the production index for the chemical industry had reached 42.5 points at the turn of the century (1913 = 100), it had almost doubled by 1910 (Table 6). Similarly commerce could look back in
1912/13 on a 20-year era of almost continuous growth, which took it from
60.9 index points in 1895 to 100 in 1913. Banking, which had a major share in
the upswing of the national economy, grew from 22.8 index points in 1895 to
100 in 1913; credit cooperatives even grew from 16.5 (in 1895) to 100 (in 1913).
As has been mentioned, agriculture participated in this prosperity. Total
production increased, and yet the agricultural sector was unable to exploit the
opportunities in the same way as the other two sectors (Tables 1, 2, 4). Exist14

National and Regional Economic Developments

ing gaps grew wider. It could not raise enough capital for long-term investments, and it remained more vulnerable to the ups and downs in the economy
(Table 7). Thus the recession of 1900/1 resulted in a sharp decline in wheat
production from 3.2 million tons to 2.0 million tons, which a simultaneous
12 percent increase in potato production could hardly compensate for. Once
this recession was over, a moderate growth in agricultural production was restored, but it was undermined by occasional years of underproduction. Meat
production developed along similar lines. Finally, the unemployment figures,
now more systematically collected, provide a rough guide to how the economy was faring (Table 21).
B. Regions and Regional Shifts, Infrastructural Change
Just as the sectors and branches experienced the macroeconomic movements
differently, the same can be said for the various regions of Germany.23
In agriculture, regional variations were determined by the size of the units,
the quality of the soil, and local inheritance laws. In 1878, the total agricultural area was 36.7 million hectares, of which 25.8 million had been taken
under the plough. The rest consisted of grassland, orchards (10.5 million hectares), vineyards (0.13 million hectares), and gardening (0.4 million hectares).
In the nineteenth century, the line of primogeniture ran along a line quite
close to the western coast of Schleswig-Holstein in the north to the Dutch
border and the Lower Rhine. Here it turned sharply east into Thuringia (with
the exception of parts of Hesse), before making another turn through Franconia, finally dividing Baden and Württemberg from Bavaria in the south. By
this measure, the regions east of the river Elbe from Mecklenburg to East
Prussia may be regarded as a contiguous agricultural region. This was the
land of large-scale estates, whose sandy soils were best suited for cereal and
potato crops. There were also the woodlands that as late as 1905 made up
some 46.4 percent of landed property in Prussia. Although this region had been
opened up to market-oriented methods of land management, it remained
rooted in many ways in practices and attitudes that were precapitalist.24
As far as the northwest of the Reich is concerned, Schleswig-Holstein may
be seen as a region that was structured differently from the territories east of
the river Elbe. Particularly along the North Sea coast, freehold farmsteads of
five to fifty hectares predominated, whose specialties were meat production
and dairy farming (Table 3). The fertile soils of Dithmarschen, just north of
the mouth of the river Elbe, were well suited for cabbage and sugar beet. In
the eastern parts of Schleswig the soil became sandier again, and farmers concentrated on animal husbandry. The arable land was used “primarily for the
production of animal feedstuffs.”25 There were also a number of large estates
near the Baltic Sea coast; but most of the so-called Geestbauern had small
farms, situated like those of Holstein in a landscape of hills and woods.
15

Economy

There were many regional similarities between Schleswig-Holstein and the
northern Rhineland, the Province of Westphalia, and the areas stretching further east towards Hanover and Celle, known as the North German Basin. The
west’s rich soil, it is true, is replaced further east by sandier soil up to the more
fertile region around Magdeburg; but there were few large estates here, and
agriculture was devoted to dairy farming as well as the production of cereals,
potatoes, and beetroot. In the Rhineland and in Westphalia a mere 1 percent
of all farmsteads were larger than fifty hectares. Small farmers were also found
in large numbers in the entire Rhine valley region further south all the way
up to the Swiss border and eastward in Württemberg. Unsuited geomorphically for large-scale agriculture, the family enterprises along the river Rhine
and its tributaries (Nahe, Main, Neckar) specialized in wine and fruit production. Animal husbandry and dairy farming, as well as the production of grain
and hops, prevailed further east in Franconia and Bavaria. The region had a
number of large estates; but the majority of peasants did not own more than
one to ten hectares of land. Hesse and Thuringia also had mostly small holdings, with forestry as an important element in this mountainous region. Mixed
patterns of agriculture were found in Saxony, whose real significance lay in
the fact that it was one of the oldest industrial regions of Central Europe.
Since the eighteenth century, if not before, the kingdom of Saxony and the
Silesian territories further east had been a center for textile production that
for a long time had been organized on a protoindustrial basis. Here underemployed peasant strata had adopted cottage-industrial production. Raw materials were provided by putters-out, who also marketed end-products. As early
as the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries many villages in the Eichsfeld east of Göttingen, in the Thuringian Forest, and in the uplands along the
rivers Elbe and Oder in Saxony and Silesia had a high percentage of weavers
and spinners.
Slowly, with the advent of larger power looms and steam engines, these
industries underwent a process of concentration, leading to the building of factories that would house dozens of workers under one roof. However, many of
the old putting-out networks did survive into the 1870s. The textile industry’s
decline thereafter was further hastened by the rise of the chemical industry,
which developed around Halle-Merseburg and Leipzig and, in conjunction
with the exploitation of the region’s lignite deposits, transformed the area
into central Germany’s industrial heart.
With the elevation of Berlin to Reich capital, however, there arose further
north not only a commercial and financial center, but also an industrial competitor for Saxony. Berlin became the home to many companies in the fields
of metal manufacturing and electrical engineering. Yet, neither Berlin nor
Saxony, nor much less Hamburg, a focal point of shipbuilding and metal manufacture, was able to compete with the industrial region along the rivers Rhine
16

National and Regional Economic Developments

and Ruhr, or with the Wupper River Valley and the Siegerland. However severely its heavy industries had at first been affected by the “Great Depression,”
the region, which had a long tradition of coal and iron production, benefited
from the growing importance of the metal industry. Technological developments, moreover, made possible the mining of deeper-lying coal deposits of
the so-called Emscher Zone on the northern fringes of the Ruhrgebiet. It also
proved advantageous that the Rhine provided a major waterway and that western Europe and many of Germany’s important trading partners were within
easy reach.
Further south, Frankfurt emerged as a manufacturing center, promoted, as
in the case of Berlin, by the city’s long-standing position as a hub of commerce and finance. Among the older industrial regions, mention must also be
made of the upper and lower Neckar River Valley. In Stuttgart and Neckargemünd, metal manufacturing had a long tradition. Further north, on the banks
of the Rhine and the mouth of the Neckar, Mannheim and Ludwigshafen attracted the flourishing chemical industry. Munich, the Bavarian capital, never
achieved the significance of Berlin or Frankfurt as an industrial center. But
apart from Augsburg, the region around Nuremberg established itself as a manufacturer of toys and metal goods.
Location was obviously an important factor in the success of a particular industrial region. But in view of the continued growth of the German economy—
which slowed during the 1870s and 1880s but expanded rapidly thereafter—
it is difficult to speak of a decline in any of them, only of a strengthening of
one region over another. The region of the Rhine and Ruhr unquestionably
gained a dominant position, which it defended into the second half of the
twentieth century. At the end of the nineteenth century, Saxon industry tried
to overcome its locational handicap with the building of the Mittellandkanal.
The project ran into bitter opposition from agrarians, to whom the canal represented not a waterway for the transportation of raw materials and finished
goods to and from Saxony, but an avenue for a flood of cheap grain imports
from North America. Building canals and making rivers navigable became an
important state activity, and shipping grew from 1.6 billion ton/kilometers in
1870 to 17.8 billion in 1913.
Meanwhile the railroads were of even greater importance, for all industrial
regions. It is no accident that the first German railroad line was opened between Nuremberg and nearby Fürth in 1840. Other lines soon followed between
Munich and Augsburg in Bavaria and between Magdeburg and Dresden via
Halle and Leipzig in Saxony. By 1912 over 60,000 kilometers of tracks had
been built. In 1870 the railroads transported 5.3 billion ton/kilometers of
goods; by 1913 this figure had risen to 67.7 billion. The comparable figures for
railroad passengers increased almost tenfold between 1871 and 1913. Wolfgang Schivelbusch has written a fascinating book about this “industrialization
17

Economy

of time and space” and about the impact of the railroads upon the mentalities
of contemporaries.26 Thenceforth, distances that had seemed huge began to
shrink. Remote villages suddenly were brought into the catchment area of
cities. Fresh fruit and vegetables reached the markets of densely populated
industrial regions. Time-keeping became standardized. In 1893, Central European Time was introduced for the whole of the Reich.
Road traffic meanwhile also proliferated. In the countryside and in villages,
carts and coaches remained the most important means of transportation. The
first horse-drawn streetcar opened in Berlin in 1865. By 1881 Siemens had
developed an electric tram that ran between Berlin and nearby Lichterfelde.
The western city of Wuppertal erected the Schwebebahn, which, suspended
from pylons, ran above the meandering river Wupper. In 1896 Berlin opened
the Hochbahn, a commuter system on elevated tracks. Hamburg built a similar system. Bicycles enjoyed a rising popularity toward the end of the nineteenth century. From the middle of the 1890s automobiles became the craze
for those who could afford them. The slow expansion of paved overland roads
promoted bus and motorized postal services. They were able to reach remoter
parts of the country that the railroad companies had bypassed. To be sure, this
was not yet the age of mass motorization. Germany remained behind the
United States, France, and Britain in the number of cars per capita. Passenger cars remained luxury items, custom-made mostly in small workshops.
It is important to emphasize that this was not yet the age of mass production and mass consumption. At most mass entertainment had arrived on the
scene, mainly in the form of movies. In the centers of many of the big cities,
it is true, the first department stores opened their doors, trying to attract customers to buildings that looked like palaces and to entice them with lavish
displays of desirable goods. Department stores tended to attract the well-todo and particularly middle-class women with time on their hands and money
to spend. Given the tight budgets of working-class families, they might travel,
for example at Christmas time, from their poorer neighborhoods to the center to window-shop and to look at the festive glitter.
The building of railroads and the advent of automobiles also benefited
postal services. The invention of the telegraph and later of the telephone further accelerated and facilitated communication in unprecedented ways. In
1872 the German postal service expedited around 972 million messages of
all kinds. By the turn of the century, this figure had risen to 5.7 billion. In 1913
the number of letters and parcels alone handled by the Reichspost amounted
to 5.9 billion. In 1872 some 12 million telegrams were sent; in 1910 it was
four times that number. Similarly, the number of telephones spread quickly
after the turn of the century. In 1910, Germany had l million telephones, and
the exchanges connected some 1.8 billion calls.

18

The Organization of Industry

Under British leadership the global cable network was greatly expanded,
reinforcing the integration also of German industry and commerce into the
world economy. The above-mentioned growth in exports and imports (Table
8) stimulated not only shipbuilding but also commercial shipping. Until the
mid-1880s the transport capacity of tall ships continued to be larger than that
of steamboats. By 1910 the latter had a combined space of 2,185,890 register tons (BRT), and it doubled once more to 4.4 million BRT by 1913. By
then the total for tall ships had declined to around 440,000 BRT. Technological developments, such as the steam turbine and later large diesel engines, further enhanced the position of the German commercial fleet. Norddeutscher
Lloyd and the Hamburg-Amerika-Paketfahrt Aktien-Gesellschaft (HAPAG)
became the two major shipping companies. In 1913 no fewer than thirtythree large passenger steamers and freighters of over 10,000 BRT had been
put into service, and several of these even had a capacity of over 50,000 BRT.
Germany now held second place behind Britain among the world’s commercial fleets.
All in all it may be said that the expansion of communications provides a
good mirror of the modernizing impulses that the German national economy
received before 1914. Even if structural changes, the ups and downs in the
economy, and geography affected some individual branches and sectors negatively, overall the German Empire gave the impression of strength and vitality. Only agriculture fell more and more behind—with consequences we
shall investigate in later chapters.27

3. The Organization of Industry
The evolution of capitalist industrialization and urbanization is inseparably
connected with the phenomenon of increased organization that affected both
the economy and all other spheres of life in the second half of the nineteenth
century. We first turn to the organization of the various local and national
markets.
A. Labor Markets, Capital Markets, and Cartels
There was a marked increase in the number of working men and women
between 1871 and 1913 from 17.3 million to 30.9 million (Table 28). This
amounted to an average annual growth rate of 1.2 percent. However, considerable imbalances developed due to the migrations from agriculture to industry and to the tertiary sector.28 Moreover, the above absolute figures must be
correlated with the employment rate, which was partly determined by the
country’s age structure, the share of working women, the age of entry into the
labor market, and the average retirement age (Tables 27, 29). Until 1880 the

19

Economy

employment rate vacillated around 43 to 44 percent, rising to 46 percent by
1913.
Similarly the share of working women saw little change, remaining at around
30 percent, notwithstanding the shifts that occurred between agriculture and
industry as well as within the tertiary sector, where the number of domestic
servants declined, while that of female office workers (“white-blouse” occupations) went up (Tables 29–31).29 Furthermore, the decline of child labor
and the extension of education and training for young people must be taken
into consideration when we look at the relative stability of the employment
rate. Reasonably reliable calculations of the unemployment figures and rates
exist only from 1887 onwards (Table 21). But these statistics refer only to industry and crafts, and therefore the actual figures were certainly somewhat
higher. In 1887 the unemployment rate was below 1 percent, but hovered around
the 4-percent mark a year later.
There was another decline in unemployment in 1890 and 1891, before it
reached a peak at roughly 6 percent the following year. Later, at the end of
the 1890s, the rate leveled off again at a little higher than 1 percent. It reached
a high of 7 percent during the recession of 1901/2 (with over 630,000 unemployed). After this date the statistics that had been kept by trade unions up
to then were complemented by official records. Above all, the rate stabilized
at between 2 and 4 percent until 1913. In the last year before the war some
350,000 unemployed were once more on the books, which was seen by some
as another sign of a trend reversal in the economy. These developments as
well as the steady stream of people looking for employment put pressure on
the labor market to become better organized.
Agriculture—except in the case of purely family-run farms—had for a long
time hired its laborers on a daily basis every morning in accordance with demand. But the massive flight to the cities and into industry moved the estate
owners to offer steadier employment conditions, whose further advantage
was that it facilitated firmer social control and, in the age of mass politics,
also control over the land laborers’ voting behavior.30 Faced with a scarcity
of labor, the large-scale estates in East Elbia were moreover forced to rely on
migrant workers, most of whom were Poles from the Russian parts of the former “Congress Poland” who were sent back at the end of each season. These
employment practices increased tensions with the Tsarist empire, especially
toward 1914; it also undermined the anti-Polish Germanization policies of the
Prussian government.31 In any case, as early as the 1890s the Agricultural
Chambers in the east began to organize regional labor exchanges. In 1903,
with the support of the Prussian Ministry of Agriculture, the nationalist Society of the Eastern Marches (HKT) and the Pan-German League temporarily
appeared on the scene. Finally, in 1905 the Central Office for German Land
Laborers was founded, which, after considerable bureaucratic wrangling, ulti20

The Organization of Industry

mately succeeded in 1908/9 in centralizing the existing systems of labor exchanges. Through this system, as well as innumerable private agencies, well
over 500,000 migrant workers came to Germany every year, most of them
Poles.
One can easily imagine the social and openly racist prejudices encountered by these poorly paid “Polacken.” Their situation as third-class laborers
was reinforced by political and ideological problems.32 At this point it must
suffice to note that it was an odd agricultural labor market that emerged in
the east, one in which the workers—indigenous ones included—had virtually
no rights. Industry could not have survived with this kind of a system. Cottage industries were suited only for certain types of jobs. Factory production
and the handling of fairly complex machines required workers who could not
simply be hired on an ad hoc daily basis. Although industrial workers remained virtually without legal protection against dismissal, the employers’
interest in uninterrupted production demanded that most branches acquire a
core of skilled workers, and these in turn could insist on greater job security
than agriculture was able to offer.
These circumstances affected the organization of the nonagricultural labor
markets. At first the employers merely kept lists designed to prevent the hiring of Social Democratic “agitators.”33 Later employers developed and ran
exchanges, that is, organizations that acted as intermediaries between employers and those looking for work. Increasingly, the government began to
assume a role in this field. Thus, local authorities organized exchanges through
which domestic servants and unskilled laborers were placed. Although the
employers, above all in mining and the metal industry, were able to preserve
their predominance in this area, the government did gain a foot in the door.
Its role became fixed in the Prussian Placement Law of 1912, which indicated that those looking for work would no longer be completely at the
mercy of the employers. The introduction in the 1880s of a social insurance
system had enhanced workers’ material and legal positions, even if Bismarck
had his own political considerations when he devised this system.34 In short,
there was a close connection between the growing demands of modern factory production and the organization of the labor markets.
The same is true of the organization of the capital markets. The capital requirements of the national economy, the rise of financial institutions, and the
changing needs of employers and the public administration have already been
mentioned. In organizing capital markets, banks were bound to assume a key
role, and not just because private bankers were personally liable and shareholding institutions operated under limited liability. The latter were able to
expand their capital basis considerably during the early 1870s and thus gained
levers to influence the national economy as a whole. However, it is the model
of the “universal bank”—developed from the concept of the French crédit
21

Economy

mobilier institution—that is fundamental to the increased power of the German banks. As the name indicates, “universal banks” were not just credit institutions that attracted savings accounts and then provided short-term loans
to whoever was deemed credit-worthy. Unlike their British and American
counterparts, German banks were allowed to act as brokers on the stock market and even to acquire and sell shares for their own gain. Indeed, they could
engage in virtually all financial matters. They could acquire a stake in an industrial or commercial enterprise and then exercise their voting rights at the
annual meeting of shareholders. These organizational and legal conditions
explain why German credit institutions were less interested in short-term high
profits than in the long-term health of those companies in which they had a
direct or indirect interest. Whereas British banks rarely offered more than an
overdraft facility, German banks made a long-term commitment to the firms
of their choice.
Thus, a close relationship developed between banking and industry as a
result of which expanding and successful enterprises were able to base their
investment planning on strategic projections. Even before Rudolf Hilferding
published his famous book in 1910 under this title, the argument could be
heard that “finance capital” had gained the upper hand in this relationship.
More recent research indicates, however, that it was a more balanced, genuine symbiosis that both sides nourished as mutually beneficial and without
a constant desire to dominate. The rise of joint-stock companies such as the
Deutsche Bank, Commerz- und Disconto Bank, or Dresdner Bank was certainly promoted by their links with rapidly growing firms such as Siemens
and AEG, although some companies, particularly in the chemicals industries,
also reinvested a large share of their profits. Private bankers, because of unlimited liability requirements and other factors, had to be more cautious, but
their role in the organization of Germany’s capital markets should not be underestimated. Many of them were active in the field of industrial investments
or they floated lucrative public loans, often also as agents of foreign governments. The wealth that Gerson Bleichröder accumulated not only for his
most famous client, Otto von Bismarck, but also for himself was generated
by a long string of successful transactions on the capital markets of Europe.
Among the large banks, Deutsche Bank’s growth was particularly impressive. Its share capital, which included that of several larger regional banks,
amounted to 691 million marks by 1911. It had reserves of 238.5 million marks.
Siemens & Halske and Norddeutscher Lloyd were among its major customers. Deutsche Bank, in cooperation with Berliner Handels-Gesellschaft and
Bankhaus Delbrück, Leo & Co., supported Emil Rathenau in building up his
AEG empire. Its top executives were represented on the supervisory boards
of other important industrial and commercial enterprises. In the southwest,
Darmstädter Bank in conjunction with Schaafhausener Bankverein mediated
22

The Organization of Industry

agreements in 1905 between Badische Anilin- und Sodafabriken (BASF),
Bayer, and Agfa, three of the up-and-coming chemical firms. Meanwhile
Dresdner Bank promoted the further expansion of Saxon industry, but also of
the Felten & Guilleaume Cable Works in Cologne. Other well-known big
banks were engaged in the mining and steel industries.
Given their commitments to industry, most larger banks were more interested in attracting major investors rather than ordinary people, who held relatively small savings. The latter, whose cumulative wealth was anything but
insignificant, were courted by communal savings banks (Sparkassen). Nor
were their customers interested in risk papers like stocks; rather, they wished
to have their funds securely invested for retirement. Accordingly, the amounts
held by these institutions trebled in the decade after 1870. At the time of the
Kaiserreich’s founding, Saxony alone had no fewer than 142 savings banks
with some 474,272 accounts. They held a total of 115.7 million marks. Twenty
years later the number of savings banks had risen to 220, with 1.6 million accounts and 581.7 million marks. In 1914 the total for Saxony was 361 institutions, holding just over 2 billion marks (Table 19). By 1913 the customers
of all savings banks had entrusted to them some 19.7 billion marks. This was
four times the amount that was held by the eight largest joint-stock banks.
To be sure, individual savings banks often remained so tiny and bound to
their localities that they could do no more than provide small loans. However,
the credit needs of artisans, shopkeepers, and farmers were often considerable, especially in economically hard times. This is where cooperative banks
came in. They were credit associations whose members shared, through the
capital they had put in, the cooperative’s profits and losses. Members could
also obtain loans at favorable rates. The great popularity of this type of credit
institution is reflected in its membership figures. In 1870 cooperative banks
had 314,656 members; by 1913 this number had increased to over 800,000.
The total number of these associations doubled to 1,500 during the same period. A separate system of cooperatives developed to cater to the credit needs
of agriculture, three quarters of which belonged to the Reichsverband der
landwirtschaflichen Genossenschaften, the rest to the Raiffeisen-Verband.
The latter was more centralized and offered its members other services besides loans.
With the agricultural sector’s indebtedness rising under the impact of the
“Great Depression,” and given the above-mentioned general structural crisis
of this sector, the traditional system of lending continued, that is, private
loans at often very high interest rates. This kind of lending had a bad reputation, though not always justifiably so. Of course, there were many cases in
which the usurer unscrupulously exploited the plight of a particular peasant.
But there were as many lenders who would not immediately confiscate property the moment a borrower was in arrears with his payments. This, and the
23

Economy

fact that many usurers were non-Jews, did little to prevent the fanning of antiSemitic resentments in many rural areas on which politicians then tried to
capitalize in the age of the universal male suffrage.35
Finally, mortgage banks emerged in the second half of the nineteenth century as an alternative to credit associations. Like the universal bank, this type
of credit institution was modeled on the French example. Mortgage banks
operated under strict legal rules, which were further strengthened at the turn
of the century, that did not allow them to help in any emergency. Moreover,
the lending activities of these banks shifted increasingly from the rural to the
urban market. In the face of the country’s demographic explosion, there arose
a growing demand for mortgages to finance city housing. Builders and developers were as a rule also able to offer better securities than farmers whose
properties were frequently overburdened with other mortgages.
Founded in 1875, the Reichsbank stood at the top of this highly diversified financial system with responsibility for currency and interest rate policies. Reichsbank shares were held by private investors who had little
influence on its policies, though. The bank’s president was appointed by the
Kaiser. The banknotes issued by the Reichsbank were increasingly backed by
the country’s gold reserves, by 1913 up to 45 percent. The base rate was held
as low as possible to promote economic growth. Yet, however well the German banking system may have been equipped organizationally and legally to
support the expansion of industry and commerce, the available capital resources always remained tight and in fact became even scarcer toward 1914.
The serious indebtedness of agriculture sucked too high a proportion of investors into a sector that was structurally weak and declining.
The public sector’s growing need to borrow proved an even greater drawback. The costs of armaments, which kept mounting from the late 1890s because of the Kaiser’s ambitious naval program, bloated the Reich budget. At
the same time the federal states and local governments became no less reliant
on the capital market to cover their deficits, which they found more and more
difficult to remove through politically sensitive tax increases.36 Ultimately,
the capital markets suffered from the fact that Germany—where more broadly
based wealth was a recent phenomenon—did not stand on as firm a financial
basis as, for example, did Britain. In no other area is this weakness evidenced
more clearly than in the difficulties to make foreign investments on a larger
scale, even if this seemed desirable for both economic and strategic-political
reasons. Even in the years of prosperity before 1914, the cake was simply too
small to cater for all those needs, private and public, at home and abroad.
Finally, there were the commodity markets. In organizational terms, they
underwent a major change that was to have consequences for the development of Germany’s industry and commerce well beyond the lifetime of the
German Empire. According to liberal-capitalist theory, these markets were to
24

The Organization of Industry

be exclusively subject to the laws of supply and demand. These laws supposedly determined the movement of prices and the volume of production. The
market was thus endowed with a self-healing capacity. It would correct temporary imbalances in supply and demand by making adjustments in prices or
production respectively.
Another advantage of this system was said to lie in the mechanism of competition in the open marketplace, which would result in the disappearance of
weak enterprises. The slowdown of the 1870s with its many bankruptcies
demonstrated that there was some truth in this argument. Prices slumped, and
many firms that had been founded in the heady days of the Gründerjahre
lacked the financial strength and stamina to survive until demand picked up
again and the economy righted itself. Faced with hard times, businessmen
had been inclined before to throw their professed support for the principle of
competition overboard and to seek protection against the vagaries of the market. They banded together to stabilize prices and production in the hope that
this would accelerate the economy’s turnaround. And as before, foreign competitors were the first against whom they would form a common front.
In the face of such protectionist tendencies that were never far from the
surface in a developing industrial economy, it is not surprising that demands
for higher tariff walls were made when the recession of the 1870s persisted.
As a first step, business became organized. Associations were founded whose
lobbyists began to exert pressure on the government and Reichstag deputies.37 This agitation was successful in that industrial and agricultural tariffs
were introduced in 1878/79 and increased in subsequent years, as the “Great
Depression” was perceived by many to show no signs of abating. While tariffs impeded foreign competition, many businesses had meanwhile moved
beyond this. They began to help each other in the domestic market, concluding agreements among themselves over prices, conditions, and production.
These horizontal agreements between independent firms (known as cartels)
were, as initially conceived, no doubt responses to a perceived emergency. In
1875, there had been no more than 8 cartels, confined to a few branches of
industry. By 1887, the total had risen to 70, and by 1895 there were 143. Cartel agreements were binding contracts in civil law, a violation of which could
be made the subject of court litigation. Trying to break out of the discipline
of a cartel hence became expensive, quite apart from the threat of other sanctions by the remaining cartel members against the offending company. Conversely, refusing to join a cartel could lead to no less costly ostracism by the
majority.
If cartels were products of a particular crisis situation, they should have
been disbanded when the recovery came after 1895. But in the meantime many
cartel associations had begun to take on lives of their own. Many members had
so come to appreciate the stability provided by them that they preferred the
25

Economy

arrangement to renewed exposure to competition in the open marketplace.
This was particularly true of those weaker firms for whom cartels with pricefixing policies and exact production quotas provided a life raft even in better
times. Moreover, traumatized by the long rollercoaster period of retarded
growth, they sought protection not only against competition in a period of
boom, but also against future recessions. Accordingly, the expansion of cartel organizations continued after 1895. By the turn of the century, the number of agreements had again doubled to 300. In 1910 there were some 673
cartels. However, the degree of cartelization varied considerably from branch
to branch. It was highest in mining, followed by the paper, iron, and cement
industries. In relation to the value of its output, the potash industry was fully
cartelized, followed by the paper industry (90 percent) and coal (82 percent).
In the iron and cement industries cartelization reached just under 50 percent
and was still rising. The degree of cartelization in car manufacturing and electrical engineering, on the other hand, was a mere 10 percent. Virtually no cartel agreements existed in chemicals.
Apart from conditioning its members to anticompetitive behavior, cartels
were also fostered by the organizational structures that had developed since
the 1870s. In order to safeguard coordinated sales of their products and also
to control their members, sales associations (so-called syndicates) had been
established. They looked after the marketing and selling of the members’
production quotas that a cartel had agreed upon. Once in existence, it proved
difficult to abolish such organizations. No less important, in 1897 the Reich
Court rendered a decision that actually permitted horizontal agreements between independent firms and thus confirmed that breaches of cartel rules
could be made the subject of civil suits. As a result of this decision, a very
different legal framework developed in Imperial Germany from that of the
United States, for example, where, in line with dominant liberal ideology,
cartels were deemed detrimental to competition and directed against the interests of the consumer. They were outlawed and breaches criminalized by
the Sherman Act of 1890.
Notwithstanding a number of exceptions ratified in later years, the organization of business in the United States thenceforth occurred within a different constitutional framework from that of Germany, where cartels were in
principle legal. American industry developed in the direction of oligopolistic
competition. Although before 1914 Germany also experienced a concentration movement that led to ever larger enterprises, cartelization, by aiding the
survival of smaller and weaker firms, endowed German capitalism with a special quality. This in turn had an impact on prices because, in fixing their prices,
cartels had to calculate them on the basis of the profitability of their weakest
members. Ultimately, the consumer therefore had to pay, and the benefits of
mass production were not passed on, as America’s Henry Ford had begun to
26

The Organization of Industry

advocate. German industry developed into a well-organized authoritarian producer capitalism.
Cartels probably slowed down the emergence of mass consumption in the
German Empire, but they did not prevent it. Just as in France, Britain, and the
United States, department stores and nickel-and-dime shops began to proliferate that sold mass-produced cheap goods to a growing urban, industrial
working class. Still, although reliable figures are lacking, the impact of price
reductions was so small that improvements in living standards could, in the
face of inflation, only be reached by fighting for higher wages. The pursuit
of an expansionary wage policy on the part of the workers and their organizations—the trade unions—was further stimulated by developments in the
markets for agricultural produce. Price rises in this sector were not fuelled by
cartels but through high tariffs. After a lull in the 1890s, the tariff laws of
1902, which primarily hit cheap foreign grain imports, once again impacted
adversely on the budgets of millions of low-income families. This in turn lent
additional force to wage demands promoted by a working class that had meanwhile begun to organize and led to conflicts with employers.
B. The Development of Enterprise, Labor Conflicts
For us today, when over 40 percent of all working men and women are employed in enterprises with over 1,000 laborers and office employees, it is not
easy to visualize the structure and organization of German industry during
the early 1870s. At that time the overwhelming majority worked in companies employing no more than 1 to 5 people (Tables, 22, 23, 25, 26). This high
percentage, which was primarily due to the continued importance of crafts in
this period, declined to 40 percent by 1895 and to 30 percent by 1907. Meanwhile a strong growth occurred of enterprises employing between 11 and
1,000 men and women. In 1895 there were over 1.5 million artisans, of whom
some 532,000 were self-employed and almost twice as many (983,000) found
employment in a workshop.
It is difficult to overestimate the consequences of this concentration movement in industry for the organization of work, for industrial relations, and for
the general climate that obtained in German industry. At a most basic level,
patriarchism continued that had defined the internal structure and atmosphere
in the workshops before the Industrial Revolution. In a small setup like this, it
was still possible for the master and/or owner to have knowledge of all aspects
of the production process and to be in constant control. He held disciplinary
powers and supervised sales and the keeping of the accounts. The advantage
of this type of small-scale organization was that relations were more personal
and that many masters and owners felt directly responsible for the welfare of
their workers. Once an enterprise had 100 or 200 employees, a limit had often
been reached beyond which it was impossible to maintain the old patriarchal
27

Economy

structures. Work became more differentiated and divided, although it remained
hierarchically organized. Still, there now developed several levels of command.
Hand in hand with this went a growing bureaucratization, which Jürgen
Kocka traced when he studied the expansion of Siemens, the electrical engineering firm.38 A man like Krupp tried to uphold the image of the ever-present
entrepreneur; but even in his heavy industrial empire personal relations inexorably became more anonymous. By 1913, he had around 77,500 men and
women on his payrolls. Siemens & Schuckert trebled its rolls between 1882
and 1907. Research and Development (R&D), stockpiling, production, sales,
and financial control developed into separate spheres. Specialized knowledge
was required in all of them, thus promoting the rise of the expert. In this way
a further differentiation took place that was particularly visible in the production sphere and was partly related to the impact of mechanization.
With the transition from workshop to factory, artisanal expertise was undermined by the use of machines. It was sufficient to have workers who were
familiar with a few basic operations, among whom many were women. They
were supervised by a small number of skilled workers and foremen whose task
was to secure uninterrupted production. And the more the technical expertise
of the latter increased with the growing complexity of the production processes and the pressure to integrate the various elements into a well-functioning,
efficient enterprise, the more they emerged as a separate category from the majority of the workforce. Together with other highly qualified experts in R&D,
marketing, sales, and finance they became the new group of white-collar employees. By 1912, Siemens had some 12,502 of these employees, with 44,400
blue-collar laborers involved with the actual manufacturing of goods. The
rise of the white-collar employee had important societal, political, and ideological consequences that will be dealt with later.39
The emergence of large enterprises also affected the role of women in the
labor process. Women had been economically active before the advent of industrialization. They had made a major contribution to the peasant family
economy and, during the period of protoindustrialization, to those scores of
families who turned to manufacturing in their cottages. The rise of the factory, which employed both men and women, triggered an important change
(Table 29). Until then, women had enjoyed a considerable degree of economic equality with men. Industrial labor, however, resulted in a marked differentiation in pay between men and women. For entrepreneurs this situation
was not only profitable, but it also helped them to make the de-skilling process, as experienced by their male laborers, psychically more tolerable to the
latter, since women moved into positions even worse than their own. This is
a partial explanation for why many men supported the discrimination against
women in the workplace.

28

The Organization of Industry

It must also be remembered that these men had grown up in the milieu of
the patriarchal family where women had traditionally occupied an inferior
social position. One consequence of this mechanism was that the promotion
prospects of women also remained low. Thus, unless they got themselves organized to voice their grievances, the factory system imposed on women the
double burden of their class and gender. Nor did women who worked in the
offices beyond the production lines fare any better. The emergence of the differentiated large enterprise had led to the creation of many new positions in
the sphere of sales, marketing, or accounting. But most women entered these
offices as secretaries and assistants, and their promotion prospects in competition with men were similarly severely restricted. Their pay was also unequal, and they had to struggle against massive patriarchal prejudices on the
part of their male colleagues and superiors.40
Whatever the structured inequalities and new hierarchies that were created
in the wake of the rapid growth and more complex organizations of industry,
and however much employers may have promoted the differentiations between blue-collar and white-collar employees, between male and female workers, they also hoped to secure their domination and control of people and
work processes. The earlier model of an “absolute monarchy” was increasingly replaced by the bureaucratic principle in which the orders came from a
management board. But insofar as industry under the Hohenzollern monarchy tried to copy an organizational model, it followed that of the army and in
particular of the Prussian General Staff. It was not only the clear lines of
command, which many entrepreneurs found so attractive about this model,
that they hoped to adapt to industry. What also came to bear was the mythical reputation of efficiency that the Prusso-German Army had acquired. And
this happened at a time when industry and commerce moved towards definitions of rationality and profitability that pertained to all aspects of a company’s life. The relative popularity of the General Staff model was enhanced
by the influence of a very conservative heavy industry that was able to retain
its ideological and political leadership even after the economic rise of the
branches of the second Industrial Revolution.
Hand in hand with organization and bureaucratization went the stress on
competency, loyalty, and reliability. Increasingly, these qualities came to be
seen as no less important than the willingness to take risks in the marketplace
and the demonstration of a brilliant business sense. Certainly, the stability of
the workforce became a major consideration in the management of human
resources. With the economic upswing after 1895 there was increased competition to attract well-qualified people, and this also explains why loyalty and
identification with the company became important. Employees who, instead
of coming up through the ranks, moved in from the outside and then turned

29

Economy

into ambitious climbers were viewed with suspicion. Careers were made by
internal promotion, and this meant that people tended to advance more slowly.
After the trauma of the long period of retarded growth, employees also had a
strong desire to gain job security. This attitude fostered a “civil service” mentality that neatly complemented the organizational aims of employers. In the
end, white-collar employees were even called “civil servants,” and, after a certain number of “service years,” they could no longer be fired. Like public
officials, they could only be transferred to other departments or be pensioned
off into early retirement.
In this atmosphere new service and work rules flourished. To be sure, as
with the factory codes of industrialization’s early phases, they were designed
to establish entrepreneurial rights and powers of control, and yet they contained a number of new elements. Although in many cases milder versions of
the disciplinary clauses for blue-collar workers remained in force, other clauses
spoke of entrepreneurial obligations and employee rights and indicated that
a company constitutionalism began to replace autocratic rule. The emergence
of such elements did not just grow from inside the company. There were also
external influences. Thus, in 1891 a Labor Protection Bill was ratified that
obliged enterprises of more than twenty workers to introduce a labor code.
Beyond the traditional catalogue of disciplinary penalties, these codes contained regulations specifying the modes of wage payments, hours of work,
and rest breaks for employees.
The Labor Protection Law even gave employees an opportunity to elect a
workers’ committee prior to the introduction of a new code in their company
through which they could communicate their ideas to their employers. Considering that entrepreneurs continued stubbornly to refuse to enter into any
kind of negotiations with their workers, the idea of taking the next step and
transforming such committees into permanent bodies for the discussion of wage
and welfare questions made little headway before 1914. In light of this hostility, trade unions were even less acceptable to employers as workers’ representatives. Accordingly, granting a voice to blue-collar workers progressed,
but slowly. By 1905 some type of active workers’ committee apparently existed in no more than 10 percent of all companies with over twenty workers.
However, there were a few pioneers, such as Daimler Cars. In this company,
a workers’ committee was at least permitted to hear complaints of individual
workers about wage increases that the management had proposed. During the
last year before World War I, it even happened in a few branches that trade
unions got involved in wage negotiations. Thus Bosch, the Stuttgart electrical engineering firm, began to deal with a workers’ committee whose elected
representatives were members of the German Metal Workers’ Union (DMV).
Although such arrangements could not prevent the outbreak of strikes, as
happened at Bosch, other employers, too, saw the benefits of an official recog30

The Organization of Industry

nition of workers’ organizations. The flow of production was less likely to be
disrupted without warning. Compromises could be forged. The feeling that
they were listened to increased workers’ motivation and loyalty. Some enterprises, moreover, proved too weak to resist pressure from their organized
workforce. If there had been no more than 51 negotiated wage agreements in
1891, by 1913 their number had increased to 10,885, covering 1.4 million
workers in 143,000 enterprises (Table 10). The rate of participation was particularly high in polygraphics (50.8 percent of the workers covered) and in construction (46.8 percent). In the chemical and textile industries, on the other
hand, the share was as low as 4.3 and 1.9 percent respectively.
Other companies that remained hostile to trade unions tried to organize
their own more pliable Works’ Committees (Werkvereine, or so-called Yellow
Unions). With the huge rise in trade union membership, especially in Social
Democratic groups, the Werkvereine did gain some momentum before 1914.
It is a reflection of the growing polarization of pre-1914 industrial relations
and politics that Yellow Unions were vigorously promoted by many employers, who, apart from fighting Social Democratic associations, also rejected
the smaller and more moderate Catholic trade union movement. Polarization
was also mirrored in the waves of strikes that hit German industry at this time
(Table 11). In these circumstances, employers saw it as one of their most important tasks to support the founding of docile works’ committees and to fight
the Social Democratic associations. In a few large companies in the shipbuilding, machine tool, and chemicals branches these committees had over
1,000 members by the spring of 1914. The larger context behind this trend,
in which the heavy industries of the Saar region also took a leading position,
is found in the alarm of the rising “Social Democratic menace” in pre-1914
German politics more generally but also in the attempt to develop “corporatist” patterns designed to split the labor movement and to destroy the growing
weight of the Social Democrats in the Reich’s parliamentary-representative
system.
Wherever negotiations between employers and workers’ representatives
occurred during the upswing after l895, it was not just the traditional topics
of wages and working conditions that were put on the table, but also the
question of rationalization. Toward the end of the nineteenth century, a movement had gathered momentum, especially in the United States, that was most
frequently connected with the name of Frederick Taylor and that initiated a
further stage in the process of systematizing and organizing production.
These American ideas on “Scientific Management” that, for the period after
the turn of the century, must also be related to Henry Ford’s experiments with
standardization and assembly-line production, came to be hotly debated in
German industry. Many German entrepreneurs, it is true, did not think that
the developments across the Atlantic, which were oriented toward mass pro31

Economy

duction, were applicable in Europe. Nevertheless, some of them began to introduce “Taylorist” and “Fordist” methods.
These experiments required the cooperation of the workforce. Bosch, one
of the pioneers in this field, accordingly entered into discussions on matters
of rationalization with the local branch of the Metal Workers’ Union. To the
owners’ dismay, the attempt to establish a Taylorist “Bosch Tempo” in a company that had a reputation as a “liberal” employer did not go well and introduced a further element of tension into labor relations. In the end things got
so bad that just before the war the firm had a major strike on its hands over
this matter. An interesting case is also presented by the experience of the
Hamburg shipbuilding industry. Following a strike in 1900, it became clear
how much control the DMV had been able to retain over the dispute. This led
the employers to seek closer cooperation with the union in subsequent years.
It was partly due to changes in shipbuilding technology and work organization that this accord was torn up by disaffected workers who staged spontaneous
strikes and refused to stay in the fold of their union’s quest to institutionalize
labor conflicts.
Watching the Bosch strike with a certain amount of Schadenfreude, many
other employers felt confirmed in their rejection of all attempts to take the
road of conciliation and concession. They continued to adhere to the timehonored practices of rigid control from above and of fighting unions tooth
and nail. Toward l9l4, as the situation in the Kaiserreich became more generally polarized, hostility toward unions, whose membership had by then
reached over 2.4 million, was rising so rapidly that calls for a renewed proscription of the working-class movement grew louder. Given the size of that
movement, such a ban would have entailed considerable risks for law and order, and the Reich government therefore refused to respond to pressure from
employers. The unions’ growing importance, which should not be confused
with a similar growth in power, is also reflected in the waves of strikes that
reached a very high peak during the last years before the war.
Since the lapse of the antisocialist laws in 1890, a number of major conflicts had occurred during that decade. However, until the turn of the century
their number and also the number of workers involved in them remained relatively small. The Hamburg Dock Strike of 1896/97 was possibly an exception to this rule, mobilizing at its peak more than 17,000 workers. There was
a steep rise in 1905/6 (in 1906, for example, approximately 3,500 strikes and
lockouts, involving around 350,000 workers, took place). A second wave of
strikes began in 1910, which culminated by 1913 in a number of particularly
large and bitter disputes. The high figure for lockouts indicates that the employers often took a hard line (Table 11).
Yet, however steep the rise in labor conflicts may have been, there was
also an increase in the number of disputes that ended peacefully. Moreover,
32

The Organization of Industry

Britain and France experienced an even higher number of strikes. Consequently, Germany’s international competitiveness was not undermined, and,
as the continued growth in production and productivity of those years showed,
the strikes’ economic effect was less tangible than the employers claimed.
The latter never tired of painting extremely gloomy pictures about the future
of German industry and, indeed, the country as a whole, as it faced the allegedly lethal threat of Social Democracy. However, the successes of German
industry and its changing organizational structures must also be seen in the
context of the rise of applied science and technological innovation, with
which the following section will deal.
C. Industrial Research and Applied Science
One of the most distinctive features of the Industrial Revolution was the development and application of some of the greatest technical inventions since
the eighteenth century. The invention of the steam engine was probably the
most important among them. Textile machinery also became ever more sophisticated and efficient. Later gasoline and diesel engines came along. The
great breakthroughs in electrics, precision optics, and chemicals must be included in this picture of the rapid expansion of science and its application.
By the late nineteenth century, the German Empire held a leading position in
international research and innovation. Earlier on, German industry had been
an importer of machinery and engineers, mainly from Britain, or businessmen copied what they had seen on visits to the industrial centers of Western
Europe. After the beginning of the twentieth century, as has just been noted,
there was a rising interest in American methods and technology.
However, the number of patents that were approved demonstrates, if nothing else, that German science and industry were increasingly making their own
contribution to the process of technological innovation. In 1880, some 2,542
patents were registered for all sectors, including agriculture (among them 74
in electrics and 186 in chemicals). Twenty years later, this figure had risen to
6,449 (among them 590 in electrics and 940 in chemicals). By 1913 the annual total was 9,471 (among them 1,164 in electrics and 1,394 in chemicals).
Many of the patent applications came from individuals who experimented
with their ideas in basements and garden sheds. But with the increasing organization and division of labor within rapidly expanding companies, research and development (R&D) departments were added in which trained
scientists developed the next generation of products. The example of Siemens
was not untypical of the early days when the autodidact Werner Siemens, one
of the pioneers of electrical engineering, with his coworkers at his side, labored in a small workshop trying to put his ideas to industrial use. As late as
1884, it happened at the firm of Ganz & Cie “that a college-trained manufacturing engineer, who had just introduced himself to the company’s director,
33

Economy

was caught and taken away by the head of the embryonic electro-technical
department to turn himself, within the nick of time, into a successful electrical engineer.”41 In 1870, BASF, Hoechst, and Bayer had no more than 10 university trained chemists. Twenty years later, there were 207 among a total
workforce of 123,000 (1.6 percent), and by 1910 the total was 651 among
240,000 employees (2.7 percent).
The rising demand for R&D personnel raised the question of training. Up
to the 1880s, Siemens had a virtual monopoly in training people in electrical
engineering. To the company the program amounted to a major investment.
Its management therefore did not like to see its engineers, many of whom had
gained insights into the secrets of the firm’s research and organization, to join
the competition. In these circumstances it was fortunate that the state had become involved for some time not only in the schooling of the young, but also
in their subsequent training. The advance of industry further reinforced the
economic and political calculations that had driven the expansion of the
school system and tertiary education. State-of-the-art knowledge of the sciences was obviously indispensable in fields such as electrical engineering or
chemicals. Only an academic institution could provide this knowledge.
A glance at government expenditures on the sciences and humanities reveals the importance of this issue. In Prussia, the largest German state, funding rose continuously and then shot up steeply after the turn of the century,
when Germany proudly began to claim a leading position among industrial
nations. By 1914 annual expenditures had reached 50.1 million marks, after
it had been no more than 2.5 million marks in 1850 (Table 12). As a percentage of the total budget, Prussia was surpassed by Baden and Saxony, where
the per capita figures were also higher. The overall expenditure for schools
and institutions of the tertiary sector in the Reich reached 1,378 billion marks
in 1913, almost ten times what had been allocated in 1870. The percentage
rise of the budgets for scientific research in the Reich and its federal states
was even higher.
Meanwhile, a controversy had begun as to whether these funds should be
invested into the development of the sciences at universities, whose influence
in the tertiary sector was dominant. But universities were themselves hesitant. To some extent the older humanities faculties were responsible for this,
many of whose members did not wish to share the budget with expensive sciences and often looked down upon their colleagues from chemistry or physics.
They had an even stronger aversion to the applied sciences. The prejudice
against any kind of “commercialism” in the academy was soon extended to economics and business studies, whose research results were intended to benefit
industry and economic policy making. In the end, the applied sciences were
sidelined institutionally, housed in polytechnical schools that were later elevated to technical high schools (Technische Hochschulen, TH).
34

The Organization of Industry

Although these institutions reacted to their hostile critics by emphasizing,
next to the practical training they offered, the importance of theory in their curricula, not even these concessions could prevent the rift between universities
from widening.42 Scientists and engineers working in industrial laboratories
were among those arguing against this separatism. Defining their work as a
“cultural profession,” they advanced the hypothesis that “a highly developed
Kulturstaat” must “comprise all important cultural tasks” among which “the
first role” belonged to technology.43 Meanwhile the THs and business schools
(Handelshochschulen) emerged as vital centers of training and research. Agronomy also firmly established itself and was taught at separate institutes. The
German system of tertiary education was studied closely abroad and seen by
some as the key to the country’s technical and economic achievements.
The first TH was opened in Munich in 1868, followed two years later by
the TH in Aachen. By the late 1870s, several other polytechnical schools that
had existed since the 1830s had become elevated. THs now existed at Dresden, Braunschweig, Darmstadt, Hanover, and Berlin. Karlsruhe and Stuttgart
followed suit in 1885 and 1890 respectively. The fact that most THs were
founded during the period of retarded economic growth has led to the argument that the incentive to improve the technological infrastructure is particularly great during economically hard times and that investments thus have
an anticyclical effect. In any case, the THs were a resounding success. Around
the turn of the century some 11,000 students were enrolled in them, compared to 33,000 in the universities (Table 52). During the two decades following the founding of the German Empire, the share of public expenditures
for tertiary education in terms of the total budget for education had been almost 60 percent. It then dropped to an average of 54 percent and, just before
World War I, fell even further to 50 percent.
At the same time THs, relying on their newly-won prestige, succeeded in
increasing their budget share of 5 percent for 1850 to 1880 to 10 percent between 1880 and 1914. To these figures must be added the support that went
into science and applied science research outside the state sphere. By 1914,
this research attracted some 11 percent of resources; with the inclusion of
agronomy and related disciplines, this figure rose to 19 percent. These percentages are all the more remarkable since little external money was available
for research in the humanities and social sciences outside the universities.
Nor should it be overlooked that the public purse in some cases provided no
more than 20 percent of the THs’ budget. In other words, these model institutions could not have survived without donations and funded projects from
industry.
Just how far the promotion of science, which was economically motivated
and devoted to application, had gone before 1914 may be gleaned from a comparison with expenditures for military research. In the early 1880s, it had still
35

Economy

occupied first place, but later it fell back. As far as the promotion of the applied sciences was concerned, the state’s role changed in another respect as
well. The founding of polytechnical schools turned THs had been due almost
exclusively to the initiative of politicians and higher civil servants, who were
motivated by what they believed to be the beneficial effects of these institutions on the economy and by what they had learned from the study of French
policies. In the second half of the nineteenth century, the government functioned less as an initiator, but responded to the demands of industry. Now the
spokesmen of the latter became the dynamic element. This applies even more
so to the development of business schools for the training of commercial experts. Thus the Handelshochscule at Cologne, founded in 1901, resulted from
an initiative of Gustav von Mevissen, an influential local industrialist, who
had conceived of the idea as far back as 1879. In Frankfurt, it was the local
Chamber of Commerce and the Polytechnical Society that assumed a similar
role in the opening of a business school there. In Berlin the local merchants
were behind the establishment of such a school in 1906.
All these initiatives grew from the fertile soil of a welter of private organizations, clubs, and academies that devoted themselves to the proliferation of
scientific and technical knowledge. In this respect, too, the late nineteenth
century saw a significant shift vis-à-vis the humanities. Soon there was
barely a scientific or medical field (or a combination of both) that did not
have its own regional or national association. The history of the PhysikalischTechnische Reichsanstalt (PTR) in Berlin shows how strong the interest of industry and commerce in applied research had become.44 Werner Siemens had
been the first to promote the idea in a memorandum in which he had directly
linked scientific research with technical progress, industrial growth, and international technological leadership. Long negotiations with the government
ensued, at the end of which the mission of the projected PTR had changed
quite markedly. The original aim had been to improve the state of precision
engineering with financial aid from the state. When the Institute was finally
founded, its research brief was much broader, and by 1914 its ordinary budget, amounting to 100,000 marks in 1887/88, had grown sevenfold.
The Kaiser Wilhelm Society had similar origins.45 As chemistry began its
meteoric rise, three of its prominent representatives—professors Emil Fischer,
Wilhelm Ostwald, and Walther Nernst—began to dream of an institute like
the PTR. With the support of the chemical industry, they became active as
lobbyists, hoping to persuade the Reich government to found such an institute. But with public finances rapidly deteriorating after the turn of the century, the plan was finally turned down in February 1906. If, the government
replied, a chemical research institute really was so important to have, the
prosperous chemical industry should dip into its own pockets. At the end of
1907, the secretary of the Reich Treasury still refused to make funds avail36

The Organization of Industry

able for 1909 or 1910. At this point another solution was developed with the
help of the distinguished theologian Adolf von Harnack, who had direct access to the Kaiser: the monarch would make a personal public appeal to send
donations for a prospective Kaiser Wilhelm Society (KWG).
It was under the roof of this society that a number of research institutes
were subsequently created outside the university system, to be financed through
the KWG. After much hemming and hawing, the necessary millions were
finally collected, and the society was officially inaugurated in January 1911.
Within this framework there then emerged an Institute for Chemistry, followed by others for biology, coal research, and work psychology. All these
institutes were to conduct basic research as well as to develop applications in
close cooperation with industry.
The infrastructure of tertiary education, which also emerged ever so slowly
and centered on the THs, research institutes, and scientific societies, was
charged with the training of highly qualified people. After graduation these
men would either continue their work within this framework or move into the
R&D departments of large industrial enterprises to turn inventions into new
products. No doubt this system was important for Germany’s rise in the international economy. As competition in the world markets became more
intense, both Britain and the United States began to study closely German
tertiary education and research.46 At the same time, as we have seen, German
industrialists carefully observed the activities of their counterparts, particularly in America. They believed that the major challenges of the future would
come less from Britain, which they perceived to be a declining power, than
from the United States across the Atlantic. This, after all, was also an age when
leadership in scientific knowledge was equated with power advantages in the
global competition for markets.

37

Part II: Society

4. Demographic Structure and Development
A. Population Growth and Patterns of Migration
Population growth and urbanization are inseparably connected with the
process of industrialization in Central Europe. All three processes unfolded
at an even more rapid pace after the founding of the German Empire. According to the first census in the new Reich, taken in 1872, the total population
at that time was a little over 40 million (Table 34). This figure had grown to
56 million by the turn of the century. In 1913 the population was 67 million.
Whereas approximately 206,000 foreigners lived in Germany in 1871, by
1910 their number had risen to approximately 1.3 million. Most of these immigrants came from Eastern Europe (Table 40). Germany also became the
destination for a fluctuating number of seasonal land laborers and an unknown
number of illegal immigrants. At the same time, approximately 3 million
Germans emigrated overseas between 1871 and 1911. Overall the population
rose by around 58 percent.
The reasons for the veritable demographic explosion can partly be found
in a noticeable increase in the average life expectancy and a decline in mortality. During the decade following the founding of the German Empire, life
expectancy from birth was on average a mere 37 years (35.6 years for men
and 38.5 years for women) (Table 58). Through the decade 1901–1910, these
figures had improved to an average of 44.8 years for men and 48.3 years for
women. In 1910 the age structure had the shape of an almost perfect pyramid
(Table 55). Only 5 percent were over 65 years of age, whereas some 35 percent had not yet reached the age of 15. Meanwhile mortality rates began to
decline. If, of 1,000 men and women born during the decade after the founding of the Kaiserreich no more than 297 women and 248 men could expect
to reach the age of 65, the prospects of those born in the decade 1901–1910
had improved to 435 and 361 respectively (Table 59). While mortality rates
among adults and children witnessed a tangible downturn throughout the period, infant mortality rates (i.e., for babies during the first twelve months)
remained high for a long time and registered a marked decline only after the

Demographic Structure and Development

turn of the century (Table 60). Indeed, the deterioration of the situation for
infants that had occurred during the two decades before the creation of the
German Empire continued for more than twenty years thereafter. It was only
in 1885 that infant mortality rates once again reached the level of 1850. Still,
the improvements experienced by other age groups meant that the surplus of
births over deaths rose steadily to just under fifteen per thousand.
A first baby boom hit the country in the 1870s, followed by two decades
of relatively high birth rates. Although the rates began to decline after the
turn of the century, they remained above the (also declining) mortality rate,
thus securing a continued population growth. Put into figures, the growth rate
was 1.22 percent during 1875, the first year of the early baby boom. It slowed
down to under 1.00 percent during the economically pessimistic years of the
1880s, then rose again from the mid-1890s to between 1.31 and 1.5 percent.
There was a sharp drop from 1.21 percent in 1912 to 0.65 percent a year later.
This decline is probably less related to the political and economic difficulties
of the immediate prewar period than to a more long-term trend toward lower
birth rates that also affected other industrial countries. Finally, it is important
to note that the number of live births per 1,000 inhabitants (as well as deaths
per 1,000 inhabitants), discounting stillbirths, remained high. If the surplus
had reached a peak of 14.8 per thousand between 1896 and 1900, in 1911/13
it was still at 12.1 per thousand.
It is hardly surprising that the growth of the population was unevenly distributed between different regions (Tables 34–35). In 1871 some 31 percent
of all Germans lived in the east, including Berlin and Brandenburg. By 1910,
the share had fallen to 29.2. Southern Germany similarly experienced a decline from 23.8 to 20.8 percent during the same period (Table 41). Meanwhile
central Germany registered a small increase, with the most marked population growth occurring in the west from 19.0 to 23.1 percent. Overall, all regions had increases, but if one takes a closer look at individual provinces in
the east, it emerges that in East Prussia, for example, the growth rate was a
mere 13.2 percent, but it reached 131.9 percent in Westphalia and 150.8 percent in Berlin.
Among the urban areas with the highest growth rates were Chemnitz (268
percent), Cologne (282 percent), Dortmund (271 percent), Essen (438 percent),
and Kiel (468 percent) (Tables 36–37). The population of Dortmund grew fivefold between 1871 and 1910. The most staggering demographic explosion
probably took place in the Ruhr town of Hamborn, whose population of 4,260
in 1890 had burgeoned to 101,703 twenty years later. The population density
also increased everywhere. But whereas the growth in East Prussia went from
49 to 56 inhabitants per square kilometer, Westphalia’s went from 88 to 204
and Saxony’s from 171 to 321. All this meant that the population density in
the Reich as a whole rose from 75 to 120 inhabitants per square kilometer.
39

Society

Although the low figures for East Prussia and the large increases for Westphalia and other cities were to some extent the statistical reflections of changes
in the birth rate, another factor must be added to explain the often huge rises,
that is, the migration movements that assumed such enormous proportions
that in the end some 54 percent of the population no longer lived at their
place of birth (Table 42). Only a small part of these migrants went overseas,
and among them those who had been born in eastern Germany constituted
the largest group at 35 percent. This, and the fact that the wave of emigrants
was particularly large between 1880 and 1893, indicates that economic and
sociopolitical reasons may have been a prime factor. It is interesting to ask
what might have happened at a time of retarded economic growth and rising
fears of a revolutionary upheaval if this “valve” through which some 1.8 million Germans were able to leave the country would not have been available.1
Most of these people left in families. Only after 1890 was there an increase
in the number of individuals between the ages of twenty-one and fifty. The
share of peasants and land laborers had reached a high of 34 percent in the
period 1870–1874; it then dropped continuously to 20 percent in the period
1880–1884 and to 14 percent from 1890 to 1892. Meanwhile the share of
workers rose from 18 percent in 1871–1874 to 30 percent in 1880–1884, and
remained at 27 percent in 1890–1892. Most overseas emigrants settled in
North America; around 2 percent went to Brazil and 1.3 percent to Australia.
There was a sharp decline after 1893, when the number dropped below the
30,000 mark, after a peak of over 127,000 during the period 1880–1893.
The number of foreign migrant workers in Germany was well over 1 million before 1914. Among them Polish seasonal workers constituted the largest group with over 250,000. They were employed mainly during the summer
to fill the manpower gap that had arisen on the large estates in the east, only
to be sent back in the winter. These practices, whose impact on Russia was
exacerbated by ruthless Germanization policies of the Prussian government
and by tariff wars, contributed to straining relations with the Tsarist Empire.2
Less insecure and unsteady were the lives of those Germans who migrated to
one of the urban centers from the immediate rural vicinity (Nahwanderer).
At the beginning they constituted the largest section among the migrant population, although exact statistics are difficult to come by. However, it is fairly
certain that many—women more often than men—tried to find factory jobs
in one of the nearby cities. They either became daily commuters or found accommodation in the town during the week and returned to their families on
weekends or during harvest time. For quite a long time, some 80 percent of
newcomers in towns with over 50,000 inhabitants regularly moved back and
forth between their place of work and their village in the region.
However, ultimately those who migrated over longer distances (Fernwanderer) are more important to an understanding of the huge changes in the
40

Demographic Structure and Development

country’s demographic structure than the Nahwanderer. Only by taking these
migrants into account can we explain why some eastern regions became depleted of people, while some cities had to cope with a population explosion.
By 1907 no less than 55 percent of all internal migrants had moved to these
cities. Almost everywhere their share was over 50 percent in comparison
with those who had been born locally (Table 42). Around 30 percent of the
approximately 9 million long-distance migrants lived in the forty-two cities
of Germany at this time. In some of these places, especially in the Ruhr area,
newcomers formed colonies of their own, which became known as “New
Masuria” or “Little East Prussia.” Around 60 percent of the long-distance migrants were unmarried men, so that by the turn of the century rural Prussia
had come to have a surplus of women. But it also happened quite frequently
that the rest of the family moved at a later date. Nor did many of the migrants
from the east ever completely lose contact with their kin back “home.”
Up to 1880, total demographic losses in the eastern provinces (East and
West Prussia, Posen, Silesia, Pomerania, and Mecklenburg) amounted to just
under 570,000 men and women. A decade later, another 1.135 million had
contributed to the exodus. By 1900 there were another 1.7 million people, and
by the time of the 1907 census, the 2 million mark had been reached (Table 41).
Losses were also considerable in a few limited areas in Hesse and Franconia
as well as in the Black Forest and Lower Saxony. For many of those who
found a first abode in one of the industrial cities, this was only the beginning
of something like a nomadic existence. Although our knowledge of this aspect is still very incomplete, further moves within the same city or from one
city to another evidently became a routine part of the lives of millions of
men, women, and children. Especially in economically hard times, many
workers and their families were forced to change their accommodation, as
they could no longer afford rising rents. For years, many unmarried men and
women lived without fixed addresses by being taken in as lodgers (Schlafgänger) with a working-class family. During recessions, people left because
they had lost their job; during an economic upswing they packed their few
belongings because they had heard that a firm in the neighboring city was
paying higher wages. We will analyze in a later section on housing conditions what this nomadic life meant for those families and their children.
B. Town and Country
The movement of millions of people from the rural to the urban-industrial regions of Germany is also reflected in the changing size of the communities
(Table 36). In 1871 some 63.9 percent of the population still lived in communities of under 2,000. By 1890, this figure had declined to 53 percent and, by
1910, to 40 percent. At the other end of the scale, the share of towns with
over 50,000 inhabitants rose from 8.9 percent in 1870 to 26.7 percent in 1910,
41

Society

and cities with populations over 100,000, whose share in the above category
had been a mere 4.8 percent in 1870, now held a share of 21.3 percent. However impressive the growth of big cities, the importance of provincial towns
must not be underestimated. In 1910, just under one-third of the German
population still lived in such towns, and the population of purely rural regions was still around 21 million. Similarly the share of communities with
5 to 20,000 inhabitants increased between 1871 and 1910 from 11.2 to 14.1
percent. Daily life in these towns, which attracted at most small industrial enterprises, saw little change.
As to larger towns, it seems best to differentiate between “old” and “new”
communities; for although older settlements did not grow “organically” in this
age of hectic building activity, they at least had a clearly identifiable inner
city. They still had a certain architectural unity. In the “new” towns the wholesale incorporation of surrounding settlements often prevented any systematic
planning. Up to 1910, some 19 percent of the growth of the big cities was due
to such incorporations. In comparison with 1850, the average area occupied
by such cities had grown from 20.9 square kilometers to over 42 square kilometers sixty years later. Nor were the “new” towns melting pots of populations, even if they often displayed a greater social homogeneity than the “old”
towns. Indeed, the towns’ architecture mirrored the patterns of social stratification. In many cases it was also sufficient just to note the dress codes of the
local population if you wanted to know which part of town you were in.3
What the towns and cities of all categories had in common, though, was
their “youthfulness.” In 1890 the share of children under fifteen in towns of
up to 20,000 inhabitants was highest at 345 per thousand. It was a high 292
per thousand in the cities. Meanwhile the share of those between the ages of
fifteen and forty rose to 474 per thousand in the cities; in small towns it was
417 per thousand. The proportions were reversed among those who were
over sixty years of age (68 per thousand in small towns; 57 per thousand in
cities).
Meanwhile the share of the elderly increased in rural areas, which had lost
the most people to migration. Whoever traveled in East Elbia saw a countryside “as it had always been: sandy flat soils, covered by much grain, barley,
beetroot and potatoes, just a few rural marginal industries like breweries,
schnapps distilleries, sugar factories, a silo belonging to an estate or to an
agricultural cooperative here and there, few towns, a few stately homes with
their parks, surrounded by villages in traditional low-level architecture, all of
them connected by gravel roads, or more rarely by cobble-stone surfaces,
lined by gnarled fruit trees.”4
The way in which these contrasts between town and country were ideologized during the Wilhelmine period, if not before, is one of the more fascinating chapters of German social and intellectual history. The rapid and
42

Demographic Structure and Development

uncontrolled expansion of the cities produced a critique of urbanism that was
advanced not only by agrarian politicians, defending the values of rural life,
but also by bourgeois intellectuals. Ludwig Heitmann, a pastor and critic,
compared cities to “vacuum cleaners” that sucked up human beings and raw
materials, cut them up into pieces, and spewed them out again in a different
compressed shape. On the other side of this debate, there were those who defended the city as a cultural center and the source of the achievements of
Western civilization. They could not conceive of a better form of communal
living. Insofar as they admitted to the dark sides of urban life, they believed
that these problems could be remedied through reforms. Accordingly, they
founded movements devoted, for example, to the improvement of housing
conditions.5 The idea of generously spaced garden cities was born. Others
advocated suburban housing estates with allotments. There were also numerous proposals to improve the infrastructure: schools, hospitals, playgrounds,
water works, electricity, sewage, mass transport.
Many of the urban reform associations were born from a fear that the
growing ranks of the industrial proletariat would one day come out of their
ghettoes and slums to turn the bourgeois world upside down. This fear was
articulated even more insistently by a growing movement that rejected urban
living altogether. In the view of its members, cities were the germ cells of
vice, illness, degeneration, and the disintegration of traditional values. In
them they saw “asphalt jungles” with high crime rates and the “subversive”
activities of the “revolutionary” working-class movement. Fear of socialism
mixed with anti-Semitism, antisecularism, illiberalism, anti-industrialism,
and other resentments and coalesced in a common front against the modern
age. The city became the scapegoat for all contemporary ills. The panacea
was not the reform of the city and its infrastructure, but the return of its inhabitants to the country. The rejection of the city was thus complemented by
a romantic vision of rural life that was promoted with increasing aggressiveness toward 1914. The village community was a world in which self-reliant
humans lived healthy lives and in which tradition and the respect for custom
still prevailed. It was only from this solid base that the perceived social crisis could be tackled and salvation and renovation would come.
Since this ideology also involved an upvaluing of the “farming estate,” it
is not surprising that Agrarromantik und Großstadtfeindschaft 6 should gain
many adherents in the rural regions of pre-1914 Germany, while industrialization and urbanization continued inexorably. The theme was taken up by
farmers’ associations, but also by provincial poets and writers. Meanwhile
the officer corps, worrying about the influx of possibly unreliable recruits
who had been exposed to socialist ideas in the cities, began to support the argument that recruits from the countryside provided better “soldiers’ material”
in comparison to the emaciated young men from the industrial centers.7
43

Society

As the bourgeoisie was progressively also seized by a fear of the proletariat
and the presumed power of its growing organizations, back-to-the-countryside
ideas also took hold there. Theologians, social scientists, physicians, hygienists, anthropologists, social workers, and intellectuals soon filled the pages of
the provincial press with their articles and proposals for cures. They were
picked up not merely by artisans and small-town professionals, but ultimately also by well-to-do burghers in the big cities, as they read in their
morning papers about the disquieting events that had occurred in other parts
of their city during the previous night. Clearly they lived in a period that was
producing not only a welcome industrial prosperity, but also manifestations
of decadence and crisis that were very alarming.

5. Social Stratification and Inequalities
A. Basic Issues
If the demographic explosion and the migrations of millions of people during the period of all-pervasive industrialization tells us quite a lot about the
condition and development of German society between 1871 and the outbreak of World War I, a look at social mobility will deepen our understanding. Like other complex societies, that of the German Empire did not merely
consist of 65 million atomized individuals. There were social groups that operated within a horizontal as well as vertical structure. The above examination of wealth and income also provided a first indication that considerable
inequalities existed and that the situation of some groups in society was better simply because they possessed superior economic resources in comparison with others.8
The question to be investigated here is whether social stratification was
very finely layered or whether it is possible to recognize the emergence of
larger blocs. Ultimately, we shall have to find an answer to the question of
whether German society came to assume the shape of a class society. By this
I mean a society divided into numerically large groups whose members found
themselves in a similar position with regards to “the provision with goods,
their exterior life situation, and their inner existential predicament” (Max
Weber). Conversely, these members differentiated themselves from those of
other groups that existed as identifiable blocs of privilege or underprivilege
within a pyramid of social inequality. In short, the question is whether we can
discover, beyond a differentiation by dozens and dozens of occupational
groups, the formation of classes that were separated by recognizably bolder
dividing lines.
The answer to this question, which is obviously vital to an understanding
of how German society functioned, is sought here by way of a detour. The
44

Social Stratification and Inequalities

first step represents an inquiry into social mobility, that is, in what ways individuals and groups moved up and down the social pyramid. Changes in occupational structure and marriage patterns will be taken as yardsticks here.
The results of historical research on mobility will then be complemented by
an analysis of two other basic factors of human existence, that is, health and
housing. The detour will then be extended into the history of gender, of generations, of religion, and of minorities, all of which are also relevant to an exploration of social inequality. Only after this will we return to the question of
how the basic character and structure of the society of the Kaiserreich might
be most convincingly defined.
B. Social Mobility
Millions of men and women who lived in the German Empire were hoping
to improve their economic and social situation through occupational mobility. The expansion of the economy, the growing differentiation and complexity of most spheres of life, and the inflation of the administrative apparatus
resulted in a considerable quantitative growth of jobs and positions. As we
have seen, white-collar employees emerged beside the blue-collar workers,
as industry and commerce slowly moved toward larger units of organization.9
The ranks of these employees ultimately grew by an annual average of almost 5 percent (Table 22). By 1907 they made up some 6 percent of all those
employed in industry.
In the meantime, the civil service sector experienced an annual growth of
3 percent. In Prussia alone the number of middle-ranking civil servants grew
from 40,000 in the middle of the nineteenth century to 250,000 by 1907. The
number of Prussian officers quadrupled to over 20,000 between 1860 and
1907. The number for noncommissioned officers was 87,000 in 1905. The
additional number of school teachers also outpaced the rapid expansion of
the population, growing by almost 43 percent in the two decades after 1891.
In 1901, over 146,000 primary school teachers taught in the Reich. By 1911,
their number had increased to 187,485 (Table 44). During the previous year,
some 4,000 professors worked in the tertiary sector, thanks above all to the
expansion of the sciences and applied sciences.
Meanwhile the number of physicians increased from 13,700 in 1876 to
34,136 by 1913. Artisans experienced a drop in the number of the self-employed
between 1849 and 1895, hinting at a downward mobility that threatened this
particular group. But new opportunities offered themselves to well-qualified
employed craftsmen, who were upwardly mobile. However, their road to
higher income and status was not as wide as that for white-collar employees
and civil servants.
This does not mean to say that all groups were open to recruitment “from
below.” White-collar professionals turned out to be a group in which self45

Society

recruitment was high and acceptance of social climbers more difficult (Tables 45–47). In the Prussian province of Hanover, 33.6 percent of the attorneys had a father who had likewise been in this profession. The fathers of the
next 28.7 percent had been higher civil servants or university trained, and
13.3 percent of the Hanoverian attorneys counted middle-ranking or lower
civil servants among their fathers. A majority of the higher civil servants
came from the upper classes. However, there developed considerable differences between Prussia and southern German states in this respect. In Bavaria
and Baden, for example, civil service recruitment from the middle class
amounted to 29 to 35 percent between 1876 and 1918. Meanwhile access to
the diplomatic service remained very restricted (Table 48). The Hamburg
shipping magnate Albert Ballin once called the German Foreign Office a
“club” to which entry required high birth.10 Indeed, close to 69 percent of the
higher civil servants had noble titles.
Self-recruitment was also the dominant pattern in the army and navy. Officers in this category made up 34 percent of the army in 1909, declining to
28 percent by 1913.11 During the same year, some 37 percent of officer aspirants were sons of higher civil servants. The fathers of another 11 percent
were large-scale landowners, and 15 percent were entrepreneurs. Among 550
Prussian and Württembergian generals who served between 1871 and 1914,
some 182 (33 percent) were of bourgeois background. Some 131 of them ultimately received a noble title. As to the navy, an analysis of the crew of 1907
shows that a mere 22 (11 percent) came from aristocratic backgrounds. Some
90 emerged from academic middle-class families. Another 52 had fathers
who had been officers; 34 came from families with a background in industry
and commerce, and 10 each originated from landowning or professional families. Among the teachers in higher education, 73 percent were upper middle
or upper class between 1860 and 1889. This figure declined to 64 percent between 1890 and 1919.
The share of the upper bourgeoisie among entrepreneurs hovered around
the 67-percent mark throughout this period. The rate of self-recruitment was
approximately 50 percent. Among the 175 leaders of Westphalian heavy industry, 95 came from industrial families and 47 from “traditional” occupations (landowners, officers, civil servants, mining officials). The fathers of
another 12 were in academic professions, and 10 were engineers or craftsmen. Dolores Augustine, who has studied the careers of 502 very wealthy
businessmen, found that 76.7 percent of them were non-noble.12 Only some
36 came from the old nobility, whereas 14.7 percent had inherited their titles.
The social origins of high school teachers and doctors have been reconstructed on the basis of the composition of the student body training in the
respective disciplines (Table 46). Here recruitment from the upper strata was
extensive, but in some regions the percentages of upwardly mobile middle46

Social Stratification and Inequalities

class students were similarly high. As in the case of white-collar employees
and civil servants, members of the lower strata hardly ever gained entry to
these professions. Social climbers who had risen to the middle-ranking civil
service and white-collar employment frequently came from the lower middle
class, if the example of Euskirchen in the Rhineland is any guide. Among the
sons of skilled workers from the Esslingen area in Württemberg, between 5
and 13 percent moved up into the civil service, while some 30 to 40 percent
became craftsmen. Among primary school teachers, horizontal recruitment
apparently was the dominant pattern, and only in Baden did lower-class applicants find the door to this profession a bit more open (Table 45).
Figures on high school graduates and college students offer an indirect
guide to mobility rates. In 1873, some 27.1 percent of all high school graduates had moved directly into a career. Thereafter high school came to be seen
more and more as a preparation for the university. Meanwhile the number of
graduates rose rapidly, until 1914, by 159 percent (Table 52). The tertiary
sector suddenly found itself inundated with students. Critics began to warn
that an academic proletariat was being nurtured here. The effect of the discussions that ensued and the countermeasures that were taken was that universities and THs largely remained institutions for the training of elites
(Table 51).
It was difficult enough for students with a lower-class background to withstand the psychological, financial, and academic pressures of the high school
system up to the Abiturzeugnis, the exit certificate. They would encounter
further obstacles if they decided to go to college. The costs alone would weigh
heavily upon them, as state aid was difficult to come by. In 1887/88 the number of scholarship recipients had been 20 percent. By 1911, this figure had
declined to around 10 percent. In short, the tertiary sector offered opportunities at most for some upwardly mobile students from the lower middle class,
and virtually none for working-class children. Among the fathers of Bonn
University students between 1865 and 1914, some 19.2 percent were higher
civil servants, and 8.3 percent were professionals (Table 53). A further 24.4
percent originated from the propertied middle class. On the other hand, 48.7
percent were sons of white-collar employees, artisans, farmers, and lowranking officials. A mere 0.2 percent had lower-class backgrounds. In 1905,
some 54.2 percent of the students in Baden had fathers from the lower middle class. In Prussia this figure was as high as 60 percent in 1911/12. Such
percentages should not be underestimated when it comes to assessing rates
of mobility in Wilhelmine Germany. This was not a completely stagnant society. But it is equally important to note the very small share of lower-class
students. Barriers existed here that proved insurmountable for all but a few.
We shall turn in a moment to other formal and informal obstacles (such as
social and political prejudices and the practice of giving retired noncommis47

Society

sioned officers preferential treatment in the lower civil service) that faced upwardly mobile people, especially from the lower classes. First, however, we
will investigate patterns of upward and downward mobility at the bottom of
the social scale, now that a better idea has been gained of movement higher
on the scale. In this respect we are relatively well informed about a few industrial towns. Thus, David Crew has followed the changes in occupational
mobility among workers and employees in Bochum between 1880 and 1890
(Table 43).13 His statistics showed that, of those holding unskilled and semiskilled jobs in 1880, some 87.1 percent still worked in the same category ten
years later. A mere 6.9 percent had been able to climb to the position of
skilled laborer or craftsman. Although immobility among skilled men was
lower during the same period (78.8 percent), it would be a mistake to assume
that they did better; for of the remaining 21.4 percent some 11.3 percent had
been forced to move down the social scale. By the turn of the century the picture had improved somewhat for both unskilled/semiskilled and for skilled
men. Among the former some 21 percent had achieved skilled positions;
among the latter, 23.6 percent had become white-collar workers. But these
figures must be juxtaposed with a share of 15.5 percent among skilled workers who had moved down to lower positions.
Studies considering the national picture have arrived at somewhat lower
figures than Crew’s. For reasons that will be discussed later, mobility among
working-class women was even more stagnant, and their dispiriting experience must be included when we come to consider the basic character of German society. As far as social mobility was concerned, this society was
relatively immobile at the top and bottom of the scale. There was a good deal
of upward mobility within the broad spectrum of the middle class. Even if intergenerational mobility is taken into account, workers mostly succeeded in
achieving no more than small steps upward within the larger bracket of the
working class.14 What remained possible for them was horizontal mobility,
moving into other occupations in the hope of improving their material situation in times when labor was scarce and companies were competing for hardworking personnel. Most unskilled laborers, and the many women among
them, did not even have this opportunity. In the end, only a very special kind
of upward mobility existed at the bottom of the pyramid, if one includes Germany’s rural areas in the equation. In the context of the huge migrations to
the cities, it has already been mentioned that many land laborers from the
east, as well as short-distance migrants, left their jobs in agriculture because
they saw better prospects in industry. For many, perhaps after a difficult initial period, the move brought benefits, and in this sense the migratory phenomenon may also be discussed under the rubric of social mobility. It was a
mobility that occurred within the lower class, but not much beyond it. We
shall examine in a moment what the virtual vertical immobility meant for the
48

Social Stratification and Inequalities

“exterior life situation and the inner existential predicament” of the industrial
working class, male and female.15
C. Marriage Patterns
The continuing importance of the link between town and country, which
commuters and short-distance migrants in particular never severed, is also
reflected in what has been called connubial mobility. Like occupational mobility, marriage patterns provide a deep insight into the degrees of openness
of a particular society, especially at the upper and the lower end of the social
pyramid. The hour of truth has arrived whenever a daughter of “good” family background wants to marry the upstart. Unfortunately, we are much less
well informed about questions of connubial mobility than we are about occupational mobility.
Reliable figures exist on the number of married people as a percentage of
the total population. In 1871 some 51 percent of all Germans over the age of
15 were married. By 1910 this figure had risen to 54 percent, an increase that
has occasionally been taken as a manifestation of improved life chances,
given that never getting married or having no family was another characteristic of the lower strata of society that changed slowly.
There are a few statistics relating to marriage patterns among the lower
strata in the regions of Bielefeld in Westphalia and Esslingen in Württemberg. The figures for the latter, a small industrial town in the southwest, indicate relative openness. Two-thirds of the local textile and metal workers
there married daughters of craftsmen and, to a smaller degree, of peasants.
In many cases occupational upward mobility went hand in hand with connubial mobility. In the textile town of Bielefeld, on the other hand, no more
than 4 percent of the unskilled laborers and 9 percent of the skilled men succeeded in marrying into artisanal families. Somewhat higher was the share of
unskilled and skilled workers who found a peasant daughter from the region,
usually without inheritance rights. These figures must be compared with
those 48 percent of the unskilled laborers and 27 percent of the skilled men
who married into land laborers’ families. Similarly high (48 percent) was the
share of skilled workers in Bielefeld who married working-class women.
Among the unskilled, the figure was 35 percent. As far as the latter group is
concerned, this share nearly doubled by 1910, while it rose to 59 percent
among the skilled men. In the meantime marriages with daughters of land
laborers declined to 18 percent among unskilled laborers and to 11 percent
among the skilled ones. Around the turn of the century, some 80 percent of
the industrial workers in Chemnitz in Saxony married their female counterparts, and another 7 percent married local domestic servants. All these figures
seem to indicate that, even taking account of the many variations in these patterns, industrial workers increasingly married among themselves.
49

Society

Whereas statistics on connubial mobility for the lower middle class and
middle class remain rudimentary, there are interesting data on very wealthy
businessmen. Keeping the assets together was an important consideration
among larger family enterprises and among private bankers, leading to marriage circles that were often closed in social and denominational terms. Thus,
over 50 percent of entrepreneurs’ wives were daughters of other businessmen, and another third came from very wealthy entrepreneurial families.
Around 10 percent hailed from the upper middle-class groups of higher civil
servants and professionals. Marriage links with noble families were rare.
Although there are signs that mobility through marriage was more frequent than it was in the lower classes, horizontal patterns predominated. Even
if the desire to marry upward was strong, parental pressure and the well-worn
argument that the prospective husband would not “fit into the family” led to
the cancellation of many wedding plans. Conversely, fewer barriers apparently existed against a daughter-in-law who did not quite come from the
“right” social background. The danger of “mismatches,” whether on the male
or the female side, was of course often avoided because parents saw to it that
the social life of eligible children took place in the “proper” circles. In other
words, the opportunities to meet the “wrong” prospective bride or bridegroom were quite limited.
Restrictions were even greater at the top of the social pyramid that, in
monarchical Germany, was occupied by the nobility and the courts of the
federal states. Here being of equal birth was actually a “juridical category”
and not just a social requirement, and as such had an “extraordinary influence upon the objective social position and the social self-image,” especially
of the ruling houses and the high nobility.16 To be sure, their family laws
were quite varied and in most cases open to marriage links with the lesser nobility. Exceptions were even possible in the case of marriages with women of
bourgeois background, and such exceptions included elevation to the nobility. The lesser nobility was not so strict in regard to equal birth as a sine qua
non. In these circles connubial mobility was more likely to encounter social,
rather than legal, obstacles. The ancient nobility felt superior to the new nobility or, even more so, to members of the upper bourgeoisie who had been
ennobled.
On the other hand, this hauteur was not so powerful as to prevent “social
linkages or even the blending of aristocratic groups with parts of the upper
bourgeoisie.”17 Thus it happened from time to time that close family alliances
were forged among the upper strata that gave the nobility access to bourgeois
wealth and, in turn, provided the upper bourgeoisie with the prestige of having become part of the “first estate.” Still, the important point to remember is
that such marriage links remained the exception. Marriage “into non-noble
circles was generally regarded with displeasure, unless they were represented
50

Social Stratification and Inequalities

by non-noble or recently ennobled higher civil service families and, depending on the status of the bride, it could mean the end of an officer’s career.”18
If it was a marriage for the money of a non-noble heiress, such a match was
“excused after the raising of many eyebrows.” No such excuses were accepted if an officer wanted to marry into a Jewish family. Ultimately, then,
only “a relatively small stratum of the upper bourgeoisie” fostered relations
with “parts of the nobility.”
D. Life Expectancy and Health
In terms of population growth in the Kaiserreich, it has already been noted
that mortality rates declined noticeably after the turn of the century. The birth
rate also declined, but not as dramatically as the mortality rate, and thus the
population continued to grow. So far only averages have been mentioned. We
must now ask about the health of different social groups and about inequalities in the face of illness and death. Infant mortality (i.e., deaths within the
first twelve months of life) provided particularly telling illustrations showing
that the averages veiled considerable inequalities (Table 61). Various fluctuations notwithstanding, until the turn of the century the infant mortality rate
was over 30 percent among the often illegitimate babies of domestic servants. It was 22 to 24 percent among unskilled workers, and 14 to 17 percent
among the self-employed, white-collar employees, and civil servants. Disregarding a brief hiccup in 1911, infant mortality declined tangibly and across
the board after 1900. Yet chances of survival within the first twelve months
for a baby born to a civil service family remained three times higher than for
a child of a domestic servant and twice as high as for the infants of unskilled
laborers. The rates were also lower for skilled workers so that a dividing line
arose that, for once, put the latter into a category closer to the middle class.
Due to these developments, average mortality rates came down between
1876 and 1913 by 7.7 percent for men and 6.2 percent for women. If these
averages are broken down by age and region, it becomes clear that Prussian
city-dwellers from the ages of 10 to 15, as well as those from 20 to 25, remained below the average (Table 60). However, for Prussian city-dwellers
over the age of 30, the rate declined more slowly than the average for the
whole of that state. This has led Reinhard Spree to assume that the latter groups
had begun to suffer from a higher incidence of illness, weaker immune systems, and more generally from getting worn out by long hours of hard work,
all of which reduced their life expectancy.19 Since many of them were prone
to fall ill with particular diseases and in some cases even to die from them, it
appears that it was not just the life chances of infants that depended on the
stratum to which an individual belonged. Men and women over 30 who
worked in the industrial centers of Prussia were similarly subject to this rule.
The spread of tuberculosis (TB) is the most striking example on this score.
51

Society

According to rough estimates, 600,000 to 1 million Germans suffered from
TB of the lungs before World War I. In many cases the illness was fatal. Reich
statistics show that in 1887 some 44 percent of all deaths were due to nine
types of diseases, among which the share of TB was 14 percent. Another 11 percent died of acute infections of the respiratory tract, followed by deaths due
to diseases to the digestive tract (9 percent). Until 1904 the share of these
three diseases even rose by another 3 percent to 37 percent. In 1913 the share
of TB and other fatal diseases of the respiratory tract still stood at 33 percent.
More importantly, that these were diseases of the industrial lower classes is
demonstrated by the fact that the death rate was higher in the cities than in
rural areas and that white-collar employees, civil servants, and the self-employed were less affected by them than unskilled workers. Successes in the
treatment of TB, which were achieved before 1914, did little to change the
ratios. By 1913 the number of patients, it is true, had risen to 50,000, and the
sums spent on their treatment had reached 16 to 18 million marks. But those
who participated in these programs comprised at most a mere 8 percent of all
those who should have been treated, and the most needy were presumably
among the other 92 percent.
Furthermore it would be a mistake to deduce that, once TB could be
treated, the decline in the overall mortality rate was the result of more knowledgeable doctors and improved medical provisions. Although, disregarding
wide regional discrepancies (Tables 69–70), the share of physicians per
100,000 population increased from 35 in 1885 to 51 in 1913, and although
the number of hospital beds grew by 250 percent, it is widely accepted today
that the decline in mortality was more decisively influenced by nonmedical
factors. Among them were changes in nutritional standards, the quantity and
quality of the daily diet (especially with respect to drinking water and fresh
milk), better personal hygiene, and housing conditions. These areas also witnessed tangible improvements over time, as will be seen below. However,
their effectiveness, too, was related to the system of social stratification, and,
as in the case of health, illness, and death, they must be included in our account in order to gain a better understanding of prevalent patterns of social
inequality in the German Empire.
E. Nutrition
As has been shown on the basis of statistics for the eastern provinces of Prussia, there exists a fairly close connection between life expectancy, health, and
proper nutrition.20 Thanks to the general rise in real incomes and living standards in Imperial Germany, many more families could afford higher quality
food and drink. But again, and given the large income differentials, there existed major differences in this respect. The improvement of the transport system had—as we have seen—resulted in a wider availability of fresh fruit and
52

Social Stratification and Inequalities

vegetables, also in the urban centers. But such produce was expensive, as was
meat and many imported foods (Kolonialwaren). Only the more prosperous
and wealthy strata could actually afford these goods on a regular basis. To be
sure, if the per capita consumption of meat grew from an annual 25 kilograms
to 51 kilograms between 1870 and 1910 and that of sugar from 6 kilograms
to 18 kilograms, the lower classes, too, had a share in these increases (Table
20). And yet, the differences in food consumption between them and the middle and upper classes were very tangible. Contemporary cookbooks tell us
part of this story. Above all, the biggest per capita increases were in the consumption of potatoes and bread flour.
This means that for many working-class households the greatest nutritional improvement was that they had enough food to put on the dinner table.
The decline in the number of children also exerted a favorable influence. Civil
servants and white-collar employees had begun to limit their family sizes to
an average of three children even before 1905; by 1909, their average family
size had dropped to just over two children (Table 64). At this time the average in families whose members worked in agriculture and mining, for example, was still as high as five children. But lower-class persons who married
in 1910 would already have at least one child less. Higher real wages and
smaller families certainly helped to create a situation where, as had often
been the case before, the wife no longer had to eat the scraps after she had
just about managed to serve enough food for her husband and their children,
and enough food usually meant sufficiently large quantities. Working-class
meals were also rich in calories, and this was rarely the most nutritious diet.
At a time when the workday was still 10 to 12 hours, six days a week (Table
15), meals frequently contained animal fats, but few vitamins and minerals.
Thus up to 90 percent of the energy intake in lower-class families consisted
of potatoes, bread, pastries, and animal fats.
Walther Hoffmann’s calculations provide a rough guide to the development of food consumption in Germany.21 Up to 1874 the average intake of
calories was around 90 percent of the daily requirement. Between 1875 and
1879 the German population reached the 100-percent level. There was a renewed drop to 95 percent during the 1880s, but from the 1890s onward the
daily intake finally surpassed the daily requirement for good, at least until
World War I. Indeed, just before 1914 it was close to the 120-percent mark.
Looking at the consumption of specific food items provides another indication of the general improvement in nutritional standards. Thus it appears that
fewer potatoes and more sugar were consumed. Wheat consumption increased,
while rye consumption stagnated. Meat, though primarily reserved for the
wealthier strata, increasingly appeared on the tables of the lower classes as
well. The per capita consumption of pork quadrupled between 1850 and 1910,
constituting 60 percent of meat consumption, if sausages are included. It is
53

Society

probable that working-class families had meat once or twice per week, but it
was rarely the more expensive cuts. The consumption of cabbage and root
vegetables also saw an increase, and by 1914 some 1 million units of canned
food were produced in some thirty-two factories in the Reich. Fresh fruit remained a luxury for the lower classes, although the acreage for growing it
doubled between 1878 and 1898.
If consumption of all these items fluctuated, it was not only because of
varying harvest levels and prices, but also because of developments in income and the labor markets. As we have seen, periods of increased unemployment and short-time work continued after the “Great Depression,” and
they usually hit the lower classes hardest. As late as 1907, some 80 percent
of the private consumption of a working-class household was taken up by the
necessities (food, clothing, rent, and heating). The remaining 20 percent was
divided between purchases of household goods (6.1 percent), personal hygiene
(2.8 percent), education and entertainment (5.9 percent), and miscellaneous
expenditures (2.0 percent). The percentages that J.S. Roberts has calculated
largely tally with these figures, but his research is additionally interesting for
its comparisons with the household budgets of civil servants and teachers
(Table 67).22 Thus, the 522 working-class families of his sample spent 80.6 percent of their annual income on food, clothing, rent, and heating, leaving 19.4
percent for the rest. By contrast, the respective averages for his 218 middleclass families were 72 percent and 28 percent. This meant that working-class
families had little room for maneuver, if struck by serious illness or unemployment. Inevitably, nutritional standards also suffered in such times of crisis. This is when belts had to be tightened, often at the expense of the health
of the family, and of the mother in particular, who would in most cases come
last.
A seemingly contradictory connection between infant mortality and breastfeeding habits demonstrates, however, how difficult it is to make a straight
connection between life expectancy and nutrition. According to the statistics,
mortality rates for infants who were not breastfed by their mothers increased
by 300 percent. At first sight, this nutritional factor might explain the abovementioned high mortality rates for lower-class children (Table 61). The complicating factor is that working-class children were apparently more frequently
breastfed than infants in the upper strata (Table 63). Their life chances were
increased by the better general care and attention they received, though not
by as much as might have been had the babies been breastfed. In other words,
upper-class infants became victims of deeply ingrained cultural traditions, so
that infant mortality rates here moved against the general trend and remained
higher because of an ignorance about the benefits of breastfeeding. Conversely, cultural traditions in this case inadvertently worked to the advantage
of lower-class infants. Once the benefits of breastfeeding had been advertised
54

Social Stratification and Inequalities

more widely, the rates for upper-class infants began to decline more steeply.
What is not included in the undoubtedly welcome discovery of the benefits
of breastfeeding is the question of its effect on the health of lower-class
mothers. It may be surmised that, if their health was often poor, this was not
just because of more frequent pregnancies and of standing back at dinnertime, but also because breastfeeding was a drain on their bodies.
F. Housing
However indicative the structure and changes in the nutritional standards of the
German population may be for gauging social inequalities, studying housing
patterns is no less instructive. Here, too, the question arises of what were the
dividing lines that may also tell us something about the basic principles along
which the German Empire was organized.
The huge population movements from the countryside to towns and cities
confronted local governments and the construction industry with unprecedented challenges.23 Two major problems were the supply of drinking water
and the building of sewage systems. A greater understanding of the causes of
epidemic diseases such as cholera and typhus increased pressures on town
planning departments to make adequate provisions. The massive outbreak of
cholera in Hamburg in 1892 had once more raised the importance of establishing a modern infrastructure. Accordingly, quite a lot was already being
done. By 1895, approximately 87 percent of all towns with more than 10,000
inhabitants had a central water supply (Table 66). For small towns (with 5,000
to 10,000 inhabitants), the figure stood at 62 percent, with communities of
2,000 to 5,000 inhabitants trailing far behind at 38 percent. The 1890s also
saw a considerable rise in the number of water works, although around 1900
only 52 percent of all towns were connected to such works. The regional differences are even more striking. Non-Prussian states made remarkable strides;
meanwhile in Prussia, the largest federal state, some 60 percent of the population continued to depend on tanks and pumps.
With regard to sewage systems, most towns did develop active construction programs before 1914. Nevertheless, barely more than 66.5 percent of
the Prussian population living in communities of over 2,000 was linked to
such a system. As with the water supply, the cities’ sewage systems were by
and large better than in the rest of the country. These shares mirrored inequalities that affected different strata—for example, lords and smallholders—in
the same way and cannot easily be disaggregated. It is another matter when
we come to examining the proliferation of flush toilets. Certainly with regards
to Berlin, about which we have the best information, it is possible to make a
strong connection between the quality of housing in different parts of the city,
the number of toilets, and mortality rates (although the latter, as has been
noted, also depended on other factors). Since a high correlation also existed
55

Society

between districts with a large number of inhabitants per heatable room and
the number of communal toilets halfway down the stairwell of an apartment
bloc, the question of residential culture also comes into play.
The size of a family’s accommodation was closely connected to its purchasing power. In agriculture no major changes occurred in this respect. The
owners of large estates continued to live in their often spacious homes, many
of which had been built or extended in better times. Those among them who
were not satisfied with their seclusion in the countryside, who enjoyed the alternative of an urban lifestyle and perhaps even had contacts at the court of
their state, would acquire a town residence if they could afford it. Peasants
lived in a wide variety of houses, ranging from the well-equipped Gutshaus
to the hovel that had no more than one small room. Many of these hovels did
not even contain the most important household goods. Wealthier peasants, on
the other hand, took pride in using the interiors of their noble neighbors’
homes or those of town residences as their model when it came to selecting
furniture and draperies. In many farm houses in Central Europe, whether
large or small, animals lived under the same roof with the humans. If the
family could afford servants, they would be put up in small rooms next to or
above the stables. Many land laborers also lived on the fringes of estates in
hovels that often had a small vegetable plot in the back.
As for urban dwelling, it has already been mentioned in connection with
the question of wealth and income that many prosperous burghers built their
often ostentatious villas in the suburbs of the large cities. Closer to the center, Mietspaläste (“rental palaces”) were built, offering prestigious accommodation for members of the upper bourgeoisie, for professors and higher
civil servants who could not, or did not want to, buy property. These apartments had salons, dining rooms, and libraries. Bedrooms and rooms for the
children and domestic servants would be at the end of a long corridor. Balconies and staircases were also lavishly laid out, pandering to the representation needs of the residents. Of course, owning one’s own home remained
an aim that an increasing number of people were able to realize for themselves. But for millions of others it remained but an unattainable dream.
From the residential “palaces” downward many types of apartments could
be found. At the bottom of the scale ranked those tiny one- or two-room spaces
into which the so-called Mietskasernen (or “rental barracks”) were divided.
These houses had narrow stairwells, dark backyards, and “light shafts.” In
1871, there existed close to 14,500 of such blocks, half of which contained 1
to 10 separate apartments; a similar number had between 11 and 50. Fortynine blocks had been built containing between 51 and 100 apartments. In
1895, about 53 percent of Munich’s working-class families lived in one-room
accommodations, with an additional kitchen or small chamber in some cases
(Table 65). But even the two-room units meant that conditions were extremely
56

Social Stratification and Inequalities

cramped. As we have seen, working-class families had on average more children than civil servants and white-collar employees. Worsening this situation, in order to pay the rents that the rising housing demand in the wake of
the great migration to the cities had pushed sky-high, between 10 and 20 percent of working-class families took in lodgers to help pay for their apartments (Table 68).
According to a survey conducted in Berlin in 1880, some 39,298 households (15.3 percent) had overnight lodgers (Schlafgänger), while another
18,318 (7.1 percent) had full-time lodgers (Einmieter). Some 8,000 households offered beds to either two male overnight lodgers or one male and one
female lodger. It is not difficult to imagine what this meant for the day-today life of a family, for marital relations, or for the upbringing of children.
Such apartments were also hotbeds for infectious diseases. Nor should the effects on the life of the lodgers be ignored. In 1893, some 25 percent of miners in the Ruhr lived as Schlafgänger, and many of them were lucky to have
to share a bed, after a long workday, with no more than one other person. And
if the rent that these lodgers paid became too small to cover the family’s
weekly expenses, the search for cheaper accommodation began. In the region
of what later became the city of Wuppertal there were even fixed days for
moving. Although family possessions tended to grow with the advent of the
mass production of cheap households goods, in most cases all belongings
could be put on a cart for the move to another part of town. Again it was the
working wives, the children, the chronically sick, and the elderly who suffered most from these realities of daily life.
For economic and social, but also political, reasons, some employers started
to build company housing. Krupp was one of the pioneers of this idea; he knew
how to keep “his” workers loyal and to impose a puritanical lifestyle with the
help of strict rules. Other firms copied his model. By 1914 the Ruhr mining
companies had a total of some 82,000 company-owned apartments on their
books whose rents were often one-third of the going market rate, and sometimes even less. Finally, there emerged yet another type of lower-class accommodation, the workers’ colony—housing estates built on the fringes of the
Ruhr cities or in the rural spaces between them. These colonies multiplied
quickly, especially in the northern parts of the Ruhr district, housing in some
cases over 50 percent of the workforce of a particular mine. Compared with
the overcrowded “rental barracks” of the big cities, the colonies had many
obvious benefits, the strict rules imposed by the owners notwithstanding. The
housing units were smaller, the individual apartments a bit more spacious.
The backyard was large enough for the growing of some vegetables. There
was often a sports field at the center of the housing complex.
At the same time, as has been convincingly argued elsewhere,24 these settlements promoted the opposite of what the mine owners had envisaged. They
57

Society

created a strong sense of a common fate among the inhabitants. There emerged
a cultural infrastructure and a milieu that was propitious for the formation of
a working class. This does not imply that the feelings of solidarity forged by
the conditions in the cities’ “rental barracks” were any less significant in forming a cohesive group of individuals who had discovered how much they had in
common with their neighbors, not just in terms of their exterior conditions in
life but also in terms of their inner existential predicament. Certainly, the city
was not a melting pot of all the different social groups that settled in them.
If one surveys the material that has been presented so far, one is certainly
struck by the variety of social life and lifestyles that could be found in Imperial Germany. Here we have millions of men, women, and children who were
differentiated not only by their divergent backgrounds, talents, occupations,
socioeconomic situations, cultural tastes, and opportunities for development,
but also by divergent hopes and expectations. And yet these inequalities are
marked in crucial respects by common features. Structures of inequality existed inside and outside the workplace. We have noted them by looking at occupational and connubial mobility. It also made a difference in respect to
health and life expectancy whether a child was born into a lower-class or a
civil servant’s family. The same held true of nutrition and housing. At the
same time, there were uniformities that sharpened the dividing lines. In most
cases certain social groups found themselves thrown together with those who,
in a cumulative way, experienced similar life conditions. However, before we
address the question of whether these structures reflected an industrial class
society and whether the class character of German society before 1914 became its most basic criterion to which all other inequalities became secondary, it is necessary first to turn to other areas of social inequality.

6. Women and Men
For a long time research into patterns of social inequality during the Imperial period focused on the broad spectrum of social strata. More recently, the
discussion has been broadened and considerably enriched by intensive research into the history of gender and the family. The history of classes was
primarily concerned with reconstructing the situation of nondescript millions
at the lower end of the social scale. Women’s history, by contrast, is interested
in the situation of no less than half the population, and increasingly also in
the interaction between the two sexes in all spheres of life. Some of the handicaps from which women suffered have already been mentioned in our examination of inequalities in the workplace and in income.25 If women were more
poorly paid than men, what was their situation in an increasingly industrial
society in which place of work and residence had become separated more
sharply than had been the case in agrarian societies?
58

Women and Men

The overall employment rate for women hovered around the 30 percent
mark between 1882 and 1907. Put in absolute terms, in 1882 there were 7.79
million working women out of a total of 23 million. By 1907 this figure had
risen to 9.74 million out of 31.26 million. The employment structure underwent similar changes during this period (Tables 29–31). In 1882 “helping
family members,” most of whom were female, amounted to 40.7 percent.
Some 15.5 percent of agricultural laborers were women. By 1907 these shares
had declined to 35.2 and 14.5 percent respectively, following a general trend
toward work in industry. The share of domestic servants also declined. Meanwhile the rates for women working in industry rose from 17.9 percent in
1882 to 18.3 percent in 1907. It must be added that the statistics for “helping
family members,” most of whom worked in small-scale agriculture, crafts,
and domestic industry, are rather incomplete. This type of female labor was
particularly widespread in southern and southwestern Germany.
In industry, the share of women in textiles and clothing was especially
high, even though it declined toward 1914. The home-based textile industries
met with a similar fate. Food producers, including breweries and sugar manufacturers, were the third-largest industrial employer in 1907; in this sector,
women made up 24.7 percent of the labor force—a quadrupling since 1882.
The share of women was lowest in the metal industries and in machine tools.
In 1907 a mere 3.3 percent and 2.0 percent respectively of all women laborers worked in these areas. In relation to the male workforce the shares in
these industries were 6.3 percent and 4.8 percent respectively. Only in cities
such as Duisburg and Dortmund in the Ruhr area were these percentages a
little higher. Regional differences in female industrial labor can also be discerned. In the Saxon textile town of Plauen, nearly half the workforce was
female. In cities such as Barmen, Krefeld, and Elberfeld it was at least a quarter and more. But there is also a slow shift away from textiles toward electrical engineering, a new and thriving branch whose rationalization policies
resulted in a growing demand for unskilled and semiskilled women.
A marked rise also occurred in the tertiary sector (Table 29). The expansion of consumption increased the demand for shop assistants. While many
smaller shops could rarely afford more than one employee, the emergence of
the department store created jobs in much larger numbers. As has been mentioned, the rise of white-collar employees was accompanied by a growth in
“white-blouse” occupations. In the proliferating public services women would
find employment as secretaries and receptionists. In 1882 no more than 7.7
percent of all working women were involved in the tertiary sector. By 1907
the share had increased to 14.6 percent.
Reference must finally be made to a relatively small group of women who,
unlike most of the female laborers discussed so far, as a rule did not come
from lower-class backgrounds. Before 1914 there were very few female doc59

Society

tors, lawyers, or academics in Germany, since the required professional training for a long time had remained closed to them. But a beginning was made
when opportunities to attend high school and to obtain the Abitur were expanded. At the time of the founding of the Kaiserreich, most girls whose parents wanted to give them better educations beyond the primary level went to
private schools. In 1872 there were also some 165 high schools for girls that
were supported by the state or local government and in which instruction was
mostly in German, French, mathematics, needlework, and religion. The range
of subjects offered was based on the assumption that the task was to equip
these girls, most of whom were of bourgeois or upper-class background, to
become better future mothers, not to train them for professional careers.
Consequently, most girls left these schools without a certificate that institutions of advanced learning required. Only a few institutes were specifically
geared to preparing their pupils for the Abitur, the state-supervised final examination. Individual teachers, such as Helene Lange, made a stronger academic orientation of the curriculum their concern. In this way a growing
number of women succeeded, after 1890, in passing the necessary examinations. After this breakthrough, the universities had a much harder time upholding their traditional refusal to admit women. However, from the start their
policies were marked by contradictions and a lack of uniformity that made
the exclusion of women appear ever more absurd.
First there was the tug-of-war over the admission of women as auditors.
Saxony and Bavaria had granted this privilege even before the founding of
the German Empire. It took Prussia until the 1890s to follow suit, and even
thereafter the practice of admission varied considerably from university to
university. Admission figures showed that interest in academic study was by
now considerable (Table 54). In 1896/97 some 223 female auditors were registered in Prussia; nine years later the figure had increased to 1,669. All the
while, some southern states had continued to handle admission in a more liberal fashion and began to experiment with the idea of allowing women to enroll as full-time students. This in turn exerted pressure on Prussia to abandon
its restrictive practices. When the last barriers finally came down in 1909, the
share of female students rose quickly. Just before World War I, some 7.44 percent of the Prussian student body was female. The Reich total was 4.8 percent. A mere 7.1 percent of the female students were Catholic, whereas the
share of Jewish women was more than twice that figure.
These developments were accompanied, almost inevitably, by the question of whether women could take university examinations and to which disciplines they should be admitted. This in turn unleashed a debate on whether
they were actually capable of scholarly inquiry. Not a few scientists, lawyers,
and medical professors openly expressed their doubts about this. Paul Möbius
even went so far as to publish a pamphlet in 1900, focused on the alleged
60

Women and Men

“physiological debility of women.” But for others, too, the most primitive arguments were good enough to be fielded against the entry of female high
school graduates who wanted to attend universities. It made little difference
that a few foreigners had successfully passed their examinations as early as
the 1870s at places like Göttingen and Leipzig.
Nor did it help that women had long been admitted to foreign universities,
above all in Switzerland, where they had obtained higher qualifications in the
sciences as well as in the humanities. Some had even received their doctorates. Around 1900, there were twenty female physicians who had passed
their qualifying examinations in Switzerland and had subsequently opened
practices in Germany. The types of emotional hurdles women had to overcome is demonstrated by the case of the famous physicist Max Planck, who—
in this respect rather more liberal than many of his colleagues—had allowed
women to attend his lectures as early as 1897. Nevertheless, he continued to
hold the view, widespread at the time among men and women, that being a
mother and housewife was the natural role of women and that this alleged
law of Nature could not be ignored without serious detriment to individual
and society.
The expansion of the school system, however, opened the door early on
for unmarried women with pedagogical inclinations who wanted to become
teachers. This career could be taken without the Abitur certificate by studying at one of the pedagogical institutes. Even many men, who were otherwise
hostile to female professionals, found it plausible that girls were best instructed by women. Thus, it happened that as early as 1875 Prussia had some
3,896 female primary school teachers. Their number more than doubled to
8,380 by 1891 (Table 44). Twenty years later, there were over 24,000 women
teaching alongside 91,600 male colleagues. Similarly the growth of girls’
high schools required more female teachers. Some 9,100 of them worked in
these schools around the turn of the century. Meanwhile the question of pay,
which was higher for men than for women at all levels, generated much controversy. Similarly, the requirement for female teachers that marriage carried
with it a statutory end to their teaching careers was bound to cause bitterness.
There was also the problem of equal promotion rights that were time and
again denied to women. Conflicts also broke out over access to further training and qualifying examinations that would allow women to rise on the
career ladder in tandem with their male colleagues. Men were at the forefront of the opposition to an incipient, female-dominated preschool movement. The critics insisted that six was the appropriate age for starting a formal
education.
Meanwhile fresh opportunities arose for women, usually of lower middleclass background, who decided to go into the nursing profession. Here, too,
special training was required, and work was no doubt more interesting than
61

Society

factory manufacturing. Before World War I, the female share in the health industry was around 55 percent. In the arts, a few actresses and artists made it
to the top. Although they were statistically insignificant, they nevertheless
acted as role models. Even if the most prominent among them earned high
honoraria, there was no question that their male colleagues would receive
more, and this was equally true of women in the legal and medical professions. Even if they, too, were left behind when it came to promotions, these
women nevertheless achieved a higher level of job satisfaction than female
laborers, secretaries, and shop assistants.
Whatever the many handicaps under which working women labored in
comparison with their male colleagues, when it came to the factory shop
floor, where thousands of them found employment, they were all in the same
boat. Here men were just as much without a vocation or a perspective on their
future as their female counterparts. But in order fully to appreciate the special difficulties encountered by women, we must present yet another set of
statistics, relating to their marital status. In 1907 agriculture still employed
the highest share of married women at 54 percent. Their share in industry
rose from 31.1 percent in 1895 to 32.9 percent in 1907. Some 44.7 percent of
domestic servants were married, closely followed by women in the tertiary
sector (44 percent). For the year 1875, we also have a breakdown by agegroup for Prussia. According to this table, some 25.1 percent of women aged
16 to 18 were laborers, of whom 0.6 percent were married (Table 33). Among
those aged 18 to 25 years, a group representing 43 percent of the total, no
less than 88.6 percent were unmarried. Only among women above the age
of 25 was the percentage of those who were married again considerable at
56 percent. This means that the majority of female factory workers in various branches of industry were young and unmarried (Table 32). Workers in
home industries present a different picture; most were married or widowed.
These industries had the lowest pay rates and the fewest promotion prospects.
Whatever other handicaps these women workers may have faced, homeindustrial work offered certain logistical advantages, especially for women
with small children. All in all, they constituted a badly exploited group whose
work was moreover subject to sharp seasonal vacillations.
Still, in terms of pay and prestige, the unmarried female servant working
in agriculture was probably at the bottom of the pile. The only escape from
these conditions was to move to the city, where positions as domestic servants to the well-to-do were available. In terms of city work, being a maid
was pretty much the pits. The working day was long and included Sundays.
Chambers were often no more than cubby holes. Since room and board were
free, domestics received rarely more than a small “pocket money.” They also
had to contend with supervision by the “mistress of the house,” which was
frequently very strict. On the positive side, these women had left the worse
62

Women and Men

conditions in agriculture behind them. They immediately had a roof over
their heads and usually enough to eat. Employers were not invariably exploitative. Maids could expect to be given unwanted clothes from the mistress,
who might also be generous in other ways. Finally, these women also gained
an insight into the organization of the household that would be useful later
on when they decided to get married.
Even before the decline in the number of domestic positions, many women
who arrived in the cities as commuters or long-distance migrants would go
straight into the factories. Some would return to their parents at night, if they
lived nearby; others would look for a bed as lodgers with working-class families. There were also shelters for young female workers. However difficult
life might have been, at least the pay was better than it was for maids. The
women who did not commute did not have to hand over part of their earnings
to their parents. They thus had money to spend, while the slow reduction of
work hours gave them more leisure time. In the 1880s the workday for female textile workers was still twelve to thirteen hours (Table 15).
After the turn of the century, the eleven-hour workday became more typical in the textile industry. In other branches it even came down to ten hours,
and in 1910 a law was promulgated that prescribed the sixty-hour week for all
industries. Nightshift work was banned, and laws protecting pregnant women
from dismissal were enacted. If the factory was some distance away from the
worker’s abode, all these improvements could still mean an exhausting daily
routine. But at least Sunday was completely free, and when Saturday work
hours were reduced to eight, the evening of that day was similarly available
for leisure pursuits. Beyond this, few of these working-class women succeeded in moving up into the group of white-collar employees. Income improvements could perhaps be achieved by moving to jobs in other companies
that paid higher wages and offered better benefits.
And many unmarried female factory workers did try to enjoy their Sundays. They went to dancehalls or beer gardens with their friends and colleagues, where they would meet single men, many of whom had also migrated
from the rural parts of the country. Social contact might lead to sexual relations, causing bourgeois social critics to utter dark warnings about an alleged
decline in morals. But any attempt to understand the sexual behavior of young
working-class men and women would go wrong if we were to apply the yardsticks of these critics. Civil servants, white-collar employees, craftsmen,
wealthy businessmen, and the nobility expected their daughters to preserve
their virginity until marriage. To become pregnant with an illegitimate child
was deemed a violation of family honor. Of course, different standards applied to “young gentlemen.” Ever so discreetly, they would be encouraged to
sow their oats during their bachelor years. The codes were again different for
female laborers, maids, and—at least in some regions—agricultural servants.
63

Society

Certainly they were less restricted than women from the middle and upper
classes. If, having met at some dance, a young couple warmed to each other,
the relationship would not stop short of sexual intercourse. It also happened,
especially in economically harder times, that female factory workers or domestic servants would slip into occasional prostitution. In 1873, the number
of prostitutes under police supervision in Berlin was 2,224. The share of female workers among them was 16 percent, while domestic servants and shop
assistants made up another 42 percent. By 1890, the figure had risen to 4,039,
and contemporary estimates of the actual levels were many times higher.
Around 1909, the number of prostitutes in Berlin was thought to be 40,000,
contributing to a high percentage of illegitimate births.
According to some estimates, the latter figure climbed as high as 350,000
in 1914. However, the share of illegitimate births in relation to the total number of births varied considerably from city to city. In Munich it was as high as
31.6 percent, in Dresden 20.5 percent, in Berlin 12.3 percent, and in Cologne
a mere 9.8 percent. Pastor Paul Göhre, who in the 1890s signed up as a factory worker and later wrote a report on his experiences, came to believe that
it was difficult to find a young factory woman over the age of seventeen in
Chemnitz who was not sexually active.
It would be mistaken to deduce from these percentages that members of
the lower classes were devoid of morals. Even when illegitimate children
were born in larger numbers, they often were the result of stable relationships
that knew genuine love, emotional relief, and mutual support. If such relationships did not last, this was due to many circumstances, but not, as a rule, to
an unwanted pregnancy. For just as in rural society, there existed unwritten
codes of honor, according to which a young worker would not just “dump”
his pregnant girlfriend. That is how sailors might behave in port cities, or soldiers in garrison towns, or “gentlemen” students in university towns, or the
fictive Baron Botho von Reinäcker in Theodor Fontane’s novel Irrungen und
Wirrungen. For most workers, it was “a matter of course” to get married now
or at least to establish a joint household, if marriage was not yet possible for
economic or other reasons. If necessary, colleagues or the family would exert a bit of moral pressure. Such social mechanisms were even stronger in
cases where a journeyman had started a liaison with the master’s daughter.
However, we are best informed about the workings of these mechanisms
in certain rural areas. As the above-mentioned figures on illegitimacy in individual cities of the Reich indicated, there were some surprising differences.
This applied even more so to larger regions. The fact that some parts of Catholic Bavaria ranked high, and the Catholic Rhineland low, points to the perhaps surprising fact that confessional factors were not decisive, if we discount
the low illegitimacy rate among German Jews. Rates were also low in Protestant Frisia and around Brunswick near Hanover, but were sharply up in Prot64

Women and Men

estant Saxony further east. To some extent these differences may be explained “with divergent intra-Church currents and the varying effectiveness
in the imposition of High Church norms.”26 Most demographers are inclined
today to see marriage age and work organization as the decisive factors.
In most of northern Europe the marriage age for women declined from
26–27 years to 24–25 years during the nineteenth century. At the same time
the start of a woman’s fertility cycle moved back to 14–15 years from an earlier 18–20 years. Unlike in the Balkans and in the Mediterranean, with their
patrilinear family systems and patriarchal structures, there was no tradition
of “child marriages” in Central Europe. Consequently, women had ten years
between reaching sexual maturity and their average marriage age to gather
sexual experiences. They lived “dangerously” in this period. At an age when
the chance of conception was high, they and their often no more “sexually
enlightened” or experienced boyfriends experimented, if at all, with contraceptives and techniques that were very unreliable.27 Wherever, following the
abolition of the marriage consent, sanctions against sexual intercourse
among unmarried people were mild, but outside pressures to honor the promise of marriage or not to “dump” a woman were high, we also find high illegitimacy rates. This was true, above all, of those rural parts of Germany in
which inheritance laws had prevented a splintering of peasant lands. These
larger farmsteads were unable to operate on a family basis and were hence
dependent on servants. This pattern, together with an increased sexual freedom among young people, offered greater opportunities for sexual contact.
If, in these circumstances, birth control was practiced carelessly or not at all,
a high pregnancy rate was the almost inevitable result.
Existing statistics, of course, refer only to actual births. The number of infanticides in the Kaiserreich was low, if court records provide any guide. The
large unknown is the number of abortions, about which we have no more than
crude estimates, running into hundreds of thousands. Contemporary interviews
with female factory workers showed that many had several intended and unintended terminations. In Berlin circa 1900, about 25 percent of pregnancies
ended in abortion. There are no comparable figures for the rural areas. What
presumably prevented a high incidence of abortions in the villages, where
everyone knew everything about everybody else, were, apart from a fear of
criminal prosecution, the existing instruments of social pressure. Here local
traditions and the economic dependence of the female servants had a powerful influence. It was difficult for a father to abandon the mother of his child,
and in many cases marriage took place just before or after the baby’s birth, or
the couple established a common law household. If this solution proved impossible, alimony payments were due. But even in such cases, the children did
not have to grow up in foster families without their biological mother. They
would simply be raised on the farm together with the other children.
65

Society

Employers in the cities, by contrast, very rarely offered a domestic servant
the opportunity to stay on with her illegitimate child. For financial reasons,
bourgeois households preferred maids that had just arrived from the country.
But if these maids brought with them the sexual norms of the village and suddenly became pregnant, the “mistress of the house” would not even wait with
giving notice until the child was born. Consequently, unqualified doctors and
backstreet abortionists in the cities were busier than their rural counterparts.
Considering that an unwanted pregnancy always meant emotional and material hardship, even if the father stood by his lover, it was no doubt fortunate
that high illegitimacy rates were an ephemeral urban phenomenon. The lower
classes, too, began to limit pregnancies by practicing more effective birth
control. Urbanization, the lowering of the marriage age by an average of two
years, and a higher marriage rate finally contributed to reducing the problem
further.
Meanwhile the situation of an unmarried mother and her children did not
necessarily improve if the father of her child stayed with her. As has been
mentioned,28 infant mortality rates remained high during the first year, not
least because of the poor living conditions into which these children were
born. These conditions also contributed to the relatively low life expectancy
of women, even though it was slightly higher than that of men (Tables 58,
60). What remained was the increased danger to working-class women
throughout pregnancy or during birth. There was also the progressive undermining of their health due to inadequate nutrition and sheer overwork. Affliction with tuberculosis, the “disease of the poor,” provides a good indicator of
this. Not only was the rate of infection higher for females over the age of five
than it was for males, but it also experienced no more than a very small
decline between 1875/79 and 1914 among those between the ages of twenty
and forty.
Nor were chances particularly great that children would grow up with
both parents. This was not due to high divorce rates, but rather because, although the average marriage age of women declined, working-class men
continued to marry late, and because they died earlier than the male average
if they came from the industrial working class. One factor accounting for the
late marriage age was that many men had to perform military service but
could be drafted only from the age of twenty. Military pay in 1913 was 23
pfennigs per day, making it difficult to save for a future family. Not surprisingly, therefore, at the end of 1910 no more than 8 percent of 20 to 25 year
olds were married. The figure then rose to 50 percent for 25 to 30 year olds.
A good four-fifths of all industrial workers finally got married by the age of
50, and there was merely a modest increase in this figure between 1882 and
1907 from 83 percent to 86 percent. Meanwhile, the average life expectancy
was still under 50 years.
66

Women and Men

Since most women would ultimately get married, the question arises as to
why the nuclear family came to be the most common form of living among
the lower classes, even though it was exposed to so many emotional and material hardships. Among agricultural and industrial laborers, marriage in most
cases became the destination not because the couple was longing to have
children or because the wife expected to devote herself exclusively to her
family. To begin with, many children either existed before marriage or arrived shortly after the modest wedding. Above all, around 30 percent of all
married women had to work in order to make ends meet. This figure does not
include those who had a small and often irregular job to boost the weekly
budget. With the decline in the number of domestic service jobs, such jobs
included working as cleaning women for well-to-do middle-class families or
in one of the proliferating offices and stores.
There were obvious advantages to not having to work the full ten- to
twelve-hour workdays that factory labor still involved. A few hours in the morning or late at night made it easier to find supervision for the children. Unless
the economy as a whole did poorly, the wage was in many cases enough to
secure a slightly higher living standard. Logistical considerations of this kind
also explain why the share of married women in the domestic industries was
particularly high. It was clearly easier to look after small children if the
workplace was in the home. If one of the children fell ill, factory women stood
to lose a full day’s pay and perhaps even their job. Moreover, domestic workers could put their children to work at an early age—finishing garments,
making cigars, or wrapping sweets and chocolates. The preparation of meals,
washing, and other domestic chores were also more manageable. If there was
an elder daughter, she would look after the smaller children or do the cooking.
The 30 percent of married women who had a full-time job with unequal
pay had no relief from carrying the triple burden of monotonous and often
unhealthy factory work, the bearing and raising of children, and keeping
household for four to five people on a meager budget. The fact that the patriarchal family structures and attitudes survived in many working-class marriages, just as they obtained elsewhere in society, only made matters more
difficult for women. There may have been more equality of the sexes when
it came to major economic decisions than in bourgeois families, but rarely
did the husband bear his share in running the household. Time and again
would his wife sacrifice her needs to those of the family. Kitchen aids were
too expensive to be affordable for the lower classes. If her indispensability
provided her with some influence within the existing family hierarchy, the
time that she had to herself was strictly limited. We will never know how
many of these women harbored the modest and secret hope that one day their
husbands’ income would be high enough for them to be able to give up their
menial jobs. This is when “life” might at last begin.
67

Society

Similarly, it seems that many lower-class husbands, too, dreamed of the
day when they would be able to relieve their wives of the burden of working
outside the home. Reaching this goal would have been proof that workingclass marriage had ceased to be no more than an emergency arrangement offering emotional and material shelter against illness, job loss, and political
discrimination by the employer and the police, especially when the family’s
ideological commitment was to the left. That many working-class women
strove to devote themselves to the family and did not take jobs outside the
home—as was the ideal and in most cases the reality for many bourgeois and
upper-class married women—should not mislead us, however, into thinking
that working-class women were being absorbed into the bourgeois universe.
Workers and the middle class lived in different worlds in Imperial Germany,
and indeed increasingly so; this was also true of working-class women and
their bourgeois counterparts.
When we consider the middle classes, gender role divisions were even
more asymmetrical and polarized. This applied to the families of shopkeepers
and artisans, where the wife might lend a hand with the accounts or behind
the counter. Divisions were also sharp among civil servants and white-collar
workers, whose wives by and large stayed at home minding the “private sphere.”
If nothing else, the existence of this sphere differentiated them from workingclass women. Though often stifled by prudishness and sexual repression, it
was also larger simply because accommodation was more spacious. The rituals of bathing may be a good example after the bourgeoisie had discovered
the seaside for their summer vacations. These rituals stood in curious contrast
to the nudist movement that emerged before 1914 in connection with many
middle-class individuals’ search for new ways of life and relationships between men and women. While the working-class family with its larger number of children and lodgers remained “half-open,” the overall effect of the
different economic and sociocultural conditions in the middle classes was
that there existed more spaces to which husband and wife could withdraw
and be undisturbed.
The husband acted as the sole breadwinner, while his wife kept the house
for him and was in charge of the private sphere, economically and legally dependent on him. To some extent, the size of her household budget determined
her ability to spend her day as a successful homemaker who understood the
needs of her husband. In her Practical Cookbook for the Bourgeois Kitchen,
published in 1913, Mary Hahn described this idyll as follows: “The path to a
husband’s heart goes through the stomach.… Love alone is insufficient, to
guarantee the happy continuation of a marriage. A soup that is too salty, a
roast that is burnt, often constitute the minor causes of a failed marriage.…
The husband is coming home from his office or workplace at lunchtime and
wants to refortify himself at the family table.… One should also constantly
68

Demographic Structure and Development

vary the dishes; this makes the meal interesting. The grateful husband will
smile and be thrilled to see what new [dishes] the inventive house-wife is putting [on the table].… The social question will be solved quickly as soon as
all wives cook well and know how to provide a comfortable home so that the
husband likes it better there than in the pub.”29
What Hahn, of course, overlooked was that this kind of care required economic resources that not even all middle-class families had. It also depended
on how far she actually wanted to be a “perfect housewife” who lent “domestic glamour” to the spacious home; how frequently she went out to buy fashionable clothes or to see her women friends in one of the many coffeehouses;
how far she moved beyond the home, for example, by being active in charitable work; and how far she was willing to be the devoted lover of her husband. Clearly, she had more space than a working-class wife in a tenement
apartment. But historical research will probably never be able to reconstruct
what went on behind those larger four walls of the “rental palaces” and in the
bedrooms of the well-fed bourgeois couple. All that can be said is that it was
a different, though not necessarily happier, world from the one of those who
faced the “social question” in their hard daily lives.
Among the lower middle classes—those whose incomes often barely kept
up with inflation—it was virtually unthinkable to have a domestic servant.
Here housewives did their own shopping, laundry, and housecleaning. Children
below school age had to be supervised and kept occupied full-time; school
children came home around lunchtime, not, as in other countries, in the midafternoon. If there was a small back garden, some time would be spent growing vegetables, thus relieving the budget. Part of the fruit season might be
spent making preserves for the winter. The advent of the sewing machine made
it easier to save on clothing expenditures. If all these activities were taken seriously, not much time was left in the day for social life. A longer chat with
a neighbor at the local shop or on the street fulfilled an important social function. And on Sunday, after church, one might meet with friends in the afternoon over coffee and cake or in the evening for a glass of beer at the local pub.
The social obligations of middle-class husbands, especially if they belonged
to the local oligarchy of notables, could make for a busy life. To be sure, many
of the evening affairs were for men only. But for the wives there were also
theaters, concerts, and balls to attend, and receptions and private dinner parties to prepare. The often strict demands of etiquette required considerable
organizational talents to avoid embarrassments. What was at stake here was
the ability of the husband to demonstrate his status. On such occasions, some
of his public status and prestige would also reflect upon his wife, just as she
would benefit from any of his professional achievements by being addressed
as “Frau Doktor” or “Frau Direktor” when out shopping. Still, it was a world
set apart from the virile ambiente of men, as they went after their public busi69

Society

ness, gathered in clubs and smoke rooms, and occasionally even challenged
each other to a duel.
Social commitments multiplied for women whose husbands moved in
court circles, in the diplomatic service, or in the armed forces. The diaries of
Baroness Spitzemberg provide a good insight into the changing, but often
very stiff, lifestyle and sociability of the more urbanized and cosmopolitan
nobility, where on some days one reception, dinner party, or concert would
be chasing another, and where a single new evening dress might cost as much
as the annual wage of a factory worker.30 However, these women could also
retreat into their own homes and private suites. They could sit alone in the
garden. They had most of the comforts of modern life—a bath tub, central
heating, gas. The family budget of the upper bourgeoisie and the still wealthy
nobility was also large enough to accommodate a vacation that a wife and
children would spend, accompanied by the nanny, at the seaside, in the mountains, or in one of the famous spa towns. Waiting outside might be a horsedrawn carriage or, after the turn of the century, perhaps even an automobile.
In short, many women lived busy, but often also emotionally empty lives,
especially where the genuine love of the early marriage years had been replaced by routine and indifference. Since divorce was viewed as a serious
violation of social norms and hence rarely entertained, happiness often proved
elusive. Migraine headaches became one of the symptoms and symbols of a
neglected female psyche. And in many cases it was also a weapon of refusal
used by many “well-situated” women who were disenfranchised politically
and economically. Where it was so difficult to realize one’s individuality in
constructive terms, migraine became the often subconscious negative selfexpression of a physically and psychically deprived wife and mother.
Compared with women of the urban upper classes, the wives of landed estate owners had more sedate lives that could become one of isolation during the
long winter months. At the same time, there were quite a few organizational matters to manage. The servants had to be supervised. Church and parish welfare
had to be supported. The wives were required for consultations with the children’s private teachers. Hunting parties had to be entertained. In the evening,
there might be time to read a book or, during the summer, to sit in the garden.
But just as in the case of working-class women in comparison with their bourgeois counterparts, the relationship between actual work and tending the private
sphere defined the difference in the lives between the ladies of the manor and the
peasant wife. On wealthier farmsteads, the woman was still an administrator of
the family sphere. Lower down the income scale, she, too, would bear the triple
burden of hard farm labor, looking after the children, and keeping the household.
What was common to the situation of all women was that they had to operate within a patriarchal society and family structure that did not move with
the rapidly changing economy around it. To be sure, many partners had deeper
70

Issues of Generation and Socialization

emotional and sexual ties than the average marriage. But they, too, ran up
against the legal, political, and social obstacles that existed to secure male
dominance. Sometimes marriages would break up over the strains that the
unequal relationship imposed. In 1895, some 8,300 marriages were legally dissolved. Six years later, the number had actually declined to 7,892. By 1913
some 152 out of every 100,000 marriages ended in divorce, with considerable variations between Catholics and Protestants, and between city dwellers
and rural folks. The big city perhaps made coping with divorce easier. But
considering that divorce law severely disadvantaged women, available figures probably represent no more than the tip of the iceberg and do not tell us
much about relations between the sexes. The number of unhappy marriages
was most likely considerably higher.
This section’s focus on gender relations in the workplace and within the
family will be expanded in Part IV to a discussion of women’s position in the
political sphere. Suffice it to say at this point that many of the above-mentioned
inequalities were cemented in law and political power positions. Some legal
changes, such as the ratification of the Association Law of 1908, which allowed women to participate for the first time in political organizations, at first
glance seemed to improve the situation of women. The gains turned out to be
more ambivalent. Above all, there were also very tangible and immediate setbacks. A good example can be seen in the property and inheritance clauses
of the Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, BGB) promulgated after years
of debate in 1900.

7. Issues of Generation and Socialization
A. The Young and the Aged
As a result of rapid population growth, the percentage of children and young
people was particularly high during this period. In 1913, the share of youngsters under the age of 15 in terms of the total population was 34.4 percent. At
the other end of the spectrum, the increase in life expectancy had led to a
slightly larger number of elderly people (Table 55); but as long as average
life expectancy remained at 47.7 years for men and 50.7 years for women, it
is not surprising that in 1910 no more than 5 percent of the population was
over 65. At the same time, the young and the aged were among the most defenseless groups of the population and the ones who suffered the most from
existing inequalities.
With infant mortality as high as it was, for the newly born it was first of
all a question of surviving the danger zone of the first twelve months (Tables
59–62). This in turn depended in large measure on the social group into
which the child happened to be born. It is true that chances of survival for an
71

Society

infant born to an upper-class family were lower by international standards,
and infant mortality rates fluctuated. Still, the fact remains that the survival
rates of working-class children or of illegitimate babies were depressingly
low. Thus, the social background of the parents, legitimacy, and housing, as
well as nutritional standards, remained important factors. For example, infants who were not breastfed died most frequently of diarrhea and vomiting
caused by unpasteurized milk that had gone sour during the hot summer days
for lack of a cool space or refrigeration in the overcrowded apartment blocks
of the big cities. And more generally it tended to make a difference between
the life or death of a child whether or not the mother had basic medical or
nutritional knowledge. Finally, there was the question of whether the family
could afford calling a pediatrician when children fell ill.
It is now also common knowledge of child psychology that the early years
of childhood can be decisive for a person’s later psychic, intellectual, and
even physical development. Nor can there be any doubt that emotional warmth
and close human contact are no less important than proper nutrition. In the
late nineteenth century, many people had at least a rudimentary appreciation
of these aspects of childrearing, promoted by doctors and social reformers.
They also knew about the important role of parents in the transmission of
cultural capital. Yet this knowledge rarely (or, at best, incompletely) reached
the lower classes. The educated and well-to-do middle classes were most
likely to pick up the proliferating information on child development. It was
rarely put into practice among the upper classes, where wet-nurses and nannies were more common, and where the mother’s social commitments kept
her away from the children and the patriarchal fathers remained remote. The
detrimental effects of an aristocratic upbringing have been studied most closely
with respect to the development of Crown Prince Wilhelm, who was to become emperor in 1888.31 His may be an extreme case, but, whatever the material comforts, it was not always easy to grow up in a noble family with its
time-honored traditions and strict conventions. That the use of wet-nurses
was less common in bourgeois families, even if the mother did not breastfeed, is related to middle-class perceptions of family life and the fear that
wet-nursing might interfere with the bonding between mother and child.
Although preconditions for a happy childhood were least favorable in
working-class families, this does not mean that love and warm relationships
could not develop between parents and children in this milieu. However,
material hardship and the difficulty of articulating feelings toward family
members, spouses, or children put up considerable obstacles. The father, who
spent ten to twelve arduous hours in the factory, would not be present during
the day. When he returned to the overcrowded apartment of no more than a
kitchen and a bedroom, often after a detour to the local pub, he would be
tired and irritable. He did not have to be particularly brutal or authoritarian
72

Issues of Generation and Socialization

to grab a coat hanger or leather belt to give his boisterous children an intemperate trashing. Even without this, his tone and language would frequently be
coarse. There would be no long discussions; authority was not to be questioned, and any argument was liable quickly to degenerate into a shouting
match. If the father had an alcohol problem, all members of the family would
fall victim to his violent outbursts. However, it must be stressed that research
on the extent of battering and child abuse in all strata in this period is still
very much at the beginning. Some have argued that the increased consumption of bottled beer, which might have eliminated the need for an after-work
trip to the pub, points to more frequent socializing within the family circle.
While her husband was at work, his wife would be fully occupied with the
household and, in many cases, with improving the family income through a
part-time job. If she was lucky, there might be a nearby grandmother to take
over as a babysitter. Elder daughters also helped watch the other children.
Even if the mother had to work full-time, crèches or babysitters might be too
expensive and difficult to come by. In 1914, there existed in Germany around
1,400 kindergartens with no more than 85,000 places. Consequently, in many
cases the children were just left to themselves. A neighbor might agree to
keep an eye on them, as they were playing in the backyards and stairwells of
the apartment buildings. In Berlin alone there were an estimated 20,000 of
these unattended children in 1912.
By comparison, children of middle-class families must be considered fortunate. Whether it was their mother or nanny, someone would be around them
all day. There would be toys and children’s books; they would be encouraged
to play imaginatively. Stories would be read to them at bedtime. There was
no need to give them—as frequently happened in working-class families—
tranquilizers like beer or a lump of sugar dipped in brandy so that there would
at last be peace and quiet in the small apartment at the end of a long day. However poor and monotonous the food that lower-class children were served may
have been, it had to be eaten. Their bourgeois counterparts were offered greater
variety and more choice all around. One could think of other aspects of a
child’s life to provide further illustrations for how much of a head start was
given by having the “right” family background and by having parents who
were well-to-do and pedagogically enlightened.
The beginning of school was the next major step in a child’s development,
and one that many working-class parents looked forward to as a relief. Whatever the benefits and drawbacks of primary schooling for their education and
socialization,32 children were now also old enough to contribute to the family income. However, this was no longer the kind of child labor involving long
hours in the mines or factories with which we are familiar from industrialization’s earlier periods. In Prussia the minimum age had been fixed at twelve
as early as 1853. The Gewerbeordnung of 1869 had outlawed the employment
73

Society

of children in jobs that were dangerous to their health. Further legislation in
1891 raised the minimum age to thirteen and imposed a general ban on child
labor in the factories. The maximum number of hours for fourteen to sixteen
year olds was fixed at ten, and this also applied to apprentices and agricultural servants, most of whom were taken under contract at age fourteen.
The changes in the law led to a drastic decline in the number of children
working in industry, whose number had doubled to 27,500 during the 1880s.
By the mid-1890s this figure slipped to fewer than 5,000, but rose once more
to 10,900 in 1906. Yet, however progressive labor legislation may have been
in Wilhelmine Germany, abuses continued to occur, especially in the treatment of apprentices and agricultural servants. In 1904, the Berlin Insurance
Association reported a high incidence of workplace-related illness among apprentices. According to the annual report of the factory inspectorate at Minden in Lower Saxony for 1905, many employers tried to flout regulations by
obliging their apprentices to stay on after their ten-hour workday to clean the
machinery. Moreover, behind the vague term of “supplementary work” lurked
another and even bigger problem: hundreds of thousands of children under
fourteen years of age held “small” jobs. Around the turn of the century, some
540,000 school-age children were registered as having part-time occupations.
This figure represented well under 10 percent of primary school students.
But the actual number must have been much higher. This is reflected in a survey by the Prussian government, according to which 40 percent of all school
children worked for at least three hours, six to seven days a week. Many of
them delivered newspapers or fresh rolls at daybreak. Or they stayed up late
at night setting up pins in bowling alleys or washing dishes and glasses in
restaurants and pubs. However, the largest number of these part-time child laborers worked in domestic industries.
The Child Protection Law that came into force in 1904 tried to regulate
the permissible hours of work and to outlaw the employment of children in
particularly dangerous jobs. However, this law’s shortcoming was that it protected children from other families more effectively than the biological children of a family. The position of the latter was governed by Paragraph 1617
of the Civil Code of 1900, in which parents’ rights had been given precedence over children’s interests. Nor was it easy to police families who employed their own children. In fact it was not the parents who complained
about the extent of this type of child labor, but primary school teachers. Legal sanctions notwithstanding, every day teachers faced children who had
clearly slept too little, either because they had gotten up hours before the start
of school to run errands or because they had not gone to bed much before
midnight. To be sure, these children had not been sent out to work part-time
because this furthered their education or apprenticeship; rather they took on
these jobs to contribute to the family budget.
74

Issues of Generation and Socialization

In agriculture, child labor was so deeply rooted that the government, faced
with the sharp opposition of agrarian pressure groups, was forced to exclude
rural children from the law’s sanctions altogether. It just was not possible politically to introduce in the agricultural sector a clause similar to the one that
industry had so grudgingly accepted. Opposition was particularly vocal in East
Elbia, where day-laborers in some cases even had a contractual obligation to
the local lord to send their school-age children into the fields. In Prussia
alone the number of children working in agriculture was estimated to be just
under 1.8 million in 1904. Thanks to the Prussian bureaucracy’s penchant for
meticulous record keeping, we possess some interesting statistics relating to
the children who worked outside their own families. Of the approximately
1.8 million children, some 445,000 were under ten; 717,000 were over twelve,
with the rest distributed in-between. How many of the children were employed
in agriculture from within the family is not known. We do have some official
statistics, though, concerning the total number of hours worked. Thus, around
446,000 children were temporarily employed for over six hours per day. Demand was particularly high during harvesttime, and at those periods the total
count came to at least 1.5 million for children from other families.
The sons and daughters of the middle and upper classes were, exceptions
always granted, never exposed to the health-damaging conditions that children
from the lower strata experienced. It was on the whole economically possible
for parents to grant them slightly bigger wishes for toys and entertainment,
especially at Christmas and on birthdays. Helping their children with school
assignments was not beyond these parents’ ability and education, and, if necessary, private tutors might be asked to help with homework. However, few
of these children, except for those from very sheltered homes, would have remained totally ignorant of the poverty in which some of their fellow public
school pupils lived. True, the concentration of certain social groups in specific
parts of town promoted separation in different primary schools. But at least
in the more mixed neighborhoods, it was difficult not to notice the differences
between the well-to-do and the poor. Rarely did this lead to closer social contact or even friendships, though. In short, in this period the young experienced
very different childhoods, depending on whether one’s parents were factory
workers or belonged to the middle classes, whether they were small peasants
and land laborers or estate owners. In many ways the situation of children
with a bourgeois background came closest to the prevailing notions of the
ideal family espoused by family politicians and child psychologists, who wrote
about the psychic and intellectual needs of young people. As regards the children of the rural or industrial proletariat, one is often left to wonder how
many of them experienced a childhood, as we would recognize it today, at all.
Boys from this latter milieu initially fared no better than girls. But with
rising age, differentiations set in. Thus, daughters would be asked to help in
75

Society

the kitchen and with the supervision of younger siblings. Later on, when they
had their first jobs, girls were more likely than boys to have to surrender a
larger share of their earnings to the family budget. Teenage men also began
to insist more loudly on their economic independence. Reports exist from the
region around Esslingen in southwestern Germany about “young insolent
lads, who gave improper expression of their sense of freedom on Sundays at
the local ale-house.”33 Other parents were said to be glad if they got hold of
the weekly wage “without deductions and were able to determine the amount
of their sons’ and daughters’ pocket money.” Siblings were also treated differently when it came to further education or training. Here sisters often had
to defer to the needs of their brothers—a treatment that daughters of middleclass parents might also find themselves subjected to, especially if high
school fees exceeded the financial means of the family.
Among the lower classes, however, not even the boys had many opportunities to remain in school beyond the primary level. Therefore, most tried to
find apprenticeships, while many of the girls would sign up as servants. Still,
working-class youths lived by and large a somewhat happier life than they
had had in their early childhood. With respect to their developing adolescent
sexuality, it may even be said that they were less inhibited in expressing it
than their bourgeois counterparts, especially middle-class girls. The latter were
often more restricted by the religious norms of their parents. On the whole,
however, our knowledge of sexuality among middle-class teenagers is limited and generally confined to what can be gleaned from memoirs or contemporary advice on puberty and sanctions against such “sins” as masturbation.
In the memoirs of educated women we may find references to the start of
menstruation or to the long years of waiting and celibacy at a time when the
average marriage age for women was twenty-four to twenty-five. For many of
these women, these were the years of further education or of preparation for
eventual marriage.
The quite high illegitimacy rates reflect,34 at least in part, a lack of an elementary sex education. On this point, most parents tended to be mute and too
embarrassed to talk to their children. In lower-class families, where life revolved around the kitchen and one or two bedrooms, children could not avoid
becoming witnesses to their parents’ sexuality. Or they would by chance observe an elder sister, a lodger, or, on the farm, servants or land laborers engaging in sex. The idea that children were brought by the stork was most likely
to persist longest among boys and girls from middle- and upper-class backgrounds who had fewer opportunities to come across adults in sexual situations. However, sooner or later even they would pick up the basic information
from their older friends or in the school grounds. While parents and teachers
would warn against the dangers of venereal disease, advice on unwanted pregnancies would be most easily available outside the family. Also largely ex76

Issues of Generation and Socialization

cluded from public discourse were questions of homosexuality. After the turn
of the century, adolescents organized in the Youth Movement started to raise
these topics as serious issues. Meanwhile the older debate on the advantages
and disadvantages of separating the sexes in schools also continued.
In rural areas, the sexual behavior of young people was furthermore regulated by traditions that varied from region to region. In the south, Fensterln
(climbing through the window into a woman’s bedroom) was practiced as a
courting ritual, ending, not always but frequently, in sexual intercourse. If an
unwanted pregnancy resulted, the couple would enter into marriage, which in
many cases had been previously agreed upon. In this respect, Schwärmen
(swarming) was safer, a practice by which young men would roam through
the village and visit the young women in their bedrooms in groups. The
so-called Spinnstuben (spinning sessions) were similarly policed by the adolescents themselves but, at a time of increasing sexual freedom, would occasionally get out of hand. This may partly explain the survival of Katzenmusik
(cats’ music), which was aimed at publicly humiliating and condemning
members of the village community who were suspected of having violated
local sexual norms. Many of these practices were, of course, impossible to
uphold in the anonymity of large industrial cities. And yet it might happen
even there that workers would perform “cats’ music” for a colleague who had
reneged on a marriage promise. In some parts of Upper Bavaria around the
towns of Miesbach and Bad Tölz, the custom of well-organized Haberfeldtreiben (charivaris) continued that were directed against “fallen maidens”
and young couples who had diverged from local norms for sexual behavior.
However, what also came to the surface in such practices in the years before
1914 were conflicts between young people and the irritated local police authorities who were often called to the scene.
Conflicts between parents and their teenage children also arose, not least
because the low life expectancy frequently produced early widowhood and
remarriages, with the resulting problems associated with step-parenthood.
Conflicts across three generations, on the other hand, were rare, because not
many children ever got to know both their grandparents. If the grandparents
lived to see their grandchildren as adults, the relationship was often one of
respect and mutual support. Only after the turn of the century, with rising life
expectancy, did the hitherto positive image of the elderly undergo some change.
Now help from the younger family became vital for many of the aged. The
benefits of the old-age insurance schemes were still very meager for the insured and more so for their widows (Tables 75, 77).35 In 1907, no more than
17 percent of all men over the age of seventy actually received a pension.
Among the retired self-employed and rentiers it was at least 32 percent.
The middle classes also had a higher capacity to put some of their money
into savings. All this meant that many elderly people had to carry on work77

Society

ing for as long as they could manage, preferably in occupations that did not
require much physical exertion. This was also the age when men and women
would begin to suffer from many smaller ailments, if not from more serious
illnesses, for which medication was either unavailable or too expensive for a
low-income person. Some had to think twice about whether they could afford
a visit to a doctor. If one had been permanently disabled by a work-related
accident, the insurance system that had been established under Bismarck
might pay a small pension. Apart from the wealthy, who did not have to worry
about getting the best treatment or a spa cure after an illness, civil servants,
whether still active or retired, probably enjoyed the most generous benefits.
Their medical care as well as their retirement pensions had been taken over
entirely by the state.
Furthermore, there was the problem of loneliness, from which many elderly people suffered. Chances were high for those who lived beyond the age
of fifty that they would lose their spouses early. In the villages, custom and
tradition made it relatively easy to keep the aged integrated into the community and provided for. The cities’ rental barracks made this much more difficult, though not impossible. Many a widow became an ersatz granny to a
young family next door. At a time when the offerings in affordable leisure
activities for the elderly were few and boredom could be debilitating, these
relationships were welcome, also because they gave a sense of purpose to a
widow’s life. Since economic factors were so crucial in a retired person’s
lifestyle, the middle and upper classes generally found themselves in appreciably better situations. Independent peasants had greater security because
they remained owners until the farmstead was either handed over to the eldest son or divided up among the children. But even thereafter the aged parents would continue to live on the farm and, if possible, lend a helping hand.
Meanwhile retirees of the urban bourgeoisie had plenty of time to meet
with their friends in clubs, restaurants, or at the Stammtisch, a table in the local pub for the regular notables. For well-to-do widows an afternoon out
among friends with coffee and cream cake in one of the cafés in town would
be a welcome distraction. Elderly noblemen could count on the continued
respect of the younger members of their families, and among the high aristocracy the most senior person of the clan had, as the “head of the house,”
far-reaching powers with respect to the management of family property and
marriage policy.
B. Generations and Generational Conflicts
Many of the elderly found the rapid pace of change in society and economy
in the German Empire worrisome. If the young impatiently pushed toward
new frontiers, the elderly wanted to preserve “what had proven its worth.”
Since the work of Karl Mannheim, generational research has started from the
78

Issues of Generation and Socialization

assumption that it is historical experiences and socialization into a certain era
that binds members of several cohorts together as a generation.36 Since later
generations will have undergone a social and ideological experience different from that of their elders, conflicts are likely to arise. To some extent, the
history of Imperial Germany may be illuminated with the help of this model.
Certainly, there was something like a Gründergeneration that had supported
the founding of the Bismarckian empire and the historic compromises forged
during the 1860s and 1870s. Faced with the period of retarded growth in the
1880s, this generation continued to be convinced that the main task was to
consolidate what had been achieved in 1871. However, it must be added that
this consensus was not shared by all large social groups. Industrial workers
of this generation, especially if they were Social Democrats and experienced
constant police harassment, would hardly have agreed that consolidation was
the most important objective of the age.
Beyond this significant intra-generational conflict, a younger generation
was growing up in the 1880s that was keen to move to new shores in domestic and foreign policy as well as in cultural taste.37 Wilhelm II, who ascended
to the throne in 1888 at the age of twenty-nine, has generally been regarded
as the embodiment of a different sensibility and Weltanschauung than that of
the Gründergeneration. Both tendencies can be traced most clearly through
the broad spectrum of the middle classes, while our knowledge of generational conflict within the industrial working class remains rudimentary.
This does not mean that tensions did not emerge between working-class
parents and children—fathers and sons, mothers and daughters. But their
concerns were different. Faced with innumerable discriminations to which
industrial workers were exposed socially, economically, and politically,
young workers, it appears, began to rebel against what was to them the excessive caution and conservatism of their fathers and of the Social Democratic leadership in particular. Spurred on by much bitterness and youthful
fervor, exacerbated by the promulgation of the antisocialist laws of 1878,
some of them were even prepared to accept further persecution for their acerbic criticism of conditions under the Hohenzollern monarchy. Many of the
older generation, who had a longer experience facing police brutality and
who moreover had to think of the wellbeing of their families, thought this
radicalism dangerous and self-destructive. They also had high hopes, which
soon turned out to be illusory, that the young emperor as the representative
of the Wilhelmine generation would be a Kaiser of reform and of the workers of Germany. Indeed, Wilhelm II, in his desire to set himself apart from
the Bismarckian generation, had at first presented himself as the man of a
fresh start. Young workers had always been more skeptical of the Kaiser’s determination to initiate fundamental change, and they turned out to be correct
in their doubts.
79

Society

After the turn of the century yet another generation began to raise its voice
against the spirit of the Wilhelmine age, albeit with different arguments from
those advanced by working-class activists. However, the members of this
generation did not reach positions of power before the outbreak of World War
I to a degree that would have enabled them to influence events in tangible
ways. Instead they became the “Generation of 1914”38, whose world of ideas—
hardened and partly transformed on the battlefields on the Western front, as
will be seen in Part V—helped shape the Weimar Republic’s ideological climate and political culture. Still, their critique of the status quo began before
1914 and—as far as the middle-class adolescents among them were concerned—found a rallying point in the Youth Movement. These were the young
rebels who felt alienated from the self-satisfied materialism, the cold profitoriented rationality, and the plush lifestyle of the Wilhelmine generation.
Thus, segments of Germany’s middle-class youth set out in search of alternatives that tended to emphasize the romantic and irrational, that discovered
nature and longed for human warmth in what they saw as an age of heartless
technology. Some found themselves on the flight from reality.39 But much of
this activity remained confined to weekends during which they went on hiking trips and, in the evening by the fireside, talked about Eros and eternity or,
accompanied by the guitar, sang songs from the Zupfgeigenhansl collection.
Many of them also found themselves fleeing from an age of the “masses” and
of democracy. They displayed a strong elitism and were receptive to charismatic leadership. With respect to this elitism and their social backgrounds,
members of the bourgeois Youth Movement were distinctly different from
the “proletarian Generation of 1914” that became organized in Young Socialist associations. Even if both movements encouraged reformist ideas, with
the growing polarization of German society in the years before 1914, the dialogue between them also became more difficult. It was only in the trenches
of World War I that the members of this generation stood next to each other
again and jointly faced the carnage of total war around them.
C. Agents of Socialization: Family, School, Churches, Apprenticeship,
Military Service, High School, University
As in other European societies, family and school, religion and occupational
training, universal military service and the educational system played important roles as agents of socialization, partly mediating and partly exacerbating
generational tensions. Historians have pleaded, however, that we not apply
the concept of socialization too widely and that we differentiate between
socialization’s divergent levels and phases.40 If the family is the first institution for the transmission of general societal norms, the younger generation is
introduced to the sphere of politics only later during the school years. The
assembly of all these and other influences into a more coherent Weltanschau80

Issues of Generation and Socialization

ung is then assumed to occur during a final third phase. Above all, while it
cannot be stressed too strongly that in the Kaiserreich social origins made a
considerable difference in people’s lives, it must also be emphasized that the
various agents of socialization had contradictory impacts on the young. On
the one hand, they promoted the integration of the next generation into the
existing society; on the other hand, we are dealing with institutions against
which the young rebelled. Indeed, in many cases it was an explicit or tacit
critique of their experiences with these institutions that incited their resolve
to do things differently once they had reached adulthood.
For most children, the family was the organization that helped them adapt
to their immediate environment and to the existing order in the widest sense
of the word. Children of the rural or urban lower classes, who had to contribute to the family income, were moreover slowly conditioned to the routine of the workday and the regularity of economic processes. The family
milieu also left its traces in the way the young learned to interact with others, to eat, to drink, to sleep, to spend their leisure time. Solidly bourgeois
parents instilled in their children values and conventions of social intercourse
that were in many ways markedly different from those of working-class parents. As a rule, they also equipped their offspring with a better capacity to get
ahead in life, to articulate themselves, to seize opportunities, and to master a
crisis. To be sure, too much sheltering might have left middle-class children
ill-prepared to weather setbacks. Nor would it be right to draw too idyllic a
picture of the bourgeois family as an agent of socialization, with its fundamentally patriarchal structure and marriages that frequently existed only on
paper.
Yet, however effective the mechanisms of integration may have been,
family life and the assertion of parental authority also offered many points of
friction that reinforced a youthful tendency to rebel as a way of finding one’s
identity. Frequently, and particularly in those “fatherless” families in which
the breadwinner was present only in the evening, children were liable to feel
alienated. In rural areas and the cities’ industrial quarters this alienation would
find its clearest expression in the fact that many children would leave the
home soon after finishing their basic compulsory education or because they
had been turfed out by an irate father. If, for whatever reason, they stayed at
home, they would at most put in a fleeting appearance at dinnertime. They
would spend their free time in loosely organized groups or gangs. Even in
those days, adults would complain loudly about the loutish Halbstarke. The
boys among them would be open to the influence of a charismatic ersatz father, whom they would find in those gangs or in one of the religious or secular youth groups that mushroomed especially during the Wilhelmine period.
Girls, insofar as they did not join a coeducational or single-sex youth group,
would “hang out” among themselves or with one of the male gangs. Occa81

Society

sionally it might also happen that the youngsters who were looking for role
models would become fascinated by one of their teachers.
Most schools, however, tended to project a different model in which the
teacher appeared as the stern drillmaster. School was not merely the place
where basic rote learning was systematically instilled by repetition, with the
effect—inter alia and in this case no doubt positive—that illiteracy rates were
reduced to practically zero (Table 49). Still, next to the family, school served
as a major agent of socialization. The dramatist Gerhard Hauptmann has
given a vivid description of the military style of his primary school, with its
rigid discipline. Even Wilhelm II complained bitterly in his memoirs about
how, in his youth, the uninspiring approach taken by his private tutor Georg
Hinzpeter in dissecting the classical texts of antiquity had killed off whatever
interest he may have had in them. And Wilhelm did not have to sit in overcrowded classes.
Indeed, to some extent, the stress on discipline was a function of very unfavorable staff-student ratios and of many one-class primary schools. Almost
twenty years after the founding of the Empire, over half of Prussia’s 4.5 million pupils attended village schools in which all age-groups were instructed
in a single room (Table 50). Meanwhile class-sizes in cities were in many
cases over 100 students. As late as 1911, in the new industrial cities of the
Ruhr and in Upper Silesia, there were on average 50 to 60 students for every
1 teacher. Only in towns with strong middle-class populations, such as Wiesbaden or Berlin-Wilmersdorf, did class-sizes drop meanwhile to 43 and 37
pupils respectively.
Apart from purveying a knowledge of the Three R’s, the state had traditionally used schools as institutions of ideological indoctrination. The educational policies adopted after 1871 continued this practice. It reached a new
level of intensity after Wilhelm II ascended to the throne. In May 1889, he
issued a cabinet order that warned of the dangers to society and political stability posed by Social Democratic ideas and demanded that efforts be redoubled
to instill conservative-monarchical values in the young. Shortly thereafter,
discussions began on a new curriculum that was unveiled two years later.
German was to be given greater emphasis vis-à-vis other languages. The revamping of history and religious studies, it was hoped, would lend support to
the traditions of the Hohenzollern monarchy. The success of these educational policies may have been greater at the beginning than in later years. This
raises the question of whether primary education remained no more than a
“school for the production of subjects” (“Schule der Untertanen”).41
The indications are that school had a more ambiguous effect on pupils because not all their teachers were monarchist drill sergeants. First there arose
a growing teachers’ rebellion against political interference from the top. As
Marjorie Lamberti has shown, teachers developed their own professional ethos
82

Issues of Generation and Socialization

and standards and insisted on applying them.42 Many of them, confronted daily
with the poverty and poor preparation of their pupils, also turned toward a reformist Left liberalism. They questioned the wisdom of offering crude patriotic indoctrination to pupils and tried to gain the trust not only of their students
but also of their working-class parents. Meanwhile the struggle was well underway to provide opportunities for advanced education to middle-class girls. The
female teachers who, through their work, were committed to this idea also
acted as role models for their charges. Their lives contradicted prevailing male
notions of femininity and the position of women in society, if we discount the
relatively small number of liberal-minded parents who encouraged their daughters to prepare themselves for university study. Indeed, the success of indoctrination through school also depended on whether the family reinforced
ministerial policies or acted as a counterweight to them. The latter is more
likely to have been the case in households where the father (and perhaps also
the mother) were left-leaning liberals or Social Democrats than in middleclass families where the parents were loyal monarchists and church-goers.
Nor should we underestimate the contribution to children’s socialization
made by regular attendance of churches and Sunday schools. In Germany’s
Protestant regions, it was the peculiar link between church and state, the alliance of throne and altar, that fostered a conservative orientation of the young
who were searching for a religio. Although the Kulturkampf, the struggle of
the Liberals and Bismarck in the 1870s against the “ultramontane” influences
of the Catholic Church, had complicated relations between religious institutions and the secular authorities in Germany, this was more true in Prussia
than it was in, say, Bavaria. Church communities there did not see a contradiction between being a good Catholic and being a loyal supporter of the
Wittelsbach monarchy. Moreover, the local Catholic clergy remained in most
cases the representatives of a very conservative institution whose influence
on the formation of norms and values in children was considerable. Lay
Catholics, who began to organize in the 1890s in the hope of affecting reforms within the church and of promoting a new relationship between church
and state, could not seriously undermine the prevailing conservative mood in
which ritualized piety was an important element.
Nevertheless, the fact that this lay movement gained increasing support in
the years before 1914 points to a generational change. Many who had been
raised in a very strict, hierarchical Catholic milieu now pushed for a modification of what they had been taught on Sundays or in preparation for their
first communion. Although anticlericalism never became as strong as in
France, the move of many Catholic workers toward the Social Democrats
may also be taken as a sign that the church as an agent of socialization triggered contradictory responses among the younger generation. The tensions
that this induced probably affected men more than women. Certainly the lat83

Society

ter remained more firmly attached to the orthodoxies of both the major Christian denominations and also continued to attend church more regularly. The
Jewish experience also reflected these tendencies. Here the strict regime of
rules and rituals among Orthodox congregations was increasingly challenged
by the proliferation of liberal ideas, and many intellectual Jews abandoned
institutional affiliations altogether. In short, generational change and the contradictory impact of religious conservatism were clearly interrelated.
After finishing school, many young people underwent apprenticeships
through which they were socialized into the world of work. In the workshops
adolescents would not only learn the rules of precision and craftsmanship,
but also of behavior in a professional hierarchy. Still, many apprentices,
faced with the petty authoritarianism of their masters or journeymen, must
have sworn to themselves to organize things differently once they had workshops of their own. Whether this rebellious determination was eventually put
into practice was another matter. Later, in many cases, the weight of tradition
and the greater convenience of rulings from the top overrode the erstwhile
reformist zeal. There was also the problem that many handicrafts were threatened by the rise of the factory, and more generally an apprenticeship presumably never had the same importance as family and school for the socialization
of the young. Industry and commerce, it is true, jumped into the breach by
developing their own training systems. But they and the network of occupational training schools (Berufsschulen) that was established were more interested in expert knowledge than in conservative indoctrination. Nor was the
mindset of those who saw further training as an avenue for upward mobility
ever such that they were open to rebellion and radical ideas.
Finally, universal military service channeled thousands of young men year
after year, for a period of service lasting twenty-four months, into an organization built on conservative traditions. No doubt, this experience had a profound effect on many of them. In the army the importance of obedience and
punctuality were drilled into them. Men from very different regional and social backgrounds were thrown together in the confining spaces of a garrison
and forced to work out a modus vivendi. A large proportion of them came
from the country’s rural regions, once the Prussian War Ministry showed an
increasing reluctance to draft urban youth, who were suspected of harboring
Social Democratic sympathies. Meanwhile many sons of the bourgeoisie succeeded in getting deferments. Thus, the army came to be seen as the “school
of the nation,” where poorly educated young men from the provinces were
filled up with conservative notions about the Hohenzollern monarchy and national unity. “Whoever has influence over the youth, has command of the
army” was a later Social Democrat slogan; but as an insight and motto it applied conversely to the officer corps that considered itself charged with upholding the existing order in its conservative and monarchical form.43
84

Issues of Generation and Socialization

For a long time the army relied on the quasi-automatic formative influence of military service as a “duty to the Fatherland.” By the 1890s, however,
this indirect socialization came to be regarded as insufficient. For a number
of years, formal patriotic instruction was introduced in which officers gave
their recruits rather one-sided and potted versions of the course of German
history and of contemporary politics. Soon some of the students, who had experienced different realities in the slums of the big cities and who had come
into contact with Social Democratic ideas, began to ask pointed and embarrassing questions. They were questions that left the mostly upper-class officers either helpless or seduced into giving provocative answers. Slowly, even
the politically less sophisticated recruits started to think about what they
were hearing. The infamous Zabern Affair of 1913 was in fact triggered by
an indoctrination lesson that went terribly awry.44 Meanwhile, the contradictions of socialization through the military also came to the surface as more
and more details about the “maltreatment” of soldiers were made public and
became a matter of public debate. Suspecting a ubiquitous revolutionary threat,
the army reverted to well-worn methods: searches of lockers for subversive
propaganda material and bans on frequenting certain public houses in the
vicinity of the garrison.
Overall, the mechanisms of socialization discussed so far nevertheless
proved powerful enough to promote a basic identification by a majority of
the population with the existing order and its institutions. True, there was a
growing number of voters who supported a reform of the political system;
but only a few aimed to overcome the Hohenzollern monarchy through revolutionary means. This also explains why so many millions joined up, enthusiastically or pensively, when a war broke out in 1914 that had been presented
to them as a war in defense of the Fatherland.45 Nor would one wish to deny
that the army achieved considerable successes with its methods of training
and socialization if we look at its purely military achievements and its capacity to keep millions of men fighting a very costly war until the “military
strike” of 1918 ushered in the final collapse of the Kaiserreich. School and
military service certainly contributed to a nationalization of the population.
But this nationalization also involved a division into alleged patriots, on the
one hand, and “unpatriotic fellows,” on the other, and hence contributed to a
polarization of German society that will emerge in subsequent chapters.
For a small minority, high school and tertiary education finally constituted
important socialization experiences (Table 51). All three types of high school
that proliferated in Imperial Germany experienced an expansion in the number of students. The figure for Prussian Gymnasien increased from 63,200 in
1873 to over 103,000 in 1911. The figures for the second type, the Realgymnasium, almost doubled to 48,100. Finally, the Oberrealschulen grew tenfold
from 4,120 in 1882. Of course, such rises must be correlated to the popula85

Society

tion explosion in this period. In this respect inequalities diminished, but participation rates nevertheless remained very low. If in 1870 0.4 percent of the
total population went to high school, the figure for 1900 was 2.7 percent, rising to 3.2 percent by 1911. High schools remained dominated by the middle
classes, the more so since school fees were high enough to remain beyond
the reach of many lower-class families. This was also true of high schools for
girls. While the impact of the latter on their charges may have been more ambiguous, boys’ high schools remained agencies of socialization that influenced most of their students in a conservative and elitist direction, especially
where the emphasis was on the value of a “humanist” education centered on
Greek and Latin. Only the Oberrealschulen may be said to have provided
their students with an education that was more geared toward a future in an
industrial-technological society. It was also the type of high school frequently
seen by lower middle-class and middle-class parents as an avenue of upward
mobility for their sons. If their daughters made it to a girls’ high school, the
expectation was that they would come out as better educated mothers who
would be able to offer their children a more nurturing environment.
The dividing lines that the school system introduced were reinforced by
the tertiary sector. In 1891, there were just under 34,000 university students
in the Reich. By 1912, that number had risen to 71,710 (Table 52). In 1871,
some 0.5 percent of the population had an academic education. By 1900 this
share had increased to 0.9 percent, rising further to 1.3 percent in 1910. This
small minority received first of all a systematic scholarly training in a chosen
field that provided a springboard for a comparatively well-paying position in
the private or public sector later on. The exclusiveness of higher education
also strengthened in university students an elite consciousness that had first
been instilled by parents and in high schools. This was the third phase of socialization during which many students consolidated their ideological commitments, and most of them ultimately became defenders of the status quo.
Nor were the lectures of their professors free from ideology and politics.46
To be sure, higher education also bred rebels, who, if nothing more, advocated
social and political reforms. But they must be juxtaposed with the large numbers of students who, when it came to their political beliefs, adhered to an aggressive nationalism toward the outside world and to a dichotomous view of
domestic politics that divided society into large blocs of Right and Left.47
Fraternities represented an organizational focus for these nationalist tendencies, attracting a considerable, though declining, percentage of the students
(Table 86). At Marburg University over 50 percent of the students were members in 1873. In 1913, the share was a little over 45 percent. At Bonn, the
share slumped from around 56 percent in the late 1880s to 40 percent during
the final years before World War I. In Berlin, by contrast, around 75 percent
of the students never joined a fraternity throughout the same period. Yet, how86

Minorities and Majorities

ever interesting these latter figures may be, because they undermine the widespread later impression that virtually all German students were fraternity members, the ideological force of the student subculture radiated well beyond those
fraternities. By the turn of the century, even the sports fraternities (Turnerschaften) that had their roots in the liberal era of the first half of the nineteenth
century had moved away from their earlier ideals and had adjusted their styles
and outlook to the more conservative Korps and Landsmannschaften.
By 1914, many of their members propounded an integral nationalism and
supported illiberal policies at home. Meanwhile the largely conservative “old
boys” paid for the maintenance of fraternity houses and tried to be helpful
when it came to career-planning for younger fraternity “brothers.” Their
presence also saw to it that new recruits integrated themselves into the conservative consensus that permeated higher education in the German Empire.
Contemporary critics of the tertiary sector as a socialization agent never tired
of pointing to its role as a breeding ground for a profound disdain of the
“masses.” This is where social divisions were in fact deepened “from above.”
It has been said in retrospect that the German university system was relatively more open when compared with the institutions of tertiary education
in other European countries. Even if correct, this did not mean that it prevented rather than reinforced the illiberal elitism that many of its students
and professors came to advocate.

8. Minorities and Majorities
A. Basic Issues
In trying to understand the development of German society during the decades
before 1914 it is helpful to study the situation of women, young people, and
the elderly, as we have just done. But no less telling is how those individuals
and groups living as minorities in Germany were treated and how ordinary
citizens and those in positions of power and influence reacted to them. On
the one hand, this raises the question of how far the majority was prepared to
permit the integration of minorities, a process not to be confused with assimilation; or, alternatively, how far the majority tried to ostracize the minorities
in their midst. Integration, in short, implies acceptance of difference, of the
“other.”
The second question is related to the willingness of minorities to assimilate and adapt to the majority society around them. In other words, the concepts of integration and assimilation are not being used interchangeably here,
but as complementarities, as a way of looking at the relationship between
majorities and minorities from opposite angles. However, our knowledge of
certain marginal groups like homosexuals remains quite limited even today
87

Society

and therefore cannot be dealt with here in any detail. The important general
point to be made about homosexuals in the context of our discussion is that,
in principle, their interactions with the majority society also fall within the
analytical framework presented here.
What complicates the analysis is that homosexuals were ostracized by the
majority to the point of being treated as criminals. This meant that even a homosexual relationship between consenting adults could only exist in the
shadows. However, it is a sign of the larger sociocultural ferment on Wilhelmine society that a public debate on this question began in the 1890s, if not
before. In 1897, the physician and sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld founded a
“Scientific-Humanitarian Committee” that advocated the reform of Paragraph 175 of the Criminal Code, the clause that criminalized homosexuality.
The idea was taken up in January 1898 by August Bebel, the leader of the
Social Democrats, when, in a statement in the Reichstag, he supported the introduction of legislation to this effect. Not surprisingly, his proposal was
flatly rejected by the other parties. Instead the Conservatives incorporated the
issue in a campaign to uphold prevailing norms of morality—a campaign that
the North American historian John Fout has seen as a manifestation of a
larger crisis in gender relations and of masculinity.
Research on another minority—the criminal “underworld”—faces similar
problems. The group was by definition also subterranean, but it raised fundamental questions of judicial philosophy and practice. Was the application of
justice primarily based on deterrence and retribution or on rehabilitation and
the reintegration of ex-criminals into society? Again German society began
to debate these issues, all the more so since many felonies were in effect
committed by those living in abject poverty, as recent social-history research
has reminded us. Quite obviously such felonies cannot be explained by invoking biologistic theories concerning the criminal behavior of marginal groups
or notions of urban decadence that were promoted at the time. As happened
with other minorities, myths, misperceptions, and scapegoating proved difficult to change by invoking reality. Today we know that the highest rates of
property crimes and crimes involving bodily harm (including murder) were
recorded not for the big cities (with Berlin representing the sole exception)
but for the rural parts of the Prussian East.48
B. The Catholic Minority
The Catholic population of the Kaiserreich represented by far the largest minority. In 1871 over 62 percent of the population were Protestants, and 36 percent belonged to the Catholic Church (Table 38). Until 1910 a slight shift
occurred in this imbalance in favor of the Catholics. However, there were considerable regional variations. In Hamburg and Saxony the number of Catholics per 10,000 population was a mere 503 and 491 respectively. In Bavaria,
88

Minorities and Majorities

Baden, and Alsace-Lorraine, on the other hand, the Catholics were in the majority, as they were in a number of Prussian provinces (West Prussia, Posen,
Silesia, Westphalia, Rhineland, and Hohenzollern).
Our analysis of denominational developments would be badly flawed if
we were to use these latter regions to construct a majority position for Catholicism. Both within the whole of Prussia and the Reich, Protestants not
only held the numerical majority, but they also enjoyed predominance in qualitative terms of power and influence. In Prussia, Protestantism had long been
recognized as the official faith. The alliance of throne and altar turned the
Protestant Church into an instrument of the state, although it would be wrong
to assume that this gave Protestants unlimited discriminatory leverage against
minorities. Still, it is undeniable that the victory of the Prussian army and state
over Catholic Austria in 1866 was also seen as a triumph of Protestantism.
In the Catholic south, the sense of defeat was temporarily overcome by the
wave of enthusiasm that swept through these states at the time of the FrancoPrussian War. But soon thereafter Bismarck and his Liberal allies launched
the Kulturkampf in their quest to weld the new federal Germany together on
a Prussian and Protestant basis. In pursuit of this strategy, it seemed promising to portray Catholics as the “enemies of the Reich.” Instead of trying to
integrate a minority, the majority began to ostracize it to provide an additional glue for the creation of the Prusso-German constitutional order.
As a result, this struggle, whose political dimensions will be discussed
later,49 temporarily came to assume very menacing proportions for the Catholics and their church, and its traumatic memory lived on long after Bismarck
had quietly abandoned the conflict by the 1880s. After this unpropitious start,
whose aim on the part of the majority had been to exclude the Catholic minority, the denominational question remained on the agenda. At a very general
level, the difficulties that continued to face Catholics can be neatly illustrated
by comparing patterns of social mobility. In education—a channel of upward
mobility, albeit a limited one—the participation rate of Catholics in high schools
and universities was significantly lower than that of Protestants. However, the
fact that this lower participation rate applied not only to Protestant Prussia
but also to Catholic Bavaria indicates that additional factors came into the
equation that had more to do with the prevailing Catholic social milieu than
with actual discrimination by the Protestant majority.
Thus, most Catholic high school students, and even more so pupils at Catholic girls’ schools, were geared toward rather more traditional personal objectives. Of the young women registered as first-year students at Prussian
universities in 1910, only 7.1 percent were Catholic, with the Jewish share
being more than twice as high (Table 54). A noticeable gap also remained
when it came to signing up for science and economics courses. All in all, it
may be said that the professional ethos of Catholics was more “preindustrial”
89

Society

than that of the Protestant bourgeoisie. Although by 1914 this ethos had come
under the pressure of change, few Catholics seem to have been oriented toward the many currents of modernity and the opportunities they offered to
young people. The repercussions of this attitude may be gleaned from data
on the professions and on industry. As late as 1910, the share of Catholic attorneys was a mere 12 percent. Catholics were also strongly underrepresented
among entrepreneurs.
On the other hand, as regards the civil service, not only social background
and lower educational attainment proved to be handicaps, but also political
and ideological discrimination. Thus in 1907, Catholics, in terms of the total
population, were lagging behind Protestants by as much as 17 percent when
it came to positions in the higher civil service and in the professoriat. Of the
cadets who entered the navy between 1895 and 1914, only 14 percent were
Catholic. There are many indications that these discrepancies had socioeconomic and political causes. In promoting civil servants, it was quite clear that
Protestant superiors, guided by their latent anti-Catholicism, quietly discriminated against Catholics, who faced the blanket accusation that they were ideologically unreliable and not sufficiently loyal to the Reich. Their loyalties
were allegedly with the Vatican, that power beyond the Alps (hence “ultramontane”), and not focused on serving the secular German national state.
Social background remained important both subjectively and objectively.
Statistics clearly show that the majority of Catholics lived in the Reich’s rural regions and small towns, and we have already seen that opportunities for
upward mobility were few for this population, even if they were Protestants.50
In other words, denominational discrepancies in terms of upward mobility
were less stark for groups at the bottom of the social pyramid. However, the
picture is different when a comparison is made between the two denominations with regard to the middle classes. Here discrimination based on politics
and ideology was probably most blatant. But again there was a difference
that cannot be reduced to “extra-religious facts” but rather resulted from different “value notions, mentalities, [and] behavior.”51
These intangibles were, as Thomas Nipperdey has argued, partly responsible “for a measure of a stronger motivation among Protestants to be mobile
and dynamic, [to be interested] in science and [a better] education.” Catholics, by contrast, were less “individualized and professionalized, more traditionalist and less oriented toward upward mobility and success and toward
career planning.” At the same time they were “better integrated into social
groups and more affirmative toward life.” Apart from highlighting the differences in professional ethics between Catholics and Protestants, scholars have
sought to support their findings by pointing out that Catholics had larger
families and a lower suicide rate.52 They may have been well integrated into
their local Catholic milieu, though not into the larger Protestant-dominated
90

Minorities and Majorities

nation. The latter was an objective that their political leaders pursued with
varying success from the 1890s to the end of the monarchy.
The discussion so far raises two questions: how prepared were the Protestant majority and its leaders in state and society to integrate the Catholic minority? And how far was the latter capable and willing to adapt its milieu and
cultural behavior to the majority that was so eagerly promoting industrialization, urbanization, and secularization (that is, forces that the Vatican eyed
with great suspicion)? Especially with regard to secularization the Catholic
Church in Germany remained conservatively dogmatic, defensive, and authoritarian. Seen in this perspective, the Kulturkampf was more than a political
conflict. It represented a clash with the forces of modernization that labored
for the “demystification of the world” (as Max Weber put it) and whose spearhead were the Liberals. The church was very reluctant to conclude an armistice, much less peace, with these forces after the end of the Kulturkampf.
And so the suspicions between the Protestant majority and Catholic minority continued, and Wilhelm II repeatedly articulated them from his Prussian
perspective.
Catholicism proved more flexible when it came to the problem of industrialization and its consequences. Above all, there was the “workers’ question” and how it might be tackled. The majority of middle-class Protestants had
little sympathy for the workers’ desire to form associations to represent their
interests. The Vatican adopted a different position, even if took until 1891 to
enshrine it in a papal encyclical. Thenceforth Catholics were called upon to
be conscious of their social responsibility, and the welfare work undertaken
by Catholic priests among the poor and in the Reich’s industrial regions became a task sanctioned at the highest level.
However, there were two sides to the 1891 encyclical. On the one hand, it
marked the church’s step toward accepting the industrial revolution, which
seemed unstoppable; on the other, it drew a line not only against Marxist
recipes for solving the “workers’ question,” but also against Protestantism.
Here lies the other root for a growing sense that Catholicism was confined to
a “beleaguered tower” that the Center Party politician Julius Bachem wanted
it to abandon when in 1906 he made public his famous appeal to this effect.
After the turn of the century, this striving for greater openness toward the rest
of society and for integration seemed realistic, not least because Protestant
discrimination was softening, at least up to 1907. To be sure, the Kaiser and
many conservative politicians remained convinced that Catholicism and the
Center Party (its increasingly more important political arm) received their orders from the Vatican. Undeterred by this hostility, the Center Party’s leadership nevertheless sought cooperation with other political forces in the hope
of breaking through the isolation that, it must once more be added, had also
been a consequence of its self-imposed retreat into the “tower.” Nothing sup91

Society

ported the Bachem line more than the impressive growth of Catholic lay associations, whose membership increased to the point where they could no
longer simply be ignored or ostracized.
If the Protestant majority showed a willingness to integrate the Catholic
minority, it was, of course, also because it was so sizeable and, in the age of
universal suffrage, potentially influential. Conversely, Catholics felt the pressure to adapt to the majority. In the final analysis, this pressure was generated by constant change in society and the economy, which eroded traditional
hierarchies and milieus. Clericalism was losing ground; the lay movement was
gaining it. A rift began to run through Catholicism. The hierarchy’s warnings
about the dangers of modern life went unheeded. Illegitimacy rates edged up
in some Catholic regions.53 There was a decline in the attendance of services,
even if Catholic priests on the whole had more success in upholding church
discipline than their Protestant counterparts. The share of female church-goers
was considerably higher than that of male Catholics. Between 1900 and 1912,
the share of young male church-goers is estimated to have declined from 90
to 60 percent. In Munich attendance at Easter communion dropped to around
50 percent during the late 1880s. Few, however, officially declared that they
had left the church. Similarly, for many Catholics it was a matter of course
that their children would be baptized and receive first communion at the appropriate time. Over 90 percent of Catholics did not wish to hold a wedding
or funeral without the assistance of a priest.
Taking a bird’s eye view, it appears that the old tensions between the Protestant majority and the Catholic minority did diminish over time. In realms
where one denomination far outnumbered the other, competition was less
fierce than in mixed areas. Catholics began to catch up with Protestants as regards their position in social and economic life. The bitter struggle of the
1870s slowly faded from memory, and a new generation came of age. Ideologically speaking, “Godless” Marxism appeared to be the greater danger in
the last years before the war. State and church moved more closely together
as they rallied the German Empire against internal and external enemies.
These developments, which point to a better integration of Catholicism
into the mainstream, must not mislead us into thinking, however, that the distinct cultural characteristics of the Catholic minority also began to disappear.
There was some adaptation to the political and social currents of the time.
Like other groups, Catholics tried, from the 1890s onward, to create a mass
base for themselves. This was the hour of the “People’s Association for Catholic Germany,” which, when founded in 1890, made the struggle against
Social Democrats one of its primary objectives. The main target shifted away
from the Liberals toward the working-class movement.
In the long run, therefore, Catholicism in Imperial Germany became more
modern and less insular. Yet there was never any question as to whether it
92

Minorities and Majorities

should allow itself to be absorbed into the Protestant majority culture. The Catholic minority culture may have become more similar to that of Protestantism,
and yet it had no wish to be assimilated by it. A clearly identifiable Catholic
milieu continued to exist in which tradition and innovation combined into a
distinctive cultural mix, and not even this mix was uniform. In more remote
rural areas, tradition remained the stronger element. There the position of the
austere and vigilant parish priest lost little of its prestige, and many pious
parishioners adhered to a dogmatic piety that acted as a screen against the encroachments of modernity. In cities and industrial centers—especially in the
diaspora or in regions where the numerical balance between Catholics and
Protestants was fairly even—the priest would appear in a more modern guise.
He knew that only if he responded to the changing circumstances and attitudes of his flock would he succeed in preserving his customary position at
the head of local associational and community life. In these regions church
loyalty and piety had a different texture from the Catholicism that lived on in
rural Upper Bavaria or the isolated Eifel region southwest of Cologne.
A glance at intermarriage rates provides a telling insight into the changing
balance between assimilation and self-assertion among German Catholics.
As a result of deep-rooted historical tensions, exacerbated by the Kulturkampf, the rate had traditionally been low, hovering around 8 percent at the
turn of the century. But although the Vatican continued to oppose such marriages as vigorously as before, by 1910 the rate had gone up to 12 percent.
C. The Jewish Minority
The relationship between Imperial Germany’s Jewish minority and the Christian majority can also be fruitfully analyzed in terms of the questions of integration and assimilation. The emancipation of the Jews had reached its
final conclusion in the 1860s. Their days of being seen as social, economic,
and political pariahs were officially over. Baden and Württemberg had passed
the legislation that gave Jews complete equality before the law in 1861–1864.
The same policy was adopted by the North German Confederation in 1869
and then taken over by the newly founded Reich. Even before 1871, Jews had
made good use of the opportunities that this equality had given them. By this
time, some 512,153 of them lived in the Hohenzollern monarchy; by 1910,
the figure had risen to 615,021. The latter figure subsumed some 79,000 foreign Jews, 13 percent of the German total, who had moved to Germany, mainly
from the east. Some 416,000 of all Jews lived in Prussia. Bavaria was home
to 55,000, followed by Baden (25,896), Hesse (24,063), Hamburg (19,472),
Saxony (17,585), and Württemberg (11,982). A little over 30,000 Jews lived
in Alsace-Lorraine.
In light of a rising anti-Semitism, which will be addressed later,54 it is also
significant that the Jewish share in terms of the total population actually
93

Society

declined from 1.25 percent in 1871 to 0.95 percent before World War I. In
large measure, this development is due to the fact that the excess in births
over deaths among the Jewish minority declined more rapidly than among
the rest of the population. On average Jews married later and practiced more
effective birth control. What prevented an even steeper decline was a lower
mortality rate among Jews, especially for infants. Another factor was that
Jews immigrating from the east tended to have larger families. In the face of
these statistics, there were even some pessimists in the Jewish community who
predicted the eventual disappearance of this minority, also because the rate
of mixed marriages with Christians kept increasing. In the last years before
the war, around 13 percent of all Jewish women had taken Christian husbands.
Conversely, between 1911 and 1915 the share of Jewish men who married
Christian women reached as high as 22 percent. In some cities and regions at
this time the share was as high as 62.6 percent (Saxony) and 73 percent (Hamburg). Finally, those approximately 15,000 Jews who converted to Christianity between 1871 and 1909 must be included in these statistics.
Looking at the residential patterns of the German-Jewish minority opens
a window to an analysis of the occupational structure. Before Germany was
seized by the great wave of industrialization and urbanization in the second
half of the nineteenth century, most Jews lived in the rural regions or small
towns of Central Europe. They made a living as traders and moneylenders,
while the legal restrictions still in force at the time prevented them from acquiring landed property. Thus, even after 1871, Jews were strongly represented
among the cattle and hops dealers of Bavaria. In Baden and Hesse, they excelled in the grain trade, and among the wine growers of western Germany
they acted as “buyers.” Many Jews also sold haberdasheries, kitchen utensils,
and foodstuffs to the local peasantry. Finally, they emerged as moneylenders,
particularly in those areas where the peasants tried to conceal their indebtedness and hence were reluctant to go to the bank or other financial institutions.
In the towns, peddlers who went from door to door had been a familiar sight
for many years. However, by 1895 the share of Jews in this trade had declined
to 8.7 percent. This change did not merely hint at shifts in the occupational
structure overall, but also at a considerable occupational mobility among the
Jewish minority (Table 24). Those who, as peddlers, had once pushed a rickety cart from house to house would soon be wholesalers or sales representatives covering entire regions. The move to the big city became imperative. In
1871 not even 20 percent of the Jewish population lived in cities; by 1910 the
share had grown to 53.8 percent; in Prussia it reached almost 60 percent
(Table 39). In 1871, some 36,015 Jews lived in Berlin; by 1910 their number
had risen to over 90,000. During the same period the Jewish minority of
Cologne quadrupled from 3,100, and increased two-and-a-half-fold from
10,000 in Frankfurt. Breslau and Hamburg also witnessed sizeable increases.
94

Minorities and Majorities

Overall, the change happened more slowly in the south than in Prussia. As
late as 1910, around 30 percent of the Jews of Bavaria and Württemberg still
lived in communities with fewer than 5,000 inhabitants. In Prussia the share
was much lower; by 1910 it had fallen to 28 percent in towns of over 20,000
inhabitants.
In line with these changes, the share of Jews in industry and crafts rose
from 19.3 percent to 21.9 percent between 1895 and 1907, amounting to
0.5 percent of all Germans employed by this sector. Many Jews continued to
work in trade and commerce. But in comparison to the total numbers employed in this sector, the share of Jews likewise declined, from 10.5 percent to
8.0 percent. The most striking findings concerning the occupational mobility
of German Jews emerge only if we look at their share among the self-employed.
In crafts and industry, this share was 43 percent, a figure considerably higher
than that of self-employed individuals in the total working population. In
1907, some 54 percent of Jews worked in commerce, compared to the 29 percent that constituted the share of the self-employed among all people working in this sector. Jews became pioneers in the development of department
stores and the mail-order business. They were also strongly represented in private banking, even if the rise of the joint-stock banks led to an overall decline
of the Jewish share among the directors of privately owned institutions by
6 percent to 37 percent between 1882 and 1895. At the same time many Jews
advanced to the management and supervisory boards of large banks and industrial trusts, though officially they were employees of these companies.
Social historians have tried to refine these statistics. By evaluating Prussian data on millionaires that Rudolf Martin, a former civil servant with the
Reich Office of the Interior, published before 1914 in twenty-one volumes,
Werner Mosse succeeded in identifying twenty-nine families whose total wealth
was over 50 million marks each.55 No fewer than nine of these families (31
percent) were Jewish or of Jewish descent. Among the 25 wealthiest individuals, the Jewish share was 44 percent; among the top 800, it was still as high
as 23.7 percent. Beyond these percentages at the very top of the income scale,
Jews in Imperial Germany generally had a higher income than the population
average. Reports from the Inland Revenue Service of Breslau show that 15
percent of Jewish taxpayers in the cities fell into the highest tax categories;
the figure for Hamburg even reached 27 percent.
The Inland Revenue Service reports are warped in two ways, though. First,
large-scale landowners rarely appeared in the upper ranks because wealth
locked up in landed property was not assessed, even though land prices had
risen. Moreover, most landowners were less honest than wealthy Jews, and
the rural tax officials, who were responsible for checking their returns, often
did not pursue even the most blatant dishonesties. Their reasons were political
and ideological at a time when the Junker were “ailing” economically, and in
95

Society

the eyes of the conservative bureaucracy any means to prop them up seemed
justified.56 Second, when assessing tax liabilities, an adequate yardstick can
be gained only if we compare Jewish middle-class taxpayers with their nonJewish counterparts rather than with the total population. At present, some
material for more specific comparisons is only available for Breslau and
Berlin.
What can be said, however, is that German Jews, their minority position
notwithstanding, fully participated in the expansion of the country’s industrial economy and made a contribution to it that was well above the average.
Their occupational mobility was remarkable. Their rise into the well-to-do
bourgeoisie opened up better educational opportunities, as many Jewish parents found that the cost of providing their children with a high school and
college education was no longer beyond their means. Education and immersion in the religious texts had long held a special importance, particularly
for Jewish men. Jewish mothers also played a major role in transmitting the
values of learning and education. Consequently, there existed few psychological or cultural barriers against going to high school or university.
As early as 1863 the share of Jewish pupils at Prussian high schools was
16 percent. As the Abitur certificate was an entry-ticket to the tertiary sector,
the percentage of Jewish men at first also saw a rapid rise at German universities. In 1886/87 around 9.6 percent of the students at Prussia’s universities
were Jewish; the figure was still 8 percent in 1911, although total numbers
had increased markedly and the percentage of Jews in the population had declined. After women had finally been admitted to Prussian tertiary institutions in 1909, the share of Jewish women was over 17 percent a mere two
years later.
Those German Jews who did not enter their fathers’ firms after graduation
or otherwise sought a career in industry and commerce would go into the
professions. In 1907, some 14.7 percent of all private attorneys and notaries
were Jewish. The figure for physicians was 6 percent, and another 8.1 percent of Jews registered in the occupational census of 1907 gave their profession as “private scholar, writer, and journalist.” As in industry and commerce,
many of them achieved positions of influence in these professions, above all
in the press. This gave them a high visibility, especially in the large liberal
newspapers for which they worked.
Since the civil service officially adhered to the principle of qualification
and merit, one would have expected to find a correspondingly large share of
Jews in the bureaucracy and armed forces. Since the 1860s, the law had established equality in the competition for these careers. However, time and again
Jewish applicants found themselves turned down through various tricks and
under all sorts of flimsy pretexts. The barriers were particularly insurmountable in the armed forces. Only the Bavarian army officer corps was prepared
96

Minorities and Majorities

to make a few exceptions. The allegedly liberal navy, like the Prussian army,
did not have a single Jewish officer, though it did have a few converts. A few
also succeeded in climbing to the top of the ladder in the civil service. Entering the transport, library, and public health services proved somewhat easier.
To obtain a promotion often proved no less arduous. In 1907, some 4.3
percent of all judges were Jewish, 906 of them in all. Since the number of
qualified attorneys of Jewish background was much higher, however, many
of them were pushed into private practice, even if they preferred the judiciary. Scholars, many of them highly qualified, had similar experiences. They
would be kept waiting for a tenured professorship for years. In 1909 some
2 percent of all full professors were Jews, with a noticeable concentration in
the sciences. During the German Empire no Jew was ever given a full professorship in German literature or in classics. Among the associate professors
(Extraordinarien), the share was 7 percent, and again an important statistical
point should not be overlooked: this percentage does not reflect the share of
Jews in the total population, but rather in the pool of qualified candidates.
Jewish school teachers also found professional life a struggle. They were virtually excluded from Christian church schools. Public schools, too, were
under a mandate to offer an education guided by Christian principles that
Jewish teachers were presumably unable to provide. Fortunately, this mandate was handled more flexibly at the high-school level. Following a decree
by the Prussian minister for cultural affairs, Jews could be admitted as teachers from 1872 onward, and the first of them served in Breslau with its large
Jewish community. Finally, there were also a few Jewish schools, and here
there was even a chance to rise to the headmastership.
The material presented so far demonstrates that, their rise in the economy
and the educational system notwithstanding, Jews were subjected to an array
of discriminations that in turn reinforced their concentrated appearance in
other professions. Finally, they experienced many handicaps when it came to
honors and decorations, and membership in various clubs and associations
was also denied to them.
D. Anti-Semitism
The reasons for these realities cannot be found among the Jews themselves.
Rather their difficulties indicate that this minority group faced many obstacles
to integration into the majority society that originated in a widespread antiSemitism. Innumerable studies have been undertaken on this topic.57 They
are all concerned with divergent types of anti-Semitism, often specific to a
particular non-Jewish group. They also deal with the organization and proliferation of anti-Jewish prejudice in the decades before 1914.
There existed a strong social anti-Semitism that was largely confined to
the upper classes as well as the rural and court nobility. Its adherents simply
97

Society

considered Jews inferior socially and hence totally unsuited to be invited to
court. Aristocrats would try to obtain useful advice from Jews in business
matters, but even then they would display the inimitable condescension with
which they would approach other people of unequal birth. The treatment of
Gerson Bleichröder is a good case in point. As Bismarck’s private banker, he
had used his considerable skills to increase the Reich chancellor’s wealth; but
this did not prevent Bismarck’s son Herbert from cracking ugly anti-Semitic
jokes the moment Bleichröder had left his father’s house after one of his visits. Although there were some Old Prussian conservatives who were unhappy
about these prejudices and about how they were used in Conservative agitation as a means of rallying support among the peasantry, a vicious type of
anti-Semitism also flourished in the entourage of the crown prince and later
Kaiser Wilhelm II that was merely different by degree from the anti-Semitism
that existed in Germany after 1918.
Segments of the lower middle classes and the peasantry adhered to a religious anti-Semitism. Promoted by the churches (or at least not opposed by
them), this prejudice had deep roots in Christianity’s history and in the early
persecutions of the Jews all over Europe. Particularly powerful was the lie
that the Jews were the “murderers of Christ.” Long before the nineteenth century, such arguments had repeatedly been accompanied by an economic antiSemitism that blamed the Jews for harvest failures and other disasters. Now,
in an age of rapid socioeconomic change, peasants, artisans, and shopkeepers time and again found themselves left behind or even faced with economic
ruin, whose larger structural causes they could not understand.58 In these circumstances it was certainly simpler and more comforting to find a scapegoat
for these ills and one’s own failures. The Jews were a small and easily identifiable group to be thrust into this unhappy role. The prejudice did not disappear in better times in those regions where Jews appeared as traders and
moneylenders, though it also proved attractive to others who had little contact with the Jewish minority. Worse, political agitators knew how to play on
this type of anti-Semitism.
During the final decade of the nineteenth century, a racist-biological variant of anti-Semitism began to spread whose emergence was connected with
the more or less simultaneous rise of an intolerant integral nationalism and a
missionary imperialism. Its advocates divided the world into “superior” and
“inferior” nations and “races.” These currents of thought were reinforced by
the spread of Social Darwinist ideas. Here history was viewed as a “struggle
for survival” in a power-political jungle in which the nations and “races” that
were better equipped biologically for dominating the weaker ones would win
out. The pseudoscientific foundations of this worldview were particularly
persuasive to the gullible. If all these tendencies are added up, it is not difficult to see why many non-Jews, threatened by socioeconomic decline, ideo98

Minorities and Majorities

logically confused, and predisposed to the above-mentioned religious and
economic anti-Semitism, would be open to the simple lie that the Jews were
not only an inferior but a particularly menacing “race” that tried to undermine the biological fiber of the Germans in order to dominate them.
After this, practically no limits existed to the invention of the most harebrained conspiracy theories. Long before 1914, such theories were being debated in various splinter associations and propagated in obscure journals and
pamphlets. After 1918, the National Socialists added scarcely a new thought
to this jumble of anti-Semitic prejudices. Ultimately, the explanation for the
strength and prevalence of such feelings must be sought in the social pathology of the anti-Semites themselves. The Jews played their role only insofar
as their high-profile minority position made them an ideal scapegoat. Thus,
many Germans who subscribed to one type of anti-Semitism, or to all of
them, not only came to reject an integration of the Jews; on the contrary, they
hoped to remove them from all spheres of life.
The growth of a racist nationalism and its political organizations will be
discussed in a later chapter.59 The task here is to examine the evolving situation from the Jewish perspective. If the development of a vicious scapegoat
mechanism points to the limited capacity of the majority of Germans to integrate its minorities, and its Jews in particular, there is, in line with the analytical framework put forward in this section’s introduction, also the question
of Jewish assimilation and its limits. The case of the German Jews seems to
provide an even better illustration of this issue than that of the Catholics. The
emancipation of the Jews of Central Europe had been predicated on the assumption that they represented a religious community and not a “nation.”
Most Jews agreed with this, and accordingly, once a German nation-state had
been created in 1871, they saw themselves as “Germans of Jewish denomination” (Deutsche israelitischer Konfession).
Under the impact of a growing anti-Semitism and in particular of its racist
variant, Germany’s Jews began to widen this self-definition. However much
they rejected the biological arguments of their enemies, many of them came
to realize that their religion was but one important element of their sociocultural persona. What also molded them into a group was their long history,
much of which had been marked by persecution, their cultural institutions,
and their perceptions of the environments in which they lived. All these elements taken together in fact made them an ethnic group, rather than merely
a religious community within German society at large.
This consciousness was strengthened by the fact that many German Jews
were captivated by the general process of secularization that began to permeate society. They became estranged from their religion, especially in its very
strict orthodox varieties. However, this did not prevent them from identifying
with their Jewishness in a broader sense and from seeing themselves as a cul99

Society

tural minority. Because of these developments, which offered the Jews both
self-confidence and a sense of belonging, very few of them were prepared to
assimilate into the majority to such a degree that their ethnic identity disappeared completely. This is most clearly reflected in the low numbers of Jews
who converted to Christianity, a line many Jews were unprepared to step
across. At the same time, the majority environment contained many cultural
elements toward which they felt a strong affinity. Indeed, many of these elements could be reconciled quite easily with the Judaic system of values and
with their own traditions.
As pressure on this minority mounted from anti-Semites and other groups,
and Jewish children experienced open prejudice from their classmates in
school playgrounds, factions arose within the Jewish community that rejected
an adaptation that stopped distinctly short of absorption. The supporters of
these tendencies worked for a separation and, in the case of the Zionists, even
for the founding of a Jewish national state.60 However, the latter always remained a small minority within the German-Jewish community. More significantly, foreign observers were frequently struck by how “German” even these
more radical elements were in their attitudes and behavior. Theodor Herzl,
one of the fathers of modern Zionism, provides a telling case in point for how
this “German-Jewish ethnicity” amounted to a hyphenated identity that was
in fact a synthesis of partial adaptation and reinterpretation of what it meant to
be a Jew in Central Europe in the late nineteenth century. In 1895 it did not
strike Herzl as incongruous when he received the astonished Chief Rabbi of
Vienna at his home under the Christmas tree. For him this was evidently not
a paradox but a perfectly reconcilable synthesis of Central European culture.
Consequently, German Jews also had no problems with the ideals and attitudes of the educated bourgeoisie, the Bildungsbürgertum. Nor did liberal
Jews agonize over reforming their own services and integrating Christian traditions into them. Old Hebrew songs were accompanied by organ music,
while the texts were recited in German. Under the impact of secularization,
the position of Jewish women in the family and community also began to
change, and the rigid patriarchism that characterized orthodoxy softened. On
the one hand, the role of the mother remained important; on the other, the
share of working Jewish women rose by 47.8 percent to almost 49,000 between 1895 and 1907. This figure represented 18 percent of all Jewish women
and hence a smaller percentage than the 30 percent of all German women
who held jobs in the Kaiserreich. But it must also be remembered that most
Jews had by this time risen into the middle class. Those 18 percent should
therefore be compared with the share of non-Jewish bourgeois women, and
in the absence of precise statistics it may be surmised here that the Jewish
share was at least the same, if not higher. The high share of Jewish female
students at universities points in the same direction.
100

Minorities and Majorities

As these social and cultural processes unfolded, Germany’s Jews understandably felt challenged by the anti-Semites, whose numbers appeared to be
rising, indicating a disturbing sociopathological potential. They did not want
to leave uncontested the lies that were being spread. Nor were they prepared
to put up indefinitely with discrimination against them that was based on
anti-Semitic prejudice. They wanted to be integrated as full citizens but to
preserve their identity as an ethnic group that had not been totally absorbed
by the Christian majority. These aspirations finally found an organized expression in the founding of the “Central Association of German Citizens of
the Jewish Faith” (CV). The name of this organization, which rejected Zionism, says it all. In speeches and articles, its members insisted thenceforth that
they saw themselves as both—as Germans and Jews—and that they fully identified as such with the society into which they had been born. To them being
a Jew and being a German were not alternatives, but complementarities.
How seriously they took this position became evident during World War
I, in which around 100,000 Jews participated. No fewer than 2,000 of them
were promoted to the rank of officer. But this did little to lessen the discrimination against them. As we shall see in Part V, anti-Semitism and the policies of exclusion continued to rise after 1914.
E. The Polish Minority
Cultural symbiosis without the loss of one’s own identity was also a strategy
of German citizens of Polish origin, of whom large numbers moved from the
eastern provinces to the Ruhr area in the west. It was a strategy that ultimately worked no better for them than it did for German Jews. Conversely,
the attitudes of the majority and the policies of the Prussian government put
very tangible limits upon their integration. Their experience in turn led to defensive reactions that were typical of ethnic minorities. The development of
the German-Polish relationship therefore bears many similarities to that of
Germans and Jews. However, it unfolded at a different socioeconomic level.
Whereas most Jews belonged to the middle class, the Polish minority was
made up mainly of agricultural workers. Those who subsequently moved to
the west and north settled in industrial communities and lived increasingly
proletarian-industrial lives.
Moreover, the Polish minority settled in clearly identifiable concentrations
in both east and west. These circumstances, as well as the fact that Poland,
until its destruction by Russia, Prussia, and Austria in the late eighteenth century, had been a sovereign state, put the German Poles in a somewhat different setting than that of German Jews. Zionism remained a marginal force among
the latter. Geography and memories of a period of national independence
make the history of this minority under the German Empire more comparable to that of the Danes or Alsace-Lorraineans than of the Jews or Catholics.
101

Society

Above all, the Danes were not merely a culturally distinct ethnic minority,
but also a national one. And the more this minority felt ostracized, the greater
became its desire to separate. The Poles occupied an unusual position somewhere in the middle between Jews, on the one hand, and Danes, on the other,
in this spectrum of minority experiences in Imperial Germany. For a long
time they stood right at the crossroads, and whether they would take a separatistnationalist road or the path toward a German-Polish symbiosis depended on
larger domestic developments inside the country.
From what we know, the approximately 3 million land laborers and smallholders in the Prussian East did not possess a strong Polish national consciousness at the time of the founding of the Reich. This consciousness was
more highly developed among the Polish-speaking aristocracy and bourgeoisie.
Those who joined the trek to the west in the 1870s in search of better jobs
were too apolitical to have clearly articulated ideological positions. In the
first few years after 1871, only a few thousand Poles migrated to the Ruhr
region. According to Reich statistics, their numbers, including Masurians,
had risen to 34,000 by 1890. Twenty years later, this figure had grown tenfold. It is fairly certain now that the Poles who went to the Rhineland numbered from 300,000 to 350,000. To this figure must be added a string of
smaller settlements, for example, in Wilhelmsburg just south of Hamburg.
Remaining statistical uncertainties notwithstanding, it appears that there were
around 400,000 Poles outside the eastern provinces of Prussia.
Most of them went to the Ruhr area and found employment in the mines.
This occupational pattern explains to some extent why they settled in colonies.
Especially in the eastern Ruhr there emerged a number of “Polenzechen,”
mines with a high share of Poles among the workforce. Many of these Poles
were married. Once a few families had become established in the new heavyindustrial environment, they acted as magnets for friends and family who had
stayed behind. Single men were recruited by agents of the mining companies
and put into company housing. The number of overnight lodgers was large
among the Ruhr Poles. As early as 1881, a survey found that some 735 predominantly Polish households had no less than 1,377 such lodgers. A count
for the city of Essen in 1902 showed an average of three per household. The
important point is that networks were created in this way through which
long-distance migrants came to be channeled. Newcomers were given a bed
not only because the rent was needed to contribute to the family budget, but
also because there were the solidarities of the extended family and ethnicity.
Since the number of Ruhr Poles was initially small, the majority population was not yet confronted with the question of their integration. Strangers
could simply be ignored. But when they arrived in larger numbers, the question of their position within society and local politics became more acute. At
first sight, there appeared to be considerable potential for tension between
102

Minorities and Majorities

the majority and the Polish minority. Anti-Slav stereotypes and a superiority
complex had been prevalent among the native population before their arrival.
Language and culture were different. The migrants tended to come from regions in the east with very low wage levels, while Ruhr miners were among
the best paid. The Poles therefore acted as a “reserve army” that made it easier for the mining bosses to push down wage levels, creating bitterness among
the indigenous mining communities. In short, there were a number of neuralgic points over which conflicts between the newcomers and the natives might
break out.
Nevertheless, recent research has shown quite reliably that the integration
of the Polish minority into its immediate environment proceeded unevenly
yet more smoothly than earlier historians had assumed. The organization of
work in the mines no doubt helped in this respect. Here Germans and Poles
were exposed to the same dangers, and the work in gangs and teams promoted
a sense of solidarity. Finally, unlike Germany’s Jews, the German Poles did not
outpace the majority in occupational mobility. Majority and minority shared
the same very limited opportunities to move up that existed for all industrial
laborers during the Kaiserreich. At most intergenerational mobility was slightly
higher for the indigenous population at 14 percent. More worrying was the
fact that Polish miners were hardly ever promoted to supervisory positions,
which carried with them a period of study at the Mining Academy.
Similar conditions obtained in the textile factories of Wilhelmsburg, where
many Polish migrants found employment. Here native workers gained a small
advantage on the ladder to becoming skilled workers or foremen. However,
both groups rarely succeeded in rising to master positions. Better opportunities developed for Poles in the crafts sector; but like their native fellow workers they were virtually excluded from lower civil service and white-collar
jobs, except for a few Polish “railroad civil servants” who were promoted to
the position of engine driver. This meant that sources of friction due to one
group receiving preferential treatment over the other were relatively few. The
newcomers’ integration seemed to be making progress. A survey of the Dortmund Mining District Office showed that in 1893 some 40 percent of immigrant miners whose main language was Polish had married German-speaking
women. Until 1914 there was a further rise in the absolute number of these
mixed marriages, but the actual share rose only slightly between 1908 and
1912 from 2.8 percent to 3.2 percent among Polish men, and from 2 percent
to 2.2 percent among Polish women.
Promoted by the expansion of the system of company-owned mining
colonies, Polish miners tended to live closely together. This was also true in
other regions. Wilhelmsburg experienced a “tendency toward ghetto formation,” though not “in the sense of a concentration that resulted from a discrimination of the minority.”61 Thus, Polish workers were rarely disadvantaged
103

Society

when it came to accommodation. In this respect only large families had difficulties in Wilhelmsburg. The rest suffered more or less equally with the natives from the poor housing conditions. Wherever “Polish quarters” emerged
in Wilhelmsburg, they were not isolated from the rest of the town; but they
did provide stability to an emergent ethnic culture. Christoph Kleßmann’s
findings for the Ruhr have been less favorable. He found “social discrimination, … above all, as a consequence of native prejudices.”62 As in the case of
the Jews, this leads us to the second question, that of the assimilation of the
Polish minority and its openness to this process.
If nothing else, their language made former Polish land laborers from the
east who had migrated to the cities of northern and western Germany well
aware that they were culturally different from the majority around them. In
the Rhineland, Catholicism initially provided a bridge. And yet, as in the case
of the Jews, the Polish desire to adapt to their environment never went so far
as to include absorption by the native society. Name changes are a good indicator of this. It is true that, between 1910 and 1912, there was a rise in the
number of applications to change a Slavic sounding name from 382 to 764.
But apparently most of the applicants were Masurians, who, for various reasons, were less resistant to losing their cultural identity. Moreover, even this
doubling of applications remained low in comparison to the total number of
Ruhr Poles. Their preparedness to meld their cultural environment also had
clear limits when it came to eating habits or to the question of having Polish
priests to head their church communities.
Above all, it was the mushrooming of colorful associations that pointed to
a clear desire to preserve their ethnic culture. Indeed, these associations acted
as pillars of a slowly evolving Polish minority culture that became a psychically stabilizing element. In 1906, there were no fewer than 106 singing
clubs, with 5,225 members. By 1912, the total number of the mostly cultural
Polish clubs in the Ruhr was 875, with some 81,500 members. The range of
activities was astounding. There was a temperance society with 828 members; the rosary brotherhoods counted over 16,000 members; and even the
lottery associations had some 1,500 supporters. Although the new urban environment had begun to change many of the attitudes that the immigrants had
brought with them from the east, their cultural heritage was not so easily forgotten. Like the Polish language, it was upheld collectively and passed on to
the next generation. At the same time indigenous traditions and patterns of
behavior were picked up. The new blend that developed is perhaps most
strikingly reflected in the closing ceremony of the 5th Festival of the Catholic
Associations of Dortmund on 31 May 1885 that had brought Poles and Germans peacefully together. It was a matter of course that the assembled would
issue a joint salute to both the Emperor and the Pope and finish the meeting
by singing the Leo as well as the Kaiser Hymn. A year later, the Stanislaus
104

Minorities and Majorities

Association participated quite happily in the public celebrations of Sedan
Day commemorating the 1870 defeat of France.
If it had been up to the Ruhr Poles, it is perfectly plausible that they would
have continued to develop in this way and without major tensions as an ethnic minority within their industrial environment and would have seen themselves as German citizens of Polish descent. Unfortunately, the Kaiserreich
was not a country that was prepared to tolerate such a minority group with a
specific culture. The basic structure of the Hohenzollern monarchy was too
illiberal and authoritarian to accommodate this. Worse, both Germany’s elites
and larger sections of the population were becoming more intolerant in their
outlook as 1914 approached. The Germanic nationalism that made them unwilling to allow minorities the preservation of their own culture grew into an
ever more dynamic and ultimately self-destructive force. It was further deformed before 1914 by an additional racism and imperialism that pushed for
domination and submission. This nationalism, which, to be sure, was not solely
a German phenomenon, aroused resentment and ultimately a nationalist defense. Over time, this reaction developed into a centrifugal force, and in the
case of the Austro-Hungarian multinational empire, Slav counter-nationalism
became so powerful that it threatened the survival of the Habsburg monarchy. Incapable of initiating life-saving reforms, the government in Vienna began an open ethnic struggle against the different Slav minorities within their
sphere of power. On the Polish side, resistance to the repressive policies in
Vienna at first came mainly from the nobility and the middle classes, who
dreamed of the restoration of the former Polish national state.
Prussia, having annexed parts of Poland during the divisions of the eighteenth century, was bound to feel threatened by developments in the Habsburg
empire. If Polish nationalists succeeded in building up a genuine popular
movement, the eastern provinces with their large Polish-speaking populations were no longer secure. This explains why the Prussian government tried
to smother the rising Polish nationalism with ever more brutal means. Numerically, the Poles already constituted the majority in some of the provinces.
Fears arose of a “flooding” of the “German East” with Poles, partly because
of immigration from Austrian Galicia and Russia, and because the Polish birth
rate was higher than the German one and many Germans themselves began
to migrate west in search of better jobs in industry. In these circumstances, it
was not difficult to see that repressive measures would fail in the long run,
unless they were complemented by “positive” policies. This, however, meant
in the minds of the Prussian government and its supporters that the provinces
concerned should be “Germanized.”
Accordingly, Bismarck started a different kind of Kulturkampf in the east.
The first drastic measures were taken by the authorities in 1885 when they
unceremoniously expelled some 32,000 Poles whose German citizenship
105

Society

could not be immediately documented. Since even some hard-line Prussian
conservatives reacted negatively to these expulsions, a “constructive” program began a year later: with the help of a financially well-endowed Settlement
Commission, large Polish estates were bought up for distribution in smaller
parcels to German peasant settlers. Bismarck, who as Prussian prime minister was ultimately responsible for this program, apparently also hoped to foster the integration of the parties and of domestic politics with this “national”
initiative.63 However, in his conception of things this integration did not include the Polish minority; on the contrary, it aimed to ostracize the Poles.
The activities of the Settlement Commission had a somewhat paradoxical
effect. In the twenty years after 1886, it used its fund of 250 million marks
more often for the purchase of German estates than Polish ones, raising the
suspicion that heavily indebted German landowners were saved from bankruptcy under the guise of a “Germanization” program that enabled them to
sell land at vastly inflated prices. Although this was a welcome effect for the
“ailing” Junker, the program proved a disaster from the demographic point of
view. For however strenuously the government and various private associations, which barely veiled their racist intentions, tried to sell their “Germanization” policy, by 1914 a mere 22,000 German peasants had actually settled
on the bought-up land. One reason for this depressing result was that the
Poles applied the rules of the Settlement Commission to their own benefit.
Since they were German citizens, they, too, could acquire land, as long as
they paid for it. Accordingly, they founded some 85 credit cooperatives to finance the acquisition of land by Polish peasants. The advocates of “Germanization” had the tables turned upon them.
In 1904 the frustrated Prussian government made an attempt to block these
developments by an unconstitutional move that turned Poles into secondclass citizens with respect to their right to acquire land. But soon a decision
by the Prussian Administrative High Court put a judicial stop to this policy.
Unrelenting in its desire to weaken the economic position of Poles in the
east, the Reich government promulgated another law in 1908 that made the
forcible expropriation of Polish property easier for the purpose of “strengthening the Germandom in the Provinces of West Prussia and Posen.” This
fresh discrimination greatly increased tensions between Poles and Germans
when, in 1912, the new law was used against four Polish landowners.
The memorable settlement policies of Prussia were complemented by discrimination in the fields of language and education that similarly aimed at
“Germanizing” the Poles. As to educational policies, the measures that had
been introduced in the course of the Kulturkampf against Catholics also
offered a lever against the Poles, many of whom were Catholics. Thus the
Schools’ Supervision Law of 1872 had curtailed the influence of the clergy
in the classroom. Since many priests in the eastern provinces were of Polish
106

Minorities and Majorities

background, the Prussian authorities were able to hit the instruction of Polish children at the same time. In October 1873, a decree was added that made
German the sole language in schools. For the moment, Polish could continue
for several hours per week as a foreign language. Further laws followed in
1876 and 1877 that declared German as the exclusive language in the administration and in the courts. The year 1908 then saw the final phase in this
process of escalation, when a paragraph was inserted into the new Reich Association Law that banned the use of the Polish language in private clubs and
associations. In the following year, a number of public servants were dismissed because they had voted for the Polish party in a municipal election.
It is not difficult to imagine how “German citizens of Polish descent” reacted to these measures. A Polish national consciousness began to take root
among the lower classes, who were embittered by discrimination in education,
administration, and landownership. They, too, began to speak up for the preservation of their ethnic identity, sometimes underlined by the use of physical
force. The introduction of the language policies led to open clashes between
Polish parents and German teachers. In 1906/7 tens of thousands of parents
temporarily refused to send their children to school. Prussian “Germanization”
policies and the agitation of German associations, above all of the HKT movement, gave a boost to the founding of Polish counter-organizations. Faced
with discrimination of the kind described above, these organizations were no
longer content to pursue cultural objectives. They demanded a restoration of
a Polish national state. Polish nationalism became a mass movement, and differences with the Germans became more and more irreconcilable. The government proved incapable of solving the “Polish question” in the east, and
the situation there became badly polarized.
After this, it was virtually inevitable that separatism among the eastern
Poles, which German ostracism had unleashed, would spill over into the Ruhr
area. Here, too, the deterioration began when the authorities exerted pressure
on the education front. Faced with small numbers, local officials at first still
believed that the problem of ethnic minorities would solve itself. As the Landrat of the Bochum region put it, “in the long run, the Germanization of the
Polish elements in this area” will be effected “through primary schools, marriages, and the constant social intercourse with the German population.”64
But then the Polish-speaking pupils became so numerous that the authorities
lost hope that this long-term strategy would succeed. Suddenly, Polish private
schools had their accreditation refused. Public schools no longer took account
of ethnic peculiarities. Where the percentage of Polish-speaking students became too high, classes were split up. Parents who organized private lessons
for their children would find the police on their doorstep.
Other administrative obstacles were put up. Teachers and officials were
instructed that it was their special duty to promote a German national con107

Society

sciousness. In January 1899 the Mining Police issued a decree that expected
all miners to possess a sufficient knowledge of German—for reasons of
safety. Discrimination began to affect existential questions. The 1904 Settlement Law made it more difficult for Poles who wished to return to the east
to purchase land with their savings. Finally, in 1908 came the Association
Law, whose intolerant language clauses applied to the entire Reich.
The reaction of Polish minorities in the Ruhr area or in Wilhelmsburg was
predictable: they resisted these repercussions of the “Germanization” policies in the east upon their own lives. The associational life that, as we have
seen, had been predominantly cultural and oriented toward a Polish-German
symbiosis, became politicized and took on a nationalistic tone. There was a
closing of the ranks. The Catholic Church of the Rhineland and Westphalia
learned this lesson when Ruhr Poles suddenly began to demand Polish priests
and services. Unions and parties underwent a similar shift. The local Polish
newspapers that had begun to report regularly on Prussian government policies in the east distanced themselves from what was happening. Meanwhile
the German press launched attacks on the Polish minority in their midst. And
yet it would probably go too far to speak of a Polish separatism in the Ruhr
area.
What acted as a counterweight to such tendencies was the fact that many
Polish families had become rooted in their new industrial-urban environments, which were so different from the rural conditions they had originally
come from. They now identified with the Ruhr, and their main concern was
to get the majority and the authorities around them to recognize their culture
and to provide them with equal opportunities for advancement and selfexpression. However, suspicions on the part of officials and the majority population of the 400,000 Ruhr Poles had meanwhile grown so strong that they
could not visualize anything less than a minority that would allow itself to be
fully “Germanized.” It did not matter that defining this Germanness continued to be difficult; but it meant having to give up one’s ethnic identity, just
as the Jews were expected to. A majority of Germans and their spokesmen
were unwilling to allow minorities to continue along the path of cultural synthesis on which they had set out with considerable optimism in the 1870s.
F. Alsace-Lorrainean and Danish Minorities
If a comparison is to be made at all, the experience of the people of AlsaceLorraine, whose territory the Reich had annexed from France in 1871, is
more likely comparable to that of the Poles in the east than to that of the Ruhr
Poles. There were no Alsatian or Lorrainean minorities outside the Reichsland, where they in fact constituted the majority. There were also differences
between the east and Alsace-Lorraine, the most important among them being
that the gradual integration of the population into the Reich developed more
108

Minorities and Majorities

happily in the latter region until the truncated constitutional reform of 1911
and the infamous Zabern Affair two years later.65 This was all the more remarkable since the German civilian administration that had been installed in
Alsace-Lorraine in 1871 started its job in the most difficult circumstances.
The indigenous bourgeoisie was strictly anti-Prussian and culturally, economically, and linguistically oriented toward France. The peasant population
of Alsace along the Rhine Valley was predominantly German-speaking and
had many ties with Baden, just across the river to the east. The French element was dominant in most of Lorraine. Just under 80 percent of the inhabitants of the territory were Catholics; 17 percent were Protestants, a figure
that had increased slightly by 1910.
Some forty years later, around 1910, major changes had taken place. The
elites of the Reichsland no longer looked toward Paris, but toward Germany.
The bulk of the population continued to hope that further constitutional reforms would bring them the same rights and privileges enjoyed by citizens in
the Reich’s other federal states. It is tempting to explain the reorientation toward Germany in purely economic terms and to invoke the magnet effect that
the prosperous industrial German Empire exerted upon the inhabitants of
Alsace-Lorraine. No doubt, the region experienced a moderate expansion of
its indigenous industries, once trade had increasingly begun to flow across
the river Rhine. Between 1882 and 1907, the share of people employed in
agriculture declined by 8 percent to 37.4 percent. Meanwhile the share of industry rose from 36.4 percent to 38.6 percent and that of the tertiary sector
from 18.6 percent to 24 percent.
The economic reorientation toward Germany was a painful process that
was to some extent forced upon the business community by France. The high
French tariffs of 1892 hit the region’s economy hard, particularly the textile
industry that was concentrated around Mülhausen near the Swiss border. German trade policies contributed little to creating an alternative outlet. Attempts
to send more products to southern Germany encountered opposition from
vested interests there. In 1871, Bismarck had temporarily granted AlsaceLorraine special tariff protection; but when this came to an end, local industries
had to face the stiffer competition from across the Rhine. The wine-growers
of Alsace also had a hard time. For a while the local tobacco industry harbored high hopes that Bismarck would succeed in securing a monopoly position for them. When the Reichstag rejected this project in June 1882, this
branch also found itself struggling. Only the iron and steel industry of Lorraine posted a tangible rise in production. Between 1898 and 1909 it increased
its output from 374,000 tons to 1.2 million tons. Nevertheless, the overall
conclusion must be that the rest of German industry and its interest groups
did little to integrate Alsace-Lorraine, however keen the region’s businessmen were on this after the virtual loss of the French market. There were other
109

Society

factors in the early years after 1871 that might have facilitated the integration
of the Reichsland. Resistance against the annexation had been decisively weakened by the westward migration of some 300,000 people. Among them were
many who identified very strongly with France and French culture; thus, practically one-fifth of the region’s most anti-German population disappeared.
They were replaced by some 176,000 men and women who, as so-called Altdeutsche, settled primarily in Alsace and hence contributed to creating a basic
mood that was pro-German.
The case of Alsace-Lorraine also provides a good example that clearsighted policies by the administration that aimed at gradual change and reform were capable of winning the support of the indigenous population. The
measures taken with regard to school and the French language offer a case in
point. Given Berlin’s irreconcilable differences with the French “archenemy,” as well as the prevalence of a basic intolerance toward ethnic minorities,
it might have been expected that Alsace-Lorraine would also be subjected to
a dogmatic language policy geared to the region’s total “Germanization.”
German, it is true, became the bureaucracy’s official language in 1872, and a
year later the same rule applied to the school system. There were also the effects of Kulturkampf legislation on Catholic Alsace-Lorraine. But the implementation of these laws after 1874 made but slow progress, and French
explicitly remained the second language. In fact, the number of communities
in which school lessons continued to be held in French rose during the seven
years after 1875 from 385 to 435. As late as 1911, some 16 percent of primary schools had no choice but to use the French language with their firstgraders, because teachers would not have had the skills to teach their charges
in German. The newly founded University of Strasbourg did adopt the German academic system, but it had almost three times as many non-Germans
as the universities in the rest of the country.
That slow change and procrastination on the language front were seen as
the best way forward may be gauged from the way the issue was handled in
the Landesausschuss, the regional representative assembly. First, it took until
1881 before German became the official language in this quasi-parliamentary
body of notables. But even thereafter deputies who claimed to have insufficient German were allowed to read their speeches from a prepared manuscript in French. French could be used freely in committees. In comparison
with other parts of the Reich, the introduction of German as the language of
the courts was also delayed by a dozen years. When the language paragraph
in the 1908 Reich Association Law reached the statute book, the administration of the Reichsland issued a decree that generally permitted the “co-use”
of the French language in public meetings. In short, the regional bureaucracy
implemented the language stipulations quite differently from what the Poles
had to cope with. No doubt this approach was more conducive to an integra110

Minorities and Majorities

tion of the local population into the Reich than the one adopted in the eastern provinces. Apparently the German administration calculated that time was
on their side. Over one or two generations, they believed, demographic and
economic changes would take care of the problem.
Meanwhile the desire of the people of Alsace-Lorraine to adapt also developed in positive ways. Undoubtedly, they wished to preserve their regional
cultural identity; but even those who had French roots increasingly saw their
future as lying with the Kaiserreich. Thus, culturally speaking, there emerged
a mix of indigenous elements and others that came from across the Rhine.
What ultimately disrupted this trend, however, was a huge stumbling block
that increasingly appeared in the way of integration: the peculiar constitutional status of the Reichsland within the German Empire. Between 1871 and
1874, the region had de facto been under a government in which the Kaiser,
with the approval of the Federal Council, held both the executive and legislative powers. Only from 1874 did the centralism of Berlin become modified
when the above-mentioned Landesausschuss was created. From 1877 onwards, this assembly was given the right to participate in the legislative process. Thenceforth the people and leaders of Alsace-Lorraine pursued the idea
of an extension of their rights of self-government. At the end of this process,
the region would be recognized as a federal state, thus gaining equal status
with the Reich’s other federal states.
Yet, time and again the pressure for constitutional reform encountered two
obstacles. The most serious stumbling block was that the army never stopped
viewing the region as a military bastion and glacis vis-à-vis the French “archenemy” to the west. In the view of the powerful officer corps, their strategic
and security concerns demanded the continuation of Alsace-Lorraine’s special constitutional status, which guaranteed the ultimate primacy of military
interests. Second, serious problems arose over what kind of suffrage would
apply, should the region ever become an equal federal state. All other federal
states had restrictive electoral systems, and introducing a similar system to
Alsace-Lorraine became a precondition of their supporting the region’s admission as a full member of the Federal Council. The citizens of the Reichsland, by contrast, had enjoyed France’s universal suffrage before 1871 and
now expected to regain it from the Germans. This is where the other federal
states sensed danger. Introducing universal suffrage in Alsace-Lorraine would
have greatly increased the pressure to liberalize their systems, an action for
which many of their own citizens, the Social Democrats in particular, were
clamoring.
This impasse, as well as others, explains why the constitutional reform of
1911 went to the brink of the region’s recognition as a federal state, but ultimately denied it full equality. To be sure, the reform opened up the prospect
of future further changes. But the population’s disappointment with what had
111

Society

been achieved until that year was profound. Soon thereafter they were hit by
the Zabern Affair,66 which made it clear to them that, all advances notwithstanding, in the final analysis Berlin and the army determined their political
life. As in the case of other minorities, this experience was grist to the mills
of those who had always been skeptical of the chances for a synthesis between Alsace-Lorraine and the rest of Germany.
The Danish minority found itself in the Reich as a consequence of Denmark’s defeat in 1864 and the territorial gains made by Prussia at the time.
Secret negotiations in Vienna in 1879 then removed a clause in the Treaty of
Prague that would have allowed Danes to reunite with Denmark after a successful plebiscite. But even before then, Prussia had begun to “Germanize”
the Danish minority in the north by subjecting it to the same school and language policies that so thoroughly alienated the Poles. Following criticism by
Berlin of the slow progress that allegedly had been made until 1877, German
was to be used in schools in every subject with the exception of religious
studies. Repeated petitions to preserve the Danish language submitted during
the 1880s were turned down by the Prussian Ministry for Cultural Affairs.
The failure of these policies is indicated by the large number of Danes who
refused to accept German citizenship. By 1900, relations had grown so bad
that the German authorities began to deport those Danes whom they deemed
openly anti-German. Finally, the election results also demonstrate that up to
1914 the Danish minority remained alienated from the rest of the Reich’s population. The Germans were reluctant to see them integrated, and few Danes
sought anything less than the preservation of their national identity.
As we have seen, many problems arose with the country’s minorities,
whether they lived on the Reich’s periphery or right in the midst of the majority population. It is instructive to analyze these problems. They tell us much
about the basic character of official policy and about the development of German society, its level of tolerance, and its capacity and willingness to cope
with cultural difference. It cannot be said that the minorities were in principle not amenable to sociocultural assimilation. But they wanted synthesis
and resisted the idea of total “Germanization.” It would also be wrong to assume that the majority made no attempts to integrate minorities on any other
basis than illiberal domination. But the advocates of force repeatedly pushed
aside other approaches to integration. Thus a situation arose before 1914 that
many contemporaries viewed with increasing despair. On the one hand, the
“Germanizers” could conceive of only two solutions for the country’s minorities: absorption or ostracism. The ratification of the Reich Citizenship
Law of 23 July 1913 enshrined this concept when it established the racist
blood-tie principle (ius sanguinis) as the qualification for German citizenship, as opposed to the ius soli principle practiced in Western European countries, in which citizenship was acquired by anyone born on the national soil.
112

Basic Patterns of Social Inequality

The Citizenship Law provided grist for the mills of racists who viewed Jews,
Poles, and other minorities as inferior “alien bodies”; even before 1914, a
few radical voices could be heard calling for the excision of these minorities
from the nation.
This meant that, with the passage of time, the country’s minorities were
virtually pushed back into a narrow conception of their ethnicity. In these circumstances, the minority groups’ moderate spokesmen found it harder to
convince their followers that Germany was a society that tolerated the kind
of cultural synthesis and pluralism for which they strived. They had sympathizers on the German side who advocated the integration of minorities while
allowing them to preserve their cultural traditions and to practice them both
in their homes and associations. But these voices, too, found it increasingly
difficult to make themselves heard once their opponents on the Right began
to drown them out with their noisy xenophobic propaganda in the hothouse
atmosphere of polarized politics in pre-1914 Germany.

9. Basic Patterns of Social Inequality and Their Milieus
If the findings of this chapter on the development of German society between
1871 and 1914 can be summarized, it is clear that this society not only was
more colorful than earlier studies have suggested, but also that it found itself
in restless commotion. This commotion was connected with the large-scale
processes of industrialization and urbanization, of explosive demographic
change and secularization. And yet it was not complete chaos and anarchy. It
is possible to discern various lines that separated or unified those 65 million
people who lived in Germany in 1911. There were structures within which it
made a difference as to whether a person was male or female, young or elderly, Jewish or Protestant, banker or maid, Bavarian or Berliner.
The question that must now be asked is whether we can recognize within
this network a basic pattern that would allow us to arrive at more clear-cut answers regarding the character of German society in this period. This question
has often been hotly debated with reference to the argument, first put forward in
the nineteenth century, that social classes constitute the framework of capitalistindustrial societies. In the final analysis, so the argument continues, individuals
are indeed divided or bracketed together by their class affiliation.
We saw at the beginning of this book that the social situation of an individual was strongly defined by his or her position in the marketplace. It made
a big difference whether a person possessed cash savings, landed property, or
factories, or whether he/she earned a living exclusively through employment,
with the size of remuneration in turn influenced by qualifications and skills.
Max Weber has expanded the concept of social class that Karl Marx had
cast primarily in economic terms. He introduced the notion of social status,
113

Society

which led him beyond the economy into the realm of divergent lifestyles and
cultural attitudes. Beyond the question of material goods, he focused on the
“inner existential life” of men and women. German historians have taken up
these ideas and complemented the quantitative material on income, life expectancy, or social mobility with work on leisure pursuits, gender relations,
religious practice, or attitudes toward the environment. In this context doubts
have been raised that it is possible to explain the basic structure and evolution of German society before 1914 in terms of class, even if class integrates
tangible surviving elements of an earlier society made up of estates.
One of these challenges came from generational research. Its protagonists
started from the hypothesis that “the historical experiences that unite the
members of a particular age-group are more important than any social differences.”67 In other words, the real conflicts within society occur not between
classes but between generations. At the end of his careful analysis of the
“Generation of 1914,” Robert Wohl ultimately inclined more toward rejecting this position and, although some recent work on veteran’s organizations
has again emphasized the generational theme, there is no plausible reason not
to follow him.
Thus, if the generational divide is not crucial, what about gender as a category of differentiation? Is this the basic dividing line in modern European
societies? During the past thirty years, historians of women’s studies have
conducted a lively debate on this question, and some would indeed see gender as the most fundamental divide. There is little dispute today that a female
factory worker and a bourgeois woman shared certain experiences and situations within a society that was patriarchically organized. There is also
agreement that class and gender are inseparable and complementary in defining a person within a particular class and that the languages of class are gendered. The problem arises when we look at the system of social stratification
and structured inequality overall and find that a decision on which of the two
relationships has priority can no longer be evaded. At this point it would appear more decisive for the material and psychic situation of those two women
that one belonged to the working class and the other to the bourgeoisie.
As this debate unfolded, Thomas Nipperdey and others began to revive the
older notion that religious affiliation constituted a basic fissure in Imperial
German society. In this context Helmut Smith has advanced the hypothesis
that religious groups have at times influenced daily life more profoundly than
class inequalities. Wilfried Spohn went even further and postulated that “the
identities of members of the working class were constructed along lines that
were essentially based on denomination.”68 This position, too, has remained
controversial, and Nipperdey has been criticized for having given too high a
priority to religion and to the denominational factor.69 If the behavior of voters of the Catholic Center Party, which will be dealt with below, is any guide,
114

Basic Patterns of Social Inequality

it must be concluded that, certain regional “lags” notwithstanding, class, at
least in the long run, proved more important in the behavior of Catholic industrial workers than the conflict between the two major denominations.
One finds a similar outcome of a debate that stressed the significance of
regions in the structuring of German society. Research on the Ruhr area in
particular postulated that regional culture was very powerful in shaping the
structures of Imperial Germany at large. This culture was characterized by the
fact that men and women living in a region had common bonds on the level of
how they interpreted the world around them. They saw these bonds as “natural” and as a way of setting themselves apart from the inhabitants of other
regions. W. Brepohl has even gone so far as to argue that “the people of the
Ruhr area regard themselves as ‘us’, because they feel the same, judge in similar categories, and believe that, a lack of structures and a blurring of borderlines notwithstanding, there exists a spatially identifiable sense of togetherness.”
Celia Applegate’s work on regions points in a similar direction.70
There can be little doubt that space and geography play important roles in
shaping regional units. They mold human behavior and forms of expression,
including language. This was true of the Ruhr region as much as it was of
Upper Bavaria, Dithmarschen in southwestern Schleswig-Holstein, or in the
Magdeburg basin. Yet however striking regional differences—often articulated in local Heimat movements—may have been in a Germany that was, after
all, a federation of states, in the long-term class lines came more powerfully
into play. Language provides a good yardstick here. For an outsider the Baden
or Saxon dialect may have lacked class specificity. However, for the natives
of those regions it did exist. Thus, Hamburgians could instantly recognize,
also from the style of speech, from intonation and gesticulation, whether a
person had grown up in the working-class quarters of Barmbeck or in grand
bourgeois Pöseldorf. Karl Rohe has defined the culture of the Ruhr region as
“essentially a culture of the ‘little people.’”71 In this sense we are indeed dealing with a class culture of those workers who, after arriving from outside the
region, became the backbone of Ruhr industrial society.
Drawing the balance sheet from many studies on the social history of Imperial Germany leads us to the conclusion that, in spite of continuing differentiations by gender, generation, denomination, and region, its society evolved
more and more into a class society. This is not meant to imply a drastic downgrading of the significance of the other dividing lines. On the contrary, our
detailed treatment of gender in the Kaiserreich was designed to highlight its
importance for understanding the development of German society and how it
was gendered. The same point applies to the question of minorities, of generations, and of regional differentiations. Still, it was in the area of class that,
exacerbated by rapid industrialization and urbanization, the sharpest social lines
were drawn, bunching or dividing men and women, young and old. Urban115

Society

industrial society opened up opportunities for upward mobility, but rarely did
the movement, whether intergenerational or connubial, go beyond the slowly
consolidating social blocs. This is where the strongest homogenizations and
delineations occurred; this is where milieus emerged that were distinctly different from each other. These trends also weakened older statist elements that
had characterized social inequalities in preindustrial societies with their staggered levels of special rights and privileges. True, some of these traditions and
practices that stratified society survived in the provincial parts of the Kaiserreich; but after the turn of the century, if not before, they, too, were being undermined by the principles of formal equality before the law and at the ballot
box.
This is why we return at this chapter’s conclusion, after having examined
living conditions, health, housing, and many other aspects of daily life (and
in Part I also the economic realities) in conjunction with marriage patterns
and lifestyles, to the social milieus in which millions of Germans carved out
their social niches.
At the time of the German Empire’s founding, most men and women were
not employed in industry but in agriculture, and here the landless laborers,
servants, and small-holders constituted the largest bloc. The notion that these
people constituted a class has been called into question because they continued to live within an order in which their services constituted one half of a
mutual relationship that imposed certain welfare obligations on the lords
whose land they worked. Nevertheless, it can be said that with the rise of agrarian capitalism this ancient mutuality gradually became replaced by a capitalist
wage relationship. The result was that these men and women found themselves increasingly in a similar situation regarding not only the economic but
also the social and cultural conditions under which they lived vis-à-vis the
landowners and wealthier peasants who employed them.
This division is most noticeable when we acknowledge that the lords behaved as capitalist entrepreneurs freely disposing over the available labor,
while their servants continued to be contractually bound by the Gesindeordnung, the strict code that regulated their lives and remained in force until
1918. The gradual dissolution of the domestic house community is another
tangible expression of this change. Meals were no longer jointly taken, and
the servants’ food was frequently different, thus sharpening the line that had
long existed in terms of accommodation.
Day laborers, the other large group in this rural category, may have been
slightly better off in that they operated within a “free” contractual relationship and were able to return to their own cottage or tiny rented apartment in
one of the “reaper barracks” at the end of their long workday. Many of them
were able to improve their living standards by growing their own vegetables
and by keeping a battery of hens and other animals. Their wives could take
116

Basic Patterns of Social Inequality

up weaving or other domestic industries, and their children would take lunch
to the fields or mind the animals.
There may still have been some estatist elements in the relationship with
their employer; but day-laborers, too, slowly emerged from the age of deference and resigned acceptance of their fate and became increasingly aware of
the gap that yawned between “them” and “us.” Like the agricultural servants,
especially the young ones among them, they resolved the sense of alienation
not by organized resistance but by migration. The feeling of distance to the
local independent peasants may have been less strong than it was with respect to estate owners.
At the same time it would be wrong to see the lives of hundreds of thousands of men and women on the large estates and in villages as totally joyless and humdrum. In rural Germany, work and leisure in large measure
continued to be determined by the rhythm of the seasons. The day began at
four or five o’clock in the morning, and there was always work to do, even
on Sundays. Yet, however limited the horizons of rural life, there was time to
relax and socialize at the end of the day and on holidays. To be sure, this life
was still ruled by the strict hierarchies of the village or estate, except where
the next town could be reached on foot, by horse cart, or by train. Fairs and
other events permitted the younger generation to extend their network of social contacts. They saw different dress fashions, dances, and vaudeville. The
lucky ones among them might even see a silent movie in the last years before
1914. They would bring back illustrated journals and other reading matter.
Railway and road construction could push wide open the doors of the village’s secluded world. Construction workers who passed through had lifestyles
that were very different than those of the villagers, which often exacerbated
existing generational and social differences. Some villagers took the strangers as models of a more independent life; for others they were invaders without morals who did not shrink from stealing, from seducing local women,
and from spreading venereal diseases. The daily life in villages close to one
of the booming industrial regions of Saxony, the Rhineland, or in the southwest was even more profoundly affected. Fresh opportunities presented themselves to find better paying jobs with specified hours of work. Some commuted
back and forth, bringing the town with them to their villages. Their experiences influenced those who had stayed behind. And if local agrarian notables
had been complaining about their increasingly “impertinent” servants before,
they had only seen the beginning of it. Gradually tensions became politicized,
and loud accusations could be heard in the local public house against the “exploitative masters and gentlemen” and the lack of self-determination.
If the move to the city was permanent, newcomers did not take long to develop a consciousness of the situation in which workers found themselves in
the factories: ten- to twelve-hour workdays, six days a week, overcrowded
117

Society

housing conditions, and poor healthcare.72 Yet, it would be misleading simply to view life in the working-class quarters as a poverty culture in which
long hours of sleep on Sundays were the only recreation. However much factory workers lived under the threat of unemployment, inadequate nutrition,
illness, and constant moves, this group of men and women, married or unmarried, developed its own sense of solidarity and was not a “sullen mass”
of people. There was variety in the working-class suburbs, enlivened by customs and traditions that had been brought there from the former homeland.
Accordingly, not only material conditions differed substantially from
those of the local bourgeoisie, but also lifestyles. Language and dress became
hallmarks of social classes. It was a sign of social difference whether a person wore a hat, a cloth cap, or a headscarf, a frock coat, an overall, or silk
stockings; whether the preferred sport was soccer or tennis; whether on Sunday one was driven by coach or car to a gourmet restaurant or whether one
took to the streetcar to one’s allotment or to a garden café on the town’s edge
where “families were able to make their own coffee.” These are just a few examples of how clearly delineated spaces emerged outside the workplace that,
on closer inspection, were in effect attitudes of different class milieus that
created a sense of belonging to a larger societal “camp.”
All these examples cannot be understood unless the dimension of change
over time is factored in. Class milieus that were barely discernible in the 1870s
had taken more concrete shape twenty or thirty years later. Although material conditions of the industrial working class had generally improved by then,
most of its members did not move beyond the ghettoes of the “rental barracks” and workers’ colonies described earlier in this chapter. Therefore, this
was the environment in which they developed their lifestyles, patterns of social interaction, solidarities, and value systems, partly taken from the rural
culture they had left behind, partly transforming the latter.
The world of the bourgeoisie was on the whole clearly differentiated from
this universe. This world, too, underwent change, most tangibly reflected in
the rise of the white-collar employee and the civil servant, who became a
“turntable” of social mobility within the large middle class.73 The small-town
milieu in which artisans and shopkeepers had set the tone became overshadowed by the city. Wherever a provincial milieu survived, it remained largely
untouched by the larger shifts at the national level. Many craftsmen continued to have their own houses with workshops attached and to live as solid
burghers amidst heavy oak furniture and a landscape in oil on the wall over
the settee.
Much of small-town life remained tradition-bound, whether with regard to
the education of children or to social life. On the other hand, the lower middle class, whether provincial or urban, was not as restricted to its confines as
the industrial working class, from which one kept one’s distance. People did
118

Basic Patterns of Social Inequality

move up, suddenly finding themselves in a milieu that was completely
strange. The middling and upper middle class were not only more secure materially and better networked, but also had a more active cultural life. Their
social routine displayed self-confidence. Nevertheless, none of the fine and
manifold gradations within the middle class prevented them from seeing
themselves (and being seen by others) as a social bloc that delineated itself
from the urban working class, as it did, no less strictly, from the nobility.
The important point concerning this latter relationship is that it was not
just the aristocracy that shut the bourgeoisie out “from above.” The middle
class deliberately and proudly set itself apart from the upper class. Only in
some regions, such as Silesia, was there a symbiosis between the two groups
that resulted in the creation of a new plutocracy. To have a few titled guests
at a dinner party did not reflect in most cases an inferiority complex and a
desire to become “feudalized,” but tended to be a display of bourgeois pride.
Nor should business interests be ignored. The “splendid receptions” that Wilhelm and Elly von Siemens held in Berlin, or the “court” with which the
Krupps surrounded themselves at Villa Hügel in Essen, must be seen as selfrepresentations of class, buttressed, as they were, by an elaborate etiquette.
Meanwhile, although there existed in the capitals of the German Empire
an aristocratic leisure class, the main bastions of the ancient upper class continued to be situated in the remoter parts of the country. The structural crisis
of agriculture forced many of them to live more frugally. But there was also
the weight of tradition with its social “obligations” and expectations that defined the culture of large-scale estates. This was not as hectic a life as in business or industry. Going on a hunt often constituted the only “moving and
invigorating element” in an otherwise uniform daily routine.74 Upper middleclass businessmen who spent part of their newly acquired wealth to buy
stately homes and landed property did not find it easy to make inroads into
the rural aristocracy and to be accepted as social equals. Ultimately, the aristocracy remained largely among themselves.
Toward 1914 there occurred at most an ideological rapprochement, also
with the wealthier peasantry. The more the propertied strata in the countryside set themselves apart from the rest of rural society, the stronger became
their desire to stand together politically. Similarly, the bourgeoisie and the
industrial working class, economically and socially already more sharply delineated among themselves and vis-à-vis the upper class, began to form political and ideological blocs whose profile and evolution will be discussed in
a later chapter.75 Of course, we shall have to bear in mind the existence of
“grey zones” between the various class milieus that slowly took shape in the
years before 1914. Future research will reveal further differentiations of historical reality. For the moment, though, our analysis leads to the conclusion
that German society came to be structured progressively along class lines.
119

Society

Confessional, regional, and gender divisions remained important, but did not
constitute the decisive societal feature.
This conclusion, it is hoped, will become even more plausible once the
findings of this chapter are put together with the polarizing tendencies in the
political realm, to be discussed in Part IV. To be sure, along with polarization
there was also the pluralization of society. But before we deal with politics,
we must turn to the development of German culture in this period.

120

Part III: Culture

10. High Culture and Popular Culture
A. Basic Issues
The notion of culture underlying this book is a broad one, as social historians whose interest in cultural topics has been stimulated by anthropology
tend to use it nowadays. The focus is not just on individual artistic and intellectual creativity, but on customs and rituals, attitudes and experiences of entire groups, classes, and even nations. This kind of cultural history aims to
retrieve the overall milieu that influences the actions and reactions of men
and women. It includes the study of conflicts between classes, regions, ethnic
groups, and the sexes over what traditions, actions, and cultural goods shall
be acceptable and freely usable. And it raises the problem of resistance to
dominant cultural norms and practices. Culture, in other words, is never cast
into a tight and generally accepted mold, but is recognized as something that
is constantly negotiated and renegotiated between groups and individuals,
even in those cases where the discrepancies of power and influence between
the parties are considerable.
Of course, this broader framework subsumes aspects of culture that conform more closely to older themes of cultural history, which will be treated
first: the arts, music, architecture, literature, the humanities, and the sciences.
The main interest here is in the analysis of artistic and scholarly creation and
the organizational frameworks within which these activities take place. In
other words, we will deal with what is normally called “high culture,” in contrast to “popular culture.” However, no sharp line is drawn in this chapter between the two spheres, since the divisions are often blurred and overlapping.
Thus, it is well-known that nineteenth-century composers were often inspired by folk tunes. Similarly, writers found the material for their novels by
“keeping their ear close to the tales of the people.” Nor do I wish to promote
a notion of culture that is merely interested in “great works” and disdainfully
excludes the sphere of the “trivial.” Indeed, this latter sphere—even if it is regarded as “trashy”—may tell us a great deal about a society and its development in a particular age. This is true of both working-class culture and the

Culture

emergent “consumer culture” of the late nineteenth century. It also applies to
religious practices and forms of popular piety. These practices often had roots
that dated back many centuries and survived in the rural and provincial milieus
examined in Part II, in particular in the Catholic and Jewish populations.
One final general point remains to be made with respect to the thrust of this
chapter: the retrospective observer usually does not find it difficult to recognize the gradual evolution of artistic styles or of scientific theories and methods. But in tracing such developments we should not forget that time and again
it was a dominant “orthodox” school or approach that interacted with a “modern” and more radical countermovement that was slowly born in this process.
Thus, many cultural debates took the form of a dialectical conflict, and if the
year 1890 is seen by many today as an epochal divide, the roots of modernity and modernism go back much farther. What often exacerbated these conflicts was that they broke out between an older and a younger generation of
artists or scholars. And in many cases it was not so much the radicalism of
the young, but the stubbornness of the established artists and the ruthless
ways in which they used their prestige, power, and influence that made the
controversies so acrimonious.
As to the arts, this opposition, having gone through various preliminary
tussles, could be made out on a broad front by the early 1890s. This was the
turning point of the fin de siècle, of a revolution that “transformed culture in
all its branches. It utterly changed painting, sculpture, and music; the dance,
the novel, and the drama; architecture, poetry, and thought. And its ventures
into unknown territory percolated from the rarified regions of high culture to
general ways of thinking, feeling, and seeing. A very troop of masters compelled Western civilization to alter its angle of vision, and to adopt a new aesthetic sensibility, new philosophical style, a new mode of understanding
social life and human nature.”1
B. The Arts in the Bismarckian Period
If we consider the fine arts against the background of these broader developments during the first two decades after the founding of the German Empire,
what is particularly striking among its practitioners is their conservatism and
suspicion of all stylistic innovation. The aesthetic principles that painting
adhered to in this period had been firmly established for a long time. Above
all, the artist’s supposed task was to depict what was good, true, and great
in humanity. This concept of art engendered a peculiar mix of exactitude
and romanticization that can be found in most works. The political events of
the 1860s provided plenty of inspiration for the production of historical patriotic scenes. Thus, many battles of the Wars of Unification, as well as the
political and social highlights of the period, were portrayed in oil on huge
canvases.
122

High Culture and Popular Culture

Georg Bleibtreu, Carl Becker, Christian Sell, and Anton Werner were
among the best-known artists. Ferdinand Keller painted the frequently reproduced “Apotheosis of William I.” Among the painters of historical subjects
and portraits of the high and mighty were many whose names were soon forgotten. Apart from those already mentioned, Karl Friedrich Lessing, Karl
von Piloty, and Franz von Lenbach were among the successful ones. No
doubt they were all technically accomplished and even important masters
who were concerned with precision and detail. Later on they might cautiously experiment with impressionist elements; but, with the exception of
Adolf Menzel, these artists were shaped by conformism and aesthetic orthodoxy, no matter whether they worked in Prussia or Bavaria.2
This was especially true of portrait painters who enjoyed great popularity
after 1871. A growing number of bourgeois, having come into wealth, had
themselves or their families painted. Portrait sessions were no longer just a
pastime of the nobility and the heads of ruling families, even if William II
loved to sit for his pictures in all sorts of fantastic costumes that said much
about the Kaiser’s state of mind and worldview. Of course, such works were
almost invariably designed to satisfy the patron’s desire to recognize himself
on the canvas, ideally somewhat beautified. There was also a demand for historical paintings and landscapes, as museums expanded and were anxious to
fill their galleries with well-known names. The extension or new construction
of ministerial buildings, schools, assembly halls, and opera houses helped to
create a considerable market for art. Once ministers and city fathers had their
portraits put up in halls and chambers, industrialists and bankers did not want
to be left behind. There was always a special place in the lobby of the headquarters building for a bust of the firm’s founder, with the current owner in
oil looking benignly down from the wall. For those who could not afford an
original, cheap reproductions became available to be hung, in expensivelooking gold frames, above the settee in the living room or dining room: imposing Alpine landscapes or storm-whipped tall ships in the North Sea were
particularly popular.
Sculptors and architects similarly found themselves in harmony with their
bourgeois and noble patrons when it came to commissioned work. They also
moved into a new field of activity. There were first of all those innumerable
monuments that commemorated the victory of 1870 and other historical
events. The intent of patriotic edification and indoctrination was highlighted
at both the pompous opening ceremony and the annual festivities such as
Sedan Day. Until the turn of the century some 300 of these monuments were
put up in Prussia alone, excluding the war memorials that many communities
and cities erected for their fallen soldiers. Among the larger historic monuments were the Hermannsdenkmal near Bielefeld, commemorating the Battle
of the Teutoburg Forest against the Romans (built in 1875), and the Nieder123

Culture

walddenkmal near Rüdesheim on the Rhine (built in 1883). The Kyffhäuderdenkmal, erected in memory of the medieval German Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and the Deutsches Eck at the confluence of the Rhine and Moselle
in Coblenz followed in 1897.
The last major monument erected before World War I was the Völkerschlachtdenkmal near Leipzig, a granite-clad construction, standing 91 meters
tall, built in 1913 to celebrate the defeat of Napoleon there a century earlier.
Next to Germania, Bismarck became a frequent object of veneration in stone,
whether in the shape of the old man himself, sternly gazing across Hamburg’s port in St. Pauli, or of the so-called Bismarck Towers, like those sitting atop the Deister Mountain near Hanover, or the monstrosity seen along
the road between Erfurt and Weimar in Thuringia.
In 1873, the Siegessäule, or Victory Column, was erected in Berlin. Until
the end of 1901 no fewer than thirty-two imposing statues came to line Siegesallee, which led to the column. The statues represented prominent figures in
the history of Brandenburg-Prussia, each flanked by two busts of somewhat
lesser-known men. Women were not honored in this way. All these pieces of
art tell us a great deal about the notions of art and culture of the patrons, the
artists, and the admiring passersby. They reflect a longing for stability and
solidity. The garden became the “central image of the good life,” in which architects tried to blend culture and nature.3
Beyond national monuments, it was the Heimat movement that extolled
the rootedness of its members in the local. Frequently linked to the idea of
preservation of the natural environment and in many cases also directed
against industrialization and urbanization, Heimat became an important slogan for mobilizing conservative burghers against the advance of modernity.
Residential architecture, too, aimed to show, apart from displaying pomp,
pride, and elegance, how the Reich was consolidating. The artists turned to
what was familiar—classicism or the baroque. The façades of townhouses
and apartment blocs were designed to impress. Lavish and finely chiseled
decorations were more important than simple functionality. The stairwells
were generously laid out in marble with large mirrors along the walls. The
taste of the bourgeois inhabitants for solid-oak furniture and heavy draperies
has already been mentioned. In short, the well-to-do middle class tried to represent itself not only in portraits but also in the public and private buildings
it commissioned in competition with the nobility, which had hitherto set
artistic standards.4 The conservative artistic establishment drew its strength
from this patronage.
Meanwhile, royal interest in promoting the arts did not diminish. Wilhelm
I preferred military scenes, insisting that all details of military dress be
meticulously copied, but he also kept himself informed about general developments in the field. Outside Prussia, the Bavarian kings posed as patrons
124

High Culture and Popular Culture

with a persistent preference for the traditional and its exaggerations. Ludwig
II constructed Neuschwanstein like a castle straight out of a fairytale. His
Herrenchiemsee property looked like a mini-Versailles. In 1874 the neo-Gothic
town hall was completed in Munich, the artistic and cultural center of the
south. Museums, galleries, and churches were established. Friedrich III, the
son of Wilhelm I and in 1888 Kaiser for one hundred days, had personal contact with painters like Werner, Menzel, Piloty, and Bleibtreu. He appointed
himself guardian of the Prussian museums and tried to influence their acquisition policies. The expansion of the Museumsinsel, near the Berliner Schloss
in the city’s center, was particularly dear to his heart.
Frederick’s son, William II, probably had the most pronounced views on
questions concerning the arts. He thought the statues along Siegesallee were
more beautiful than those of the Renaissance. Hermann Knackfuss, Max
Koner, and Hermann Prell were his favorite painters. He also loved the works
of the maritime painter Willy Stoewer, especially those showing the monarch
on the bridge of one of his battleships. In architecture, the Kaiser developed
a passion for the Romantic period and for the neo-baroque. Above all, in his
view, art had a pedagogical function. As he put it during the unveiling of
Siegesallee statues, art should contribute to the instilling of ideals in the laboring classes. All Germans, he added, had the task of upholding these ideals.
They would inspire the population’s lower strata and help them to liberate
themselves from the restrictions of mundane thoughts and attitudes.5 It was,
to be sure, rather a crude pedagogy designed to foster a monarchist German
identity, and we may well wonder how, and how far, his exhortations contributed to a nationalization of the “masses” and the industrial working class
in particular.
That art was to elevate the people and serve as a conservative stabilization
of society was a view that the fine arts establishment shared with Wilhelm II.
Already in Bismarck’s time, they had conquered the important institutions
through which they began to promote their ideas. Werner played a key role
here. As a young artist he had caught the eye of those in power with his large
paintings of historic scenes, like his depiction of the proclamation of the Reich
at Versailles in 1871 or of the 1878 Berlin Congress. He was an accomplished
and careful painter, albeit without much depth. His organizational talents
were all the more remarkable. In 1875, when he was only 32 years old, he became director of the powerful Berlin Academy of the Arts. He also assumed
an important role in the German Arts Association and the Association of
Berlin Artists, whose chairman he became in 1877. Founded in 1841, the Association of Berlin Artists had been granted a royal charter in 1867 and by
the late 1880s had some 600 members.
Many of these painters possessed no more than average talent and became
Werner’s foot soldiers in his fight against stylistic innovation. Partly financed
125

Culture

by the government, the association staged annual exhibitions, and since everybody wanted to show their work, the pushing and shoving around the chairman
and selection committee were invariably great. With Werner hardly changing
his own style, he also saw to it that younger artists who were more prepared
to experiment and had begun to develop different aesthetic ideas would not
get their work exhibited. This regime remained in power for many years, supported by the cultural bureaucracy, the high aristocracy, spearheaded by the
Hohenzollerns, and the conservatism of the general public. However, around
1890, time was ripe for revolts and secessions.
Literature underwent a development similar to that of the visual arts, except that the book depended less on the support of academies and artists’ associations. Accordingly, nonconformists among the community of writers had
a better chance of achieving a breakthrough, and much earlier in their careers. Hence changes came less abruptly here than in painting. One reflection
of this is that a number of women gained recognition and popularity in an
artistic world that was otherwise dominated by men. Among them were Marie
von Ebner-Eschenbach, Clara Viebig, Gabriele Reuter, Helene Böhlau, Bertha
von Suttner, Hedwig Courts-Mahler, and Eva Marlitt. At the same time it
must be remembered that the narrative style that dominated after the German
Empire’s founding had first emerged in the middle of the nineteenth century
from a critique of the humanist bildungsroman developed by the previous
generation. As early as 1853, Theodor Fontane had argued in an essay that literature must mirror real life. But his appeal was rarely heeded in subsequent
decades. Instead books by Joseph von Scheffel or Felix Dahn’s The Struggle
for Rome were popular.
Meanwhile, real life in an age of rapid industrialization and urbanization
looked different and more depressing than what was portrayed in historical
novels and traditional, patriotically inspired short-stories. The realist novel
began with the assumption that there were clear limits to human action and
that moral ordering principles should be viewed with skepticism. This position
may have contributed to making change easier later on. At the time, however,
it tempted writers to worship the notion of power, if not of the state at least
of history, where good would win out against evil. An alternative position
that was no less conservative was to highlight the contradictions of human
existence and to end up in a noncommittal sentimentality.
Partly for this reason, novels and short stories with a regional flavor gained
great popularity—a development that can be seen in the context of a growing Heimatkunst, or regional art, movement. Theodor Storm became one of
the towering figures of regional literature in gale-torn northwestern Germany.
Hermann Sudermann took up East Prussian, and Paul Keller Silesian themes.
Hermann Löns wrote about the Lüneburg Heath south of Hamburg, while Dietrich Speckmann dealt with Rhenish motifs. Like Ludwig Thoma, Ludwig
126

High Culture and Popular Culture

Ganghofer wrote highly successful novels set against the background of the
untamed landscape of the Alps.
Gustav Freytag, Friedrich Spielhagen, and the Swiss writers Gottfried
Keller and Conrad Ferdinand Meyer are known to this day, but none of them
left the confines of the traditional novel and short-story construction. They
displayed a quietistic pleasure in collecting what had been inherited and was
small-scale. Paul Heyse, on the other hand, is largely forgotten today, although he wrote some 150 novels and received the 1910 Nobel Prize for Literature. He and his bourgeoisified classicism gained a similar position among
writers of the cultural metropolis of Munich as Werner or Adolf von Menzel
occupied among painters in Berlin. Thus, the literature of the Bismarckian
era was neither subjectively nor politically radical. It was a literature that
could be found on the coffee tables of the well-to-do middle and upper classes.
Among its readers were the young ladies of the nobility and the upper bourgeoisie, who seized upon the ever-expanding opportunities to become better
educated.6
Similarly, the plays appearing on many court and town theater stages were
intended to please and elate. Suburban stages specialized in farces, comedies,
and sentimental pieces mostly for the lower middle classes. Outside Berlin,
which became the theater metropolis of Imperial Germany, Saxe-Meiningen
under Duke Georg II developed a type of theater characterized by its “veneration for the text, the inquiry into the historical-geographic ambiance, verbal
precision, the use of prominent actors even in smaller roles, intensive rehearsals, training of supernumeraries, and careful selection of costumes and
sets.”7 This “style-shaping model stage” performed primarily the works of
Friedrich Schiller and William Shakespeare, and it is telling of the general
development of culture and society that the latter—once shown with frequent
noisy interruptions before lower-class audiences—had meanwhile been integrated into the culture of the upper classes. Of course, these groups would
sternly frown upon audience participation. The classical repertoire was concerned with beauty and the victory of good over evil. Meanwhile other theaters offered, apart from light society plays, historic dramas from antiquity
or the nineteenth century.
Neither effort nor expense was spared when it came to the supposedly
exact reconstruction of expensive historic sets and costumes. Theater thus
became an experience for the audience. But rarely did audience members
leave a performance feeling disturbed by its message. Opera was even better
at staging pompous fairytales that had little connection with real life. Only
popular theater might contain the occasional social criticism and mockingly
take on the rule of the clerics, as in Ludwig Anzengruber’s The Fourth Commandment or The Priest of Kirchfeld. Although the Gewerbeordnung, or industrial code, of 1869 had opened the way for entrepreneurial initiative in the
127

Culture

arts, for many years privately owned stages were no less conventional than
the public ones.
However, in contrast to the visual arts, there were exceptions from the start
to the basically conservative style of writing and theater of the Bismarckian
period. And the works of nonconformists became well known enough to pose
a genuine challenge to prevailing artistic canons. This challenge came less
through a change in form than in content, and next to Wilhelm Raabe and
Max Kretzer, Fontane is of course most closely associated with this shift. As
he grew older, Fontane increasingly returned to his postulate of 1853 that literature must reflect real life. In his later works, the sharper social and selfcriticism produced by this return encouraged a younger generation to abandon
the dominant themes of the day. Indeed, if Fontane’s Irrungen und Wirrungen (1888) or Frau Jenny Treibel (1892) are compared with his contemporaries’ novels, it becomes understandable why conservatives were appalled
by his subtle, indirect attacks on the upper classes and his “objective” descriptions of the lives and survival of ordinary people. Even if he never integrated the predicament of industrial workers in the cities into his genre plays,
the full range of human problems, societal fissures, and gender conflicts is
nevertheless found in them. Eduard von Keyserling was another writer who
portrayed a similar rural world coming apart at the seams.
Similarly, the young Gerhard Hauptmann turned his back on idealism. In
1889, his Before Sunrise—a play about immorality, alcoholism, and avarice—
was recommended to Otto Brahm, the director of the recently founded Freie
Bühne (Free Stage) in Berlin, by no other than Fontane. What fascinated Fontane about Hauptmann and led him to compare his work with Henrik Ibsen’s
naturalist dramas was, to be sure, anathema to what the audience expected to
see (and had until then been accustomed to seeing) on stage. Brahm could afford to put on controversial plays, including Ibsen’s Ghosts, only because
they were performed in front of the members of the association that subsidized the Freie Bühne. Government censors could not ban plays shown to
private audiences, and indeed it was for this reason that leading Berlin intellectuals like Theodor Wolff and Maximilian Harden had founded the theater.
It was as misleading as it was typical that Brahm’s opponents immediately
condemned the Freie Bühne as being a platform for the spreading of Social
Democratic ideas. Performances were disrupted by hecklers who had somehow succeeded in getting tickets. Still, Brahm certainly belonged to the artistic opposition that emerged at this time. As he put it in 1891, “the new literature
is revolutionary, the theater is conservative.… Among all factors, none clings
more pertinaciously to tradition and none is in its entire essence as hostile to
innovation as the stage.”8
Like a number of other private stage directors, Brahm worked hard to
change this. When he put on Hauptmann’s Before Sunrise in 1889, he had a
128

High Culture and Popular Culture

first scandal on his hands, surpassed four years later by the first performance
of the same dramatist’s The Weavers, which dealt with the desperate situation
of Silesian weavers prior to the 1848 revolution. No public stage was able to
show such plays at this time. In 1874 a Reich Press Law had been ratified
that required all periodicals and papers to be submitted to the local police for
scrutiny. The rule of prior notification also applied to theater performances.
If a particular issue or play was deemed to violate existing legal or moral
norms, it would be confiscated. Worse, author, publisher, and producer could
be prosecuted under criminal codes that had been sharpened by the 1878 antisocialist laws. Among the most frequent charges were lèse-majesté, obscenity,
and blasphemy. After the lapse of the antisocialist laws, there was no easing
in the application of these codes in the 1890s. Time and again authors were
hauled through the courts. The young Kaiser intervened repeatedly, first in
1890 when he ordered the Prussian minister of the interior to the palace after
he had lifted a ban on Hermann Sudermann’s Sodom’s End—a play whose
title alone made it suspect enough. But it also became clear in this period that
the advance of the new theater could not be stopped and that Imperial Germany was not an art dictatorship. A verdict by the Prussian Supreme Administrative Court in 1894 declared censorship of Hauptmann’s famous play
illegal, and soon thereafter it was performed in Berlin’s Deutsches Theater.
However, it should be added that Hauptmann never arrived at a clear-cut
definition of his naturalism. On some occasions, as in the case of Florian
Geyer, he took his material from a historic period of disruptive change. In Hanneles Himmelfahrt, by contrast, his naturalism appeared not in the shape of an
open social criticism, but of a psychologizing dream poem. For the historian,
the audience reactions are of particular interest. When Before Sunrise was performed, there were loud protests from the audience, especially against the key
figure of the socialist Loth. We have a diary entry about Hanneles Himmelfahrt by the later Reich Chancellor Clodwig von Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst,
who was not a reactionary in matters of the arts. He wrote in December 1893,
“This evening [we saw] ‘Hannele’. A monstrous, wretched piece of work,
social-democratic-realistic, at the same time full of sickly, sentimental mysticism, nerve-racking, in general abominable. Afterwards we went to Borchard’s to get ourselves back into a human frame of mind with champagne
and caviar.”9
However, as powerfully projected by Hauptmann, Halbe, Arno Holz, and
Johannes Schlaf, naturalism and the social criticism it contained of dehumanization and double standards could no longer be ignored. The shift in literature and theater had occurred. Its first rumblings could be heard earlier than
in the case of the visual arts, and thenceforth there were few barriers against
further artistic revolution; indeed, soon naturalism would be overtaken by
other and newer directions.
129

Culture

The same may be said about music—with an important qualification relating to the work of Richard Wagner. The tonal revolution that he triggered
as early as the 1870s was veiled by the backward-looking worlds that he put
on the stage in his operas. His audiences loved him as a Germano-maniac
mythmaker who perpetuated the canon of classic drama through those final
victories of good over evil. If Wagner’s music alone had been performed in
a darkened concert hall, it is doubtful that he would have found so many
bourgeois and aristocratic admirers. The schizophrenic attitude of Wilhelm II
was probably not untypical of that of many contemporaries. The Kaiser could
be heard raving about the heroic themes of Wagnerian operas; but when it
came to passing judgment on the music, he thought that it made “too much
of a noise.” This was a somewhat simple-minded response to what Wagner
had in fact dared to do, that is, to abandon, albeit not completely, the dogmas
of classic harmony. He combined this exodus with visions of a Gesamtkunstwerk, a goal to which the expressionists also aspired later, as they rebelled
against the growing specialization in the arts and in modern society in
general.
Beyond the tonal revolution of a complete chromaticism, which Wagner
initiated and to which we shall come back in a moment, musical life in the
Bismarckian period remained conservative. As with theaters and museums,
concert halls, too, formed part of the furniture of urban and court culture in
Central Europe. To be sure, music lovers did not go merely to hear the great
composers of earlier ages or to be seen in black tie and evening dress. What
also attracted them were the virtuosi on the program or their favorite conductor. Occasionally, the latter might then even succeed in “smuggling” a modern piece into a traditional program of Haydn, Bach, Mozart, Beethoven, and
Mendelssohn, as, for instance, Johannes Brahms would do when he took the
baton. Indeed, the reception of Brahms’s work is symptomatic of the obstacles encountered by more experimental composers. For however much Beethoven was his model and however audibly his work is characterized by a
dualism of a search for order and sudden bursts of romanticism, Brahms was
long denied recognition as a brilliant composer by critics and audiences.
Thus Louis Ehlert remarked on his Symphony No.1 when it was first performed in 1876 that the composer was “a far-flung, speculative mind, a mixture between a musician of the good old days, who had the sound of harmony
in him and whose cradle cover had a contra-punctual pentagram embroidered
into it, and a universally trained man of the modern age.… What differentiates his music from that of all his contemporaries is that he introduces another world into it, [a world that] gently and movingly knocks [at the door
of] our heart.”10 No doubt his disharmonies from that other world were gentle and subtle, as, for example, at the opening of his Opus 111 quintet. Only
later, the once-polite applause changed into enthusiastic cheering. Hamburg,
130

High Culture and Popular Culture

his birth place, made Brahms an honorary citizen, and he ended up as a
wealthy man whose work was used to counter Wagner enthusiasts.
Significantly, Brahms never saw himself as a radical. Connecting with
Beethoven’s oeuvre, he hoped to advance no more than a bit beyond the great
master, and even in his Symphony No. 1 shrill dissonant sequences are heard
only in the first movement. In this respect, Wagner was a very different person. During the 1848 Revolution he had been on the wanted list of the Saxon
authorities. Thirty years later, he was no longer a political revolutionary. His
work came to display a pessimistic undertone; but his gigantic ego gave him
the self-confidence to see himself as the herald of an artistic revolution. That
his bombastic operas would gain him an enormous reputation no doubt tells
us a great deal about the mentalities and dreams of his audiences. But even
his enthusiasts left the long hours of his performances somewhat exhausted
and dazed, and the revolutionary claims of the work mostly escaped them.
After this, the animated light-heartedness of an Italian opera provided a
wonderful relaxation. It was no less characteristic of the catholic tastes of the
musical world, which proved so durable, that operettas enjoyed great popularity. They depicted the rosier sides of life, and any problems raised in them
would dissolve by the last act into a superficial happy ending. For a long time
operetta lovers in Paris or Vienna may well have outdone their German counterparts; but when Franz Léhar came to Berlin, he met with a more enthusiastic reception there than the one he had found in the Austrian capital.
C. The Rise of Modernism
Although the debates on a revolutionary change and new beginning went back
to the 1880s and earlier, the shift became very clearly discernible after 1890.
In terms of cultural developments, this was both the farewell to the nineteenth century and the entry into the twentieth. Any analysis of this development, which accelerated tremendously toward 1914 and beyond, must bear
in mind that it occurred not merely in Germany but also in France, AustriaHungary, England, and Italy. For this reason, it is quite difficult, even with
the benefit of hindsight, to determine the origins of the initial impulses for
this change. Nor is it easy to discover the mainstream along which the transition proceeded. Many currents emerged that often moved in very different
directions. They might crisscross later, as artists and intellectuals tried to find
answers to what they all perceived as a cultural crisis. The debates that will
be examined below often took place in relatively small circles of artists and
intellectuals, whose ideas were usually ignored or rejected by social and political elites. Large sections of the population remained untouched by the
arguments about modernism. At most the proletarian cultural movement represents an exception insofar as it also posed the question, albeit from different ideological premises, of a “new culture” that would overcome that of the
131

Culture

bourgeois age of the nineteenth century.11 The diagnoses and solutions offered by this latter movement were correspondingly removed from those contemplated by Germany’s artists during the Wilhelmine period.
In the light of the analysis provided below,12 one further point must be mentioned here: many of the artists who participated in the march toward modernity pursued aesthetic and often highly individualistic concerns; but this did
not prevent their constant talk about a European cultural crisis from spilling
over into the political and ideological spheres. There they captivated elements of the middle class who already felt deeply unsettled by the process of
rapid industrialization and urbanization. The belief in the idea of progress
and confidence in the rationality human beings that had permeated much of
the nineteenth century were being lost. Economic and societal developments
appeared to make life more anonymous and more difficult to fathom. The
globalization of politics and economics went hand in hand with the internationalization of high culture. While foreign avant-garde artists settled in Germany, a nationalist cultural philistinism proliferated. The rise of new mass
movements on the ideological Right must therefore also be seen against the
background of the cultural shift of the 1880s and 1890s.13 This is why, next
to the evolution in economy and society, the developments in the culturalintellectual sphere examined below provide the backdrop to the treatment of
the new political movements in Part IV of this book.
If the innovations in the sphere of high culture had any common source,
it lay in the conviction of many artists and intellectuals of the time that the
certainties of the nineteenth century had been destroyed or at least had become questionable. The argument was gaining ground that bourgeois Europe
was sick and that its values were in a state of decay. Friedrich Nietzsche was
among the first to make this point, until his ideas and aphorisms were picked
up by the artistic avant-garde a generation later.14 Many intellectuals were
equally convinced that the seeds of European sickness had been sown long
before and that its visible symptoms had hitherto merely been played down.
To unmask bourgeois hypocrisy, to destroy as an illusion the idea of a world
that constantly improved itself—this was the decisive impulse behind the
cultural debates that now also started in Germany with full vigor. Modern
man—women only figured in rather peculiar ways in the mainly male world
of artists—would have the mask torn from his face; he was to be forced to
show his true physiognomy.
The powerful feelings and perceptions of reality described here could be
viewed as part of a generational phenomenon whose significance has already
been discussed.15 True, there were a number of older artists and intellectuals
among the avant-garde who had been early representatives of the “revolution” before 1890. Others had allowed themselves to be convinced that a new
beginning must be made. But on the whole, it was “the young ones,” as they
132

High Culture and Popular Culture

were called in Vienna, who joined the movement. It must remain an open
question whether these young artists and intellectuals were driven by an
oedipal complex. No doubt their rebellion was one against the “authority of
the paternal culture”;16 for in the meantime a generation of intellectuals had
come of age feeling alienated from traditional values and notions of aesthetics. They believed that they had sharply diagnosed the ills of the age and now
made their insights part of their creative wrestling with the world around
them. Earlier art had been assumed to be the expression of universal values
and order through which it seemed possible to achieve a harmonious balance
between one’s inner self and the outside world. Now artistic creativity was
seen as a violent explosion and a revolutionary acceleration toward a state of
disorder and nihilism. Value systems seemed fragmented and transitory. In
this way, the changed consciousness of intellectuals after 1890 first revolved
around emotion and imagination, the construction of the self and its dissolution, its sexuality, and its ultimate destruction.
Given these tendencies, it was quite logical that the revolt in the fine arts
defined itself as a “secession.” The term alluded to the model of the secessio
plebis by which the people of ancient Rome announced their withdrawal
from the Republic and its mismanagement by the patricians. The only question was how far this rejection should go, and this is where further controversy began. Many intellectuals and artists conceived of nothing less than the
creation of a new world in which human beings would live according to principles different from those of the nineteenth century. Others were less concerned with building an alternative world than establishing a situation of
pluralistic chaos, which they thought was the only true reflection of the human
condition. Culture was meant to mirror life in the full spectrum of its possibilities, good and bad, without cosmetic operations to show only its beauty.
The “disorderly” solution to the crisis can be traced most easily in the development of music. When discussing Wagner and Brahms above, I indicated
that the rules of tonality that had been observed since the Renaissance had
been extended step by step in the direction of dissonance. Nevertheless, composers ultimately returned to the prescribed order of consonance and harmony.
It was Claude Debussy who once stated that “music is not just harmony that
caresses the ear and has a pleasant, narcoticizing effect—something that can
easily be absorbed because so much and, one believes, so much that is different peacefully chimes together.”17 The question was how far this peaceful
kind of musical experience should be overthrown. For example, it is significant that Richard Strauss did not immediately break with the established
principles of harmony. Later he wrote with reference to his tone poem Tod
und Verklärung, composed in 1889, that the soul of the patient, who had long
been tortured by terrible pain and shaken by fever, in the hour of death left
the body “in order to find in the eternal universe in most perfect form what
133

Culture

could not be fulfilled in this world.”18 His tone poem Ein Tod, on the other
hand, made a distinct break with classical dogma. Thenceforth his operas also
began to move into dissonances that badly hurt the ears of audiences used to
Mozart or Puccini. And in his Salomé he finally broached themes on stage
that had hitherto been the taboo subjects of bourgeois morality. When he
turned, for example, to Detlev Liliencron’s poem Bruder Liederlich, his music leaves the impression of fragmentation.
It was Arnold Schönberg who finally pushed chromaticism and the disintegration of harmonies beyond Wagner to its conclusion, even if one does not
go as far as W. Mellers in his conclusion that Schönberg’s use of the full
range of the scale’s 12 semitones was “a technical and intellectual necessity.”19
Schönberg’s reluctance in the face of his own radicalism, which reflected the
uncertainty of his age, is evidenced by the fact that he took the step into
atonality only in his 1908 piano pieces and in his Quartet No. 2 of 1922. Up
to that point he preferred generating an overall mood through long modulations and the full use of the chromatic scale. In this way, the listener was
given a feeling of endless suspense of the kind that Strauss had been trying
to provide as early as 1896 in his tone poem Thus Spoke Zarathustra and, in
a different way, that Gustav Mahler had attempted to create in his Symphony
No. 5. Schönberg, too, therefore hoped to create cosmic visions that, incidentally, can also be found in his paintings. It is especially his “gazes” that gain
a central importance in this respect—those eyes that, though they may not
have seen everything, had nevertheless taken in much: the ugly and the beautiful, the good and the evil. They are eyes that give us an inkling of the unfathomable complexity and the inner chaos of the human situation; for they
speak and are mute at the same time, trying to establish a connection between
the subject and the viewer.
Other artists and intellectuals did not want to take the path into permanent
disorder. They tried to reestablish balance in a world that appeared to be
falling apart, though they hoped to do so not by repairing what was left, but
through a fundamental renovation resulting from a search of the self. Since
reality had become problematic to them, they set out on a long inner journey
during which the search of the self would not be constrained by objective
limits. It was not surprising that this search should include the sexual sphere,
which the churches and bourgeois morality had banned from public discourse. While the liberating experience of Eros may have opened up new dimensions of life emanating from the merger of woman and man, sexuality
also generated anxieties stemming from the supposedly unfathomable female
soul. If vitality and a male fear of being “swallowed up” became too difficult
to separate, an escape into narcissism and pure art remained the only way out,
the only promise for salvation beyond reality. Thus, some artists lapsed into
a world of illusions, in which they loved only their own disorderly selves.
134

High Culture and Popular Culture

Not surprisingly, this kind of journey into the unknown was unacceptable
to other intellectuals. Reality had not become blurred, fluid, and meaningless
to them. They refused to retreat from reality through introspection and to create a totally individualized and fragmented culture. Their motto was not narcissistic self-exploration that ultimately threatened to end in adaptation to a
real world that, after all, continued to exist. Instead they set out to change this
world and to create a tangible new culture. To them creativity was not l’art
pour l’art, but a judicial investigation that uncovered social injustice and condemned it in order to bring about societal change. The question was, though,
whether the great task of cultural reconstruction could be achieved through
radical revolution alone or whether it was possible to take the route of modernizing reform and to functionalize the structures and norms that had already
been built in the process of industrialization and urbanization.
Before giving concrete illustrations for the emergence of these divergent
and coexisting currents, it is important to remember that initially all protagonists of change found themselves in the same boat. Differences between
them took shape only slowly. The reason for this is that they initially shared
a common opponent who remained powerful and who was best confronted
jointly. After all, the secessio, the departure from the cultural edifice of the
artistic patriarchs of the Bismarckian age, was not just about abstract aesthetic positions; it was also about whether artists would be able to exhibit work
that had broken away from their elders’ orthodoxies. The question of power
and influence had thus been posed. None of the “young ones” was content
merely to stack up his work in the studio. These artists, too, craved recognition; they wanted their ideas to be taken seriously.20
As early as the 1880s, there had been signs of a growing dissatisfaction
with the authoritarian conservatism and the lack of imagination of the older
generation. In terms of the visual arts, the year 1892 became an important
turning point. In the spring of that year some 106 artists decided to leave the
local chapter of the Allgemeine Deutsche Kunstgenossenschaft in Munich.
Dissatisfied with Lenbach, the dominant figure in the Bavarian artistic community, and also with the funding policies of Werner in Berlin, the secessionists founded their own association, the Verein der bildenden Künstler
Münchens. The repercussions of this “Munich Secession” could soon be felt
in the Reich capital. The Munich artists had seceded partly due to their fear
of competition from Berlin and their disapproval of mass exhibitions designed to please all and sundry.
The crisis in Berlin also involved the more basic question of how far new
styles should be represented. In September 1892, the exhibitions committee
of the Association of Berlin Artists had resolved to invite the 29-year-old
Norwegian painter Edvard Munch to present his work at a special exhibition
in the rotunda of the association’s building. This was a great honor for the
135

Culture

artist. But when the show opened in November of that year, the conservatives
among the membership were scandalized by Munch’s disturbing colors and
motifs. They demanded a closing of the exhibition. Some 250 members turned
up for an extraordinary meeting of the association in mid-November, and at
the end of a heated debate a small majority favored canceling the show.
Many opponents of this decision thought of immediate secession. But little had been prepared for establishing a new organization, and they had no
money to set up an alternative. Moreover, the dissidents were split among
themselves. In the end, they followed Walter Leistikow’s advice to continue
to work inside the existing association and to try to change the attitudes of
the majority. When this proved impossible, partly because of strong animosities between Leistikow and Werner, the “Berlin Secession” was finally effected in 1897. Max Liebermann, who was now fifty-one, became the group’s
new chairman. His work enjoyed a considerable reputation, but he also had
many enemies. His themes were taken from the lives of ordinary people, and
later also included members of the upper class, whose faces fascinated him
and whom he portrayed without pathos. For this reason he was seen as an
open and conscious social critic. Yet, this was a matter of perception. Thus,
one critic professed to being absolutely horrified by the ugliness of one of
Liebermann’s paintings.21 His picture “Jesus in the Temple,” whose portrayal
of Christ offended many Catholics and Protestants alike, led to charges of
sacrilege, and Liebermann became the target for anti-Semitic attacks.
Beyond this kind of obnoxious criticism, it is not easy to classify Liebermann stylistically. It is certain that he left his peculiar type of realism behind
him for a while and, influenced by France, turned to impressionism. Some of
his later works seem to point in the direction of a completion of his naturalist phase. Perhaps it was because he painted so imaginatively that Liebermann first gained his highest recognition abroad, and only later in Germany.
His prestige enabled him to become one of the spokesmen and advocates of
modernism vis-à-vis the outside world. Among the secessionists, under whose
roof gathered a collection of artists of very different outlooks and temperaments, he acted as an integrating force. And now that these artists had left
Werner’s association behind them, they faced no limits as to their experimentation with styles and motifs.
On one side of the artistic spectrum, there were “poor people’s painters,”
as Wilhelm II called them, who advanced their social-critical concerns more
or less openly. Among them were Hans Baluschek, Arthur Kampf, and Käthe
Kollwitz, whose ideological position was close to Social Democracy. Heinrich Zille should also be mentioned in this context, although his street and
backyard scenes, taken from the milieu of Berlin working-class quarters, expressed their accusations in a more subdued form. Some of his vignettes revealed the desperate situation of the proletariat only through a reading of the
136

High Culture and Popular Culture

ironic captions. Most of them tended to confine themselves to the loving portrayal of men, women, and children, who, though living in a desolate environment, had against all odds succeeded in preserving their humanity.
At the other end of the spectrum were those who had developed what
came to be known as German Impressionism, above all Lovis Corinth, Wilhelm Trübner, and Max Slevogt. The contours in their work often disappeared completely in a soft carpet of colors. No ideological aims could be
discerned. As in the case of their French counterparts, German Impressionists did not intend to inform viewers about the subject matter. They postulated subjectivity, the primacy of what impressed itself upon the individual’s
artistic senses. Other painters concentrated on the landscapes and people of
Germany’s different regions, while a fourth group took up the ideas of the
Jugendstil, which was first developed in Vienna and extended to include the
decorative arts. Jugendstil practitioners also tried to challenge artistic orthodoxies, looking for the new in “simplified, stylized forms that were decorative and ornamental.” Above all, its adherents saw themselves as “bearers of
those utopias of happiness, youth, vitalism, and harmony that secretly” one
still hoped to achieve through art.22
Yet, there was little time for consolidating the new currents. Change came
ever more rapidly. Corinth, one of the leading members of the Berlin Secession, briefly toyed with Expressionism, to which Lyonel Feininger, Max Beckmann, and Emil Nolde had firmly committed themselves when they joined
the secession in 1905. In the summer of 1907, Ernst Barlach exhibited his
sculptures of two beggars who represented the nakedness of lonely and shivering human beings between heaven and earth. Conservatives promptly criticized the sculptures as obscene. It was probably inevitable that, just as the
artist’s role in society became the subject of heated debate, divergent styles
would also be at loggerheads inside the secession. It was not just a question
of Impressionism or Expressionism, but also of whether artists had a collective responsibility vis-à-vis society or whether, removed from politics and
ideology, they should only take their individualist creativity as their point of
orientation. Wassily Kandinski, as he put it in 1911, wanted to give voice to
his inner life through his paintings. Finally, there was the competition of older
cultural centers in Dresden, Dessau, Hamburg, Düsseldorf, and Frankfurt—
centers that, thanks to the prosperity of the local bourgeoisie, had seen a
renaissance.
The Berlin Secession in turn became threatened by further splits. Conflict
broke out openly in 1910, when the selection committee for the major annual
exhibition rejected no fewer than twenty-seven artists who had submitted their
work. Among them were Nolde, Ernst Kirchner, Karl Schmidt-Rottluff, and
Max Pechstein. Not without some justification, the latter felt that they were
now subjected to the same treatment that Werner had meted out to secession137

Culture

ists half a generation earlier. Pechstein and others thereupon founded the
“New Secession,” which organized two exhibitions a year later. A similar split
occurred at about the same time in Munich, when the local Association of
Artists rejected a picture by Kandinsky. In December 1911 the so-called Blaue
Reiter group staged a first exhibition of its own. After the arguments of
1910/11, the disintegration of the Berlin Secession could no longer be halted.
Conflicts over styles were exacerbated by personal animosities, and in the fall
of 1913 the whole enterprise finally collapsed when the majority of its members left. Further worsening the situation, the visual arts in general presented
a picture of growing fragmentation. Die Brücke, the group established in
1905 in Dresden by Kirchner and Schmidt-Rottluff, also broke apart in 1913.
It is conceivable that these centrifugal forces might have emerged much
sooner had the bastions of conservatism not remained strong, buttressed as
they were by official policy and by Wilhelm II in particular. Werner’s attacks
against modern art continued relentlessly. In this respect, he was certain to
have been of one mind with the Kaiser, whose silliness in matters of the new
styles was difficult to match. When the monarch was shown a painting of the
Grunewald by Leistikow, he remarked precociously that he had been to this
forest in Berlin’s southwestern suburbs and knew for certain that its trees did
not look like that. No doubt this was the kind of incomprehension with which
other critics also viewed the new styles. The objective of modern art seemed
lost on them. The Kaiser’s amateurism might have safely been ignored if he
had not used his position for political purposes. Art for him was supposed to
uplift people, to impart to them patriotic values. Consequently, “poor people’s painters” like Kollwitz were perceived as a real threat to society. When,
in 1896, she received a gold medal for her work, the honor was not handed
over to her. Liebermann was compelled to turn down a decoration that the
French Legion of Honor had given him in 1889. Even the German Impressionists incurred the wrath of the Kaiser—however apolitical their works
may have been.
Given this antipathy to artistic innovation, it is not difficult to imagine
how Wilhelm II reacted to Expressionism, whose aesthetic concerns ran
counter to a pedagogical definition of art that the monarch labored so hard to
promote. This had far-reaching consequences for the acquisitions policies of
the Prussian museums. It was also thanks to the Kaiser’s and Werner’s interventions that the German art show at the 1904 World Exhibition in St. Louis
was very conventional and unrepresentative of actual trends. At the same
time, the Kaiser was not powerful enough to dictate art policy. Not surprisingly, faced with growing political and societal tensions, the monarch was
deeply disturbed by talk of a cultural crisis and the need to revolutionize the
arts. Occasionally, he intervened impulsively in the decisions of the cultural
bureaucracy. But he could not stop the advance of modernism. Indeed, his
138

High Culture and Popular Culture

conflict with Hugo von Tschudi, the director of the Prussian National Gallery,
demonstrated the constraints upon the Kaiser’s power.23 Tschudi thought the
new directions in painting too important to exclude from his collections. So,
when he asked for a budgetary supplement in order to buy several paintings
of the Barbizon School and the Kaiser denied the request, the director raised
the missing 400,000 marks from private patrons. Following this impertinence, the monarch had Tschudi dismissed, but the latter went to Munich to
continue his important work in the Bavarian capital.
It may also be taken as a sign of changing power balances and of a greater
acceptance of modern art that the liberal press became more and more
scathing about the Kaiser’s interventions in the arts. While works by Liebermann, Corinth, and others continued to be banned from the National Gallery
in Berlin, the Hamburg Kunsthalle proudly acquired and showed them. The
ministerial bureaucracy, eager to portray Germany as a culturally modern
country, pleaded for greater pluralism. Hildegard von Spitzemberg, who came
from the more liberal southwest but had grown increasingly conservative
with age, went to see the summer exhibition of the Berlin Secession in June
1900. As she recorded in her diary, she did see some objectionable pieces, but
there were many others that sparked her interest and enthusiasm.24 Rejection
was often blunter in the provinces. In February 1906 Hermann Behmer railed
in the Württembergische Landeszeitung against drawings of nudes by Auguste
Rodin. One wonders what he would have said to Egon Schiele’s “Redhead
with Spread Legs” of 1910.
Others were more appreciative. One indication of this is seen in the prices
fetched by the works of Liebermann, Kandinski, Corinth, and Kollwitz on
the art market. In 1891, an oil painting by Caspar David Friedrich had sold
for a mere 38 marks at an auction. By 1906, drawings by the avant-garde cost
as much as an industrial worker would earn on average in six months. A few
years later, catalogues listed oil paintings by Liebermann or Trübner at
20,000 marks. However, it would be a mistake to deduce from Werner’s gradual marginalization that he and his supporters had abandoned the fight. They
had on their side broad sections of the educated middle classes who continued to prefer the academy’s catholic tastes to the paintings of secessionists.
What both factions had in common was that art had meanwhile become part
of a culture of consumption that was also reflected in the founding of organizations that tried to represent artists’ economic interests. Thus Die Brücke
offered subscriptions to collections of drawings. A growing number of wealthy
collectors undermined the quasi-monopoly that had been held by public galleries and widened the market. But it is probably also true that art dealers
earned more in commissions than the painters gained for their work.25
As the avant-garde rushed forward into Expressionism, another division
emerged. The Right, as a glance at their newspapers and journals shows, began
139

Culture

using the widely perceived “ugliness” of modern art as a lever for ruthlessly
politicizing intellectual and artistic debates. Toward 1914, the attacks against
what was said to be “un-German” in Wilhelmine culture were leveled in a
language against which there was hardly any protection. These attacks were
not without a dose of irony if we consider that Corinth, for example, viewed
his works as a German contribution to the relentless international competition in the arts, assuming as a matter of course that the Germans would win
it. With this view he put himself in opposition to the concept of art without
borders, advocated by men such as Julius Meier-Graefe, to whom the idea of
national schools was anathema.
This means that, when looking at the greater pluralism of cultural activity
in this period, we must not overlook the polarization of opinions that occurred at the same time. This was a seemingly paradoxical development that,
as will be seen, had its parallel in the realm of politics.26 Even if secessionists ultimately won their victory over the conservatives surrounding Werner,
the country’s elites and other groups involved in the debate over art had certainly not been won over to an unconditional liberalism and an art free of
taboos.
The shift in literature and theater that has already been examined represented a rebellion, but it also involved fragmentation. As in the visual arts,
there emerged those who categorically asserted the autonomous creativity of
the individual artist who must answer to no one and who shunned political
commitment. A leading representative of this orientation was Stefan George,
who, surrounded by his disciples, propagated the retreat into the inner self and
cast himself in the role of a poetic visionary of another world. Accordingly,
those in his circle were preoccupied with the cultic and ritualistic.27 Rainer
Maria Rilke’s aesthetic was rooted in the interpenetration of the inner and the
outer worlds. Ultimately, it appears, Rilke’s attitude towards life displayed an
optimism that the George circle had lost. But Rilke also articulated the changed
approach when he wrote in a letter of October 1907 that art must see life in
“what is horrible and seemingly repulsive” because these aspects of life were
just as valid as all others.28 Meanwhile reality remained perfectly tangible for
those engaged in social criticism. Since naturalism, having quickly attained
an influential position, continued to occupy that place, the fragmentation in
literature and theater proved irreversible in the same way as it did in the visual arts.
In a more general sense, Thomas Mann’s novel Die Buddenbrooks (1901)
may also be said to fit into this mode. In it he portrayed the slow decline of
a patrician family in the Hanseatic town of Lübeck and, more broadly, the
fragility of the bourgeois world. Mann also displayed a strong interest in the
psychology of his characters, even if he tried to distance himself through
irony. This was also true of his relationship with art and its contemporary
140

High Culture and Popular Culture

postulates. Basically of a conservative mindset, Mann in the final analysis was
an advocate of preserving the unique cultural artifacts that the bourgeoisie had
produced. He therefore remained a burgher among his oftentimes eccentric
fellow artists, which in turn made his books more accessible to an educated
readership. The antihero who perishes with and through the world remains a
marginal figure in his writings. Thus, the reader could recognize himself in
Mann, as—in this period of economic boom—he nursed his fin-de-siècle mood.
For Die Buddenbrooks does not just deal with Lübeck; it was the defining
novel of the epoch. Not surprisingly, its author found himself among the
most widely read German novelists before 1914—in contrast to his brother
Heinrich.
Typical middle-class readers had much greater difficulty identifying themselves with Heinrich Mann’s antibourgeois and politically committed critique
of society. Perhaps his characters were not as subtly constructed as those of
his brother; indeed to some extent they were grotesquely overdrawn; but sociologically his books captured basic features of Wilhelminism more accurately. His criticism was not so much of the bourgeois world per se, but rather
of its deformation (e.g., in Professor Unrat), of the emptiness of Wilhelmine
conventions that had become petrified, and of the brutality of the middle class,
especially vis-à-vis the weak and those who spoke up for them. In Der Untertan he put the following words into the mouth of his antihero, the businessman Diederich Hessling, when the latter learns of the shooting of a worker
suspected of a petty crime: “For me this event reflects something really great,
something majestic, so to speak, that some-one who cocks a snook can simply be gunned down, without a court verdict, out in the street.”29 Carl Sternheim, who put the small-town bore on the stage, tended to elicit condescending
laughter from his urban and urbane audiences. The petty bourgeois he presented was indeed despicable, but the audience never really noticed that the
mirror was also being held up to them.
Like the satire of Heinrich Mann and Sternheim, Ludwig Thoma’s sarcasm cut to the bone, especially when he dealt with basic problems of the
bourgeois marriage. In his play Moral, the character of Frau Beermann remarks to her husband that both of them had been “playing theater for many
years”—he as the “Christian head of the family” and herself as the “pious onlooker.” Yet, she added, no ideal had been “shattered.” Their marriage simply
did not have one anymore. It was difficult enough to cope with this kind of
female impertinence, which many contemporaries took as a sign of the alleged general decline of morals and of the growing demands for an emancipation of women. Even harder to stomach was the open literary discussion of
sexuality, including such topics as sex without love, erotomania, and prostitution. Just as the visual arts began to shock people with their modernist
treatment of nudity, literature was not far behind.
141

Culture

Here Frank Wedekind became one of the enfants terribles whose works
dealt with sexual murder, homosexuality, masturbation, and procuring. Wedekind’s Frühlingserwachen (1891) was relatively tame in that it put on the stage
the sexual problems of adolescents living in a world of bourgeois hypocrisy.
His Lulu took its viewers into the sphere of the nocturnal and sensual, evoking deep-seated male anxieties. For him, Lulu was the “primordial figure of
woman,” shown in this case in her most devouring and at the same time most
narcissistic embodiment.
Women appeared more often in another, less disturbing guise, which was
closer to the traditional image of them in a patriarchal society. In some writings, woman was presented as the sensitive being who enables man to discover his own sensuality. As the critic and dramatist Rudolph Lothar put it in
1885 in his study Psychologie der Litteratur, a “woman’s striving for power,
and the competition between man and woman” found expression in the fact
that “female hypersensitivity is transmitted to man in [the process of] looking, enjoying, thinking and touching.”30 Lothar’s statement, in addition to
showing an interest in psychology that was typical of his time, is significant
because he defines this alleged role of the woman as “feminism.” However,
there were limits to the discussion of sexuality in pre-1914 Germany that existed not merely because of the censor’s watchful eye. Even those artists who
counted themselves among the avant-garde adhered to a concept of gender
relations that was by no means “free.” Although interest in the self and subjectivity was great, the female psyche seemed to leave all men bewildered.
Nor was the removal of this barrier achieved through the works of Franziska Reventlow, Lou Andreas Salomé, or Ricarda Huch, who took up the
theme of the emancipated woman. Because, in the eyes of men, women were
assumed to be different, they seemed to possess a kind of frightening power,
and the postulated dissolution of a woman’s individuality in an orgiastic sexual unification was seen as bliss. In these circumstances, the stereotypes
about women that were widespread in society at large offered a stability that
the man-artist, however radical his ideas may have been in other respects, did
not dare to undermine. At most he might deal with the misery of a marriage
concluded for financial reasons; or he might raise the question of equality in
marriage. As far as gender relations were concerned, the last literary taboos
concerning sexuality and gender were dropped much later in the twentieth
century. What was later judged to be great literature was considered pornographic before 1914 and thus existed outside the realm of art. Meanwhile the
older tradition of the sentimental Heimat novel or romantic drama continued
virtually untouched by modernist and postmodernist experimentation.
In many other respects the social boundaries of the arts were fast disappearing. The more Expressionism left naturalism behind, as it had done in the
visual arts, the more shrill became its messages. Although we still possess
142

High Culture and Popular Culture

relatively little detailed knowledge of the intellectual preconditions of this
genre, there were some quite amazing eccentrics among its representatives.
As a French observer wrote in an essay entitled “Youth Searching for a German Culture of Modernism”: “The thronging in the streets, the fermenting of
ideas in literary circles” put the artists “into a state of drunkenness, the more
so since it hit them with an empty stomach.” Thus “a new messiah” presented
himself to the inebriated older bohème “at regular intervals”: “Conradi began
to swoon when he visited the bordellos; Arno Holz, standing between chimney stacks, played the prophet; in the ‘Würzburger Hof’ [a beerhall], Karl
Bleibtreu announced his royal rule over the waitresses and literature that had
been toppled.”31 Among the younger generation, the titles of their journals,
such as Sturm (1910) or Aktion (1911), published by a circle around Jakob
van Hoddis, Kurt Hiller, and Erwin Loewenson, indicated that by now more
was at stake than modest linguistic experiments. In the case of some, Franz
Pfemfert, for example, it was not just his artistic intellect but his entire mind
that seemed in a state of pathological disorder. The leaders, Hiller, Loewenson, and also Walter Hasenclever, and their disciples worshipped an activism
oriented toward the ideas of Friedrich Nietzsche and his “transvaluation of
all values.”
Hasenclever’s work, apart from exploring the theme of the rebelling son,
is permeated by a celebration of life, a cult that could be seen spreading after the turn of the century. As he put it retrospectively, his writings were designed to take him close to life. It was only in his later work, following Hiller,
that he left this narcissistic vitalism behind and turned toward an activism
that ultimately led him to promote the idea of an anti-Wilhelmian cultural
revolution. He expected a new spiritual man to be born from this upheaval,
but he lived long enough to witness an age of destruction. And when, in 1949,
he looked back upon this age, suicide seemed the only way out. Thus, destruction and self-destruction were never far apart in the thoughts and actions
of the avant-garde. However, these intellectuals not only pursued radical objectives; their language, too, was that of an experimental literature and theater whose provocations had much in common with another art form that
flourished before 1914: cabaret.
In dealing with cabaret, it is important to realize that its scope was not
limited to the political cabaret that later reached its prime in the Weimar Republic. Rooted in the Parisian Montmartre, in the carnival tradition of Central Europe, and in the fairground performances of traveling entertainers, the
art form of cabaret saw itself as an alternative to the great theater that tried
to establish a different relationship between itself and the audience. Like experimental theater, cabaret presented anything but an orderly performance
watched from numbered seats. The stage was not set apart from the audience.
Cabaret tried to create intimacy. Its lyrics were both sung and spoken. It was
143

Culture

presented in short sketches as travesties, parodies, or caricatures of the human
predicament, often without reference to the politics of the day. Thus artists
who, like Hauptmann, took the struggle for modern art very seriously might
have their leg pulled by their cabaret colleagues. The names that they gave
themselves point in the same direction. In Munich the “Eleven Executioners”
emerged as the first German cabaret in the wake of opposition to the restrictive Lex Heinze.33 They lasted for no longer than a few years before the authorities forced them to disband. Later, groups in Berlin called themselves
“Echo and Smoke,” “Colorful Plank,” “The Nasty Boys”; in Vienna a group
named itself “The Bat.”
Although political themes were occasionally taken up by all groups, it was
only “Echo and Smoke” that developed a regular series concerned with contemporary politics. In it the archconservative notions of art held by Wilhelm II
and other German princes were mocked. Art censorship was another favorite
topic, even if the bureaucracy’s presence loomed sufficiently large to engender caution. If political criticism frequently appeared in a cultural guise, this
was not just because of a fear of the police, whose methods became harsher
toward 1914; it was also because cabaret was a kind of counter-theater that
tried to provoke and fascinate, to alienate and attract at the same time.
D. Popular Culture, Workers’ Culture, and Industrial Design
Cabaret, as has been indicated, originated in bohemian pubs and cafés, on the
one hand, and in semiprofessional fairground performances on the other,
which cabaret partly rejected and partly transformed. To be sure, these forms
of popular entertainment continued and indeed expanded in the colonial age;
they began to include displays of people from non-European cultures that
promoted a Germanocentric racism. However, these displays also brought
criticism. On the Left they provided an opportunity to criticize the ethos of a
capitalist imperialism that exploited commercially other societies and human
beings. At the other end of the political spectrum were the right-wing cultural
pessimists who worried that the expressive behavior of the displayed “savages” might disturb the domestic order. Conversely, those “savages” might
gain a false impression of conditions in Germany and cause the colonial administrations difficulties on their return.
In contrast to the cabaret’s controversial offerings, publishers in the nineteenth century began to put out texts and songs handed down from earlier
decades and centuries. These publications became popular forms of entertainment among amateurs, whose recitations enlivened family reunions and
club festivities. Reclam and other publishers issued cheap softcover editions
for private occasions. Not surprisingly, this literature had a wide appeal, even
if the cultural histories of the Kaiserreich rarely included it in their discussion of artistic life.
144

High Culture and Popular Culture

This neglect is unjustified, as these were art forms rooted in peasant and
small-town culture before the advent of industry that had now gained considerable significance in the leisure pursuits of the middle classes. The same is
true of “trivial literature,” whose importance has been underestimated partly
because it was associated with the “trash and filth” that also began to be published at this time and partly because all this literature was disdainfully identified with the “masses.” To be sure, trivial literature may not have been of
great and lasting literary value. Nevertheless, in its variants of adventure novels, murder mysteries, and love stories, this literature reached millions of people and should not be ignored in a history of German society in this period.
During his lifetime, Karl May, who died in 1912, earned a large and enthusiastic following through his books. Such success was also enjoyed by science fiction authors such as Bernhard Kellermann, whose book The Tunnel
was translated into twenty-three languages. Murder mysteries with their simple linguistic but complex narrative structures would mostly be found by the
bedside of men. The love story, mostly written in accordance with a rather
conventional basic design, would appeal to bourgeois women who had time
on their hands. Trivial literature was not so much guided by artistic axioms
than by what authors and publishers thought to be the prevailing popular
taste. This was also why existing social taboos continued to be observed, particularly in romantic novels that packaged all allusions to erotic situations
very carefully. It was rare for a “trashy” novel to slide into the pornographic.
Still, these books satisfied certain sociopsychological needs and in this sense
offered more than entertainment and distraction. As the popularity of CourtsMahler or Marlitt demonstrate, this was also a genre in which female authors
could make their mark.
Religious literature remained popular in the country’s rural areas. Although the local priest or pastor continued to be an authority figure in regions
barely touched by the process of secularization, many villagers and elderly
women in particular tended to seek comfort and consolation in religion. Indeed, as more recent research has shown, secularization did not move forward in a linear fashion. Apparitions of the Virgin Mary and other “miracles”
time and again mobilized rural piety, especially among women and young
girls. These needs are also reflected in the literature sold by door-to-door
salesmen: almanacs, bibles, and catechisms were in demand. Of course,
many escaped the pressures of village life by moving to the cities and thus
became the “lost sheep” of the churches, all the more so if at their place of
work or in the ale house they came under the influence of Social Democratic ideas.
Of interest from a sociological point of view is the growth of “trivial poetry,” many of whose authors can be found in an anthology entitled NeuDeutschlands Dichterschatz, published in 1910. The percentage of female
145

Culture

poets in this collection was surprisingly high, probably reflecting a desire for
self-expression on the part of bourgeois women for whom other outlets were
not available within a patriarchally organized society. Among the examples
of Heimat and regional literature, there were many works whose authors
were quickly forgotten, while others continued to be listed in the handbooks.
Both “trivial poets” and Heimatdichter frequently took their raw material
from folklore. This also applies to music, where there existed frequently a
similarly fine line between what became “great” art and what remained “trivial.” At the same time, as Schönberg began to experiment with atonality, the
playing of evergreens by amateur orchestras and provincial brass bands continued. And the old melodies could also be heard in the coffeehouses of the
major cities.
Even in theater we find various links between “high” culture and “mass”
culture. However, unlike “trivial literature,” the old suburban stage experienced a decline that cannot be explained merely by the competition of boulevard theaters. Members of the industrial working class who labored ten to
twelve hours a day, six days a week, did not make for as amenable an audience as the townspeople of all backgrounds had been before the arrival of the
factory system. This began to change not long before 1914, when the “masses”
had gained more leisure time, and some had slightly more money in their
pockets. People did go back to the theater, although by this time the cinema
had appeared on the horizon as a medium of cheap popular entertainment. In
1910 there were 456 cinemas in twenty-nine cities; three years later, some
2,400 cinemas had opened their doors, screening a weekly silent movie,
mainly of foreign origin and of often stunning simplicity. Circa 1914 cinema
attendance was around l.5 million viewers a day. In some cities people could
choose between up to 30 theaters by this time. In Berlin that figure ran as
high as 139.32
Many of these cinemas first appeared in the working-class quarters of big
cities. Later, splendid “film palaces” were built in middle-class areas. However, this shift did not diminish the unease felt by many bourgeois about pre1914 popular culture, which they believed portrayed the sensational, the
eccentric adventure, and “women of the night.” The viewer experienced the
frivolous, the erotic, or the criminal plot in a darkened theater. Who could
know what was going on in the back rows among young men and women?
Thus, debates about “smut films” followed on the heels of earlier discussions
about “smut literature,” in which professors, theologians, journalists, and
politicians participated, while the censors continued their work in the backrooms of their ministry.33
Meanwhile the traditional theater, often subsidized by city fathers, just as
the princes took pride in supporting their court theater, attracted primarily the
well-off and educated bourgeoisie. The lower classes became involved again
146

High Culture and Popular Culture

later through the Volksbühne, or People’s Theatre, movement, which offered
discounted subscriptions and was related to the rise of the Social Democrats.
We are thus moving into an area of cultural activity whose growing importance is partly related to the above-mentioned rejection of officially sponsored arts; but it also emerged from a political critique of the products of an
increasingly commercialized “trashy art” offered to the “masses” at fairs or
in the cinema. While the impact of the working-class movement on politics
will be explored in more detail in a later chapter,35 this critique, whether articulated by the Social Democratic Party or by the unions, went beyond the
more immediate aims of these two movements. Starting from a Marxian vision of the world and of history, it aimed to reshape the cultural consciousness of its members and of the industrial working class as a whole. The task
was to create the preconditions for the establishment of a new culture that
would replace bourgeois culture once socialism had prevailed over capitalism. Social scientists and historians have in retrospect raised the question of
whether working-class culture, as it presented itself in the German empire in
advance of the emergence of socialism, represented a “subculture” or an “alternative culture”—a problem that will have to be included in our analysis.34
It is against the background of these objectives of the German workingclass movement in the realm of culture that the emergence of an extensive
network of cultural organizations after the lapse of the antisocialist laws in
1890 must be viewed. None of these objectives related to any of the “secessions” described above, but all of them identified more or less strongly with
Social Democracy. The roots of this network of associations predate 1878,
but its foundations were laid during the twelve years of persecution that followed. This was because workers’ singing clubs and gardening associations
had not been officially banned, even though they, too, found that the police
watched them ever more persistently. In these circumstances, it was only after 1890 that the Social Democratic cultural movement began to play a significant role in the cultural history of the Kaiserreich. Modernism, which
came into its own at about the same time, was not directly linked to it. The
avant-garde’s cultural radicalism notwithstanding, only a few artists openly
professed their allegiance to the Social Democrats. However, there were
common themes.
The working-class movement—very much the product of industrialization and urbanization—was highly critical of the existing socioeconomic and
political order. While accepting the idea of a modern industrial society, they
searched for new forms of organizing this type of society. In this sense there
existed an intellectual bond between Social Democrats and those elements
among the artistic avant-garde who were not driven by a phobia of industry
and urban life. Whatever the commonalities, the relationship was never free
of tension. To no small degree this was due to those members and spokesmen
147

Culture

in the working-class movement who, while favoring economic and political
reforms, remained wedded to conventional ideas about the arts and felt alienated by the aesthetic concepts of modernism. This in turn led to disputes
within Social Democracy and to contradictions that will be dealt with in a
moment. First we must look at the quantitative dimensions of the cultural
movement.
When Social Democracy once again took off after the lapse of the antisocialist laws, it initially did not have many more than the 26,000 workers who
had been members in 1875. Just before the outbreak of the Great War, this
figure had risen to a little over 1 million. The growth of the Social Democratic trade unions was even more momentous: in 1891 the membership total
had been around 278,000; by 1913 it had grown to 2.5 million. Beyond participating in politics, what were the cultural activities of the socialist movement? The first workers’ singing clubs had formed in the 1860s. Many of
these and other organizations survived official harassment under the antisocialist laws, while others that were believed by the police to be socialist
fronts were forced into liquidation.
As soon as the antisocialist laws had disappeared in 1890 and the working class was once again permitted to organize, cultural associations experienced an explosive expansion.35 In 1892, a congress was held at Berlin in
which some 319 singing associations participated. Representing over 9,000
members organized in fourteen regional associations, they founded a national
association, the Liedergemeinschaft der Arbeiter- und Sängervereinigungen
Deutschlands. By 1914, this movement had grown to some 200,000 members. Between 1907 and 1912 slightly fewer than 100,000 new members
joined. In Berlin, membership rose from 1,200 in 1890 to 7,000 in 1905, divided among some 194 local branches. From 1899, the umbrella organization
published its own series, entitled Der freie Sänger, which printed evergreens
and new compositions. Later the newspaper Arbeiter-Sänger-Zeitung was
added; in 1913, its print run reached 113,000 copies.
By contrast, workers’ associations devoted to the promotion of sports had
not existed before 1890. But thenceforth they mushroomed all over the country. The movement was spearheaded by gymnasts, whose number rose from
3,500 in 1893 to 187,000 in 1914. They published their own paper, the ArbeiterTurnzeitung, whose circulation reached approximately 119,000 copies in
1913. Their main activities were innumerable athletics trips, competitions, and
parades. With a total membership of 150,000 by 1914, the workers’ cycling
clubs also gained a very respectable size. In Leipzig in 1893, they formed a
national organization, which had no more than 10,000 members as late as 1902;
but in 1913, some 168,000 copies of the association’s paper were printed.
Workers’ rowing clubs and swimming clubs remained much smaller. The same

148

High Culture and Popular Culture

was true of workers’ chess clubs and short-hand associations, which formed
their national organizations in 1912 and 1909 respectively. Finally, by 1914
there were some 6,400 organized “Proletarian Free-Thinkers.”
There are no exact membership figures for proletarian amateur theater
groups. More is known about the above-mentioned Volksbühne movement,
which offered its subscribers reduced-price tickets for professional stages.
They operated successfully in a number of cities, with Berlin becoming the
main stronghold. There the Freie Volksbühne had been formed as early as
1890. It grew to become an organization with some 17,500 members in 1910
and was prosperous enough to establish its own stage four years later. The
Neue Freie Volksbühne that had seceded from the Berlin organization in
1892 even reached a membership level of 48,000 by 1910.36
Finally, we must deal with the workers’ educational movement, which for
financial and obvious ideological reasons was probably closest to the SPD
and trade unions. After many years of fragmentation, this movement finally
established in 1906 a Central Educational Committee that oversaw the expansion and coordination of lectures and seminars. It employed an impressively
large number of “migrant lecturers” who, traveling all over the country,
offered either one-time evening lectures or seminar series. According to the
Central Educational Committee’s annual report, no fewer than 323 talks and
44 courses were given in 1907/8 in which close to 5,000 men and women
participated. In 1912/13 there were 941 talks and 206 courses with 29,836
participants. During that year, the committee spent some 51,674 marks in support of these courses. The remaining expenses (about 80 percent of the total)
were covered by fees varying from around twenty pfennigs for a one-time
lecture to one mark per seminar course. Including other cultural events, such
as poetry readings, concerts, and lieder evenings, the 244 local workers’ educational associations spent over 680,000 marks in 1911. During the following year, the total reached 732,000 marks.
Meanwhile the Workers’ Educational School, founded in Berlin in 1891,
offered short courses on more strictly ideological and political topics. The
same held for the Social Democratic Party School, which was established in
1906. The latter, from which some 240 students had graduated by 1914, was
charged with the training of party cadres. Those attending Trade Union Schools,
which were also created in 1906, received a more pragmatic education than
their counterparts at the Party School. Finally, a number of party and trade
union libraries opened their doors to ordinary members at the local level. Up
to 1914, there were some 1,100 such institutes in 748 cities and workingclass neighborhoods. Their total holdings reached 834,000 volumes. From
1896 to 1910, Berlin’s Trade Union Library increased its holdings from 11,500
to 50,000 volumes, which could be borrowed at thirty-three local branches.

149

Culture

The library of the Wood Workers’ Union spent some 5,000 marks on books
per annum. Some eighty-seven of the larger workers’ libraries had their own
reading rooms.
As far as the membership structure of the workers’ cultural movement is
concerned, there appears to be general agreement that its active elements
came from the younger generation. Thus, in 1909 over half of the members
of the proletarian singing clubs in the district of Leipzig were between the
ages of twenty-six and thirty-five. Similarly, during the first decade of the
twentieth century, between 66 and 69 percent of the students at the Workers’
Educational School were between twenty and thirty years of age. The share
of passive members was particularly high in some singing clubs, many of
whose members were presumably elderly people. Women participated
in growing numbers. In 1910 some 277 of the 2,818 workers’ choirs were
female, and another 8 percent were mixed. The remaining 82 percent continued the tradition of purely male choirs, however, occasionally organizing an
“evening with ladies.” Women’s sections were added to the gymnastics associations. Here, too, tradition and patriarchalism remained powerful hurdles
when it came to the question of whether or not women should be allowed to
wear athletic shorts. Meanwhile, the share of women at the Berlin Workers’
Educational School vacillated between 10.9 and 12.1 percent around the turn
of the century. It dropped to 5.6 percent in 1905/6 before rising again to 7.6
percent in 1909/10.
In light of the statistical material presented so far, there can be little doubt
that the two decades following the lapse of the antisocialist laws saw the
emergence of a colorful and sizeable cultural movement that attracted above
all Social Democratic industrial workers. Differences of opinion have arisen,
however, as to how this movement should be seen within the larger cultural
development of the Kaiserreich. Guenther Roth has argued that the milieu
that defined the cultural life of the working-class neighborhoods in the cities
was a “subculture,” while Vernon L. Lidtke went beyond this view, speaking
of an “alternative culture.”37 The latter believes that a clear divide existed between the politico-economic and cultural institutions of the country and
those created by the Social Democrats. The proletarian model of society, he
added, rejected existing notions of culture and developed a “credible alternative” to them. According to Lidtke, this alternative extended beyond political
and economic systems; it existed in all spheres of life, including family,
leisure, religion, and education. Socialists and nonsocialists alike were aware
that the working-class movement was forging “a world of its own” and lived
in a “peculiar socio-cultural milieu.”38
This divergence was not only subjectively perceived as a threat by the rest
of society, but in fact it presented one objectively. These realities, Lidtke continues, were independent of the much debated question of whether or not the
150

High Culture and Popular Culture

Social Democrats themselves really wanted to overthrow the existing order
by revolutionary means. In this sense their alternative vision was radical and
could not easily be integrated into the majority society and culture on the basis of the status quo.
What, in Lidtke’s view, lends strong support to his line of argument is that,
first of all, the persecution of the Social Democratic movement, including its
cultural organizations, did not stop after 1890. The Reich Association Law of
1908, it is true, gave greater precision to a number of principles and thus constrained the possibilities for hostile government action against workers; it
also standardized a large variety of laws that existed in the federal states. And
yet, as Lidtke points out, harassment continued. Time and again difficulties
arose after 1908 concerning the membership of young people in Social Democratic sports and cultural organizations. Nor did the police ever abandon
their restrictive practices when it came to granting licenses for rallies and
demonstrations. Surveillance did not stop. Social Democratic associations
were treated somewhat more generously in some localities; but just as in the
case of the artistic avant-garde, the higher levels of government tended to
step up their attempts to muzzle the cultural and political activities of the
working class during the last years before World War I.
Lidtke also felt confirmed in his view of an alternative culture by the fact
that associational life in Germany became increasingly stratified and thus
must be related to the “segmentation” of society more generally. And, indeed, it is important to appreciate that the Social Democratic cultural movement represented but a fraction of a rich associational life that comprised
literally thousands of organizations. Yet, it would have been quite unthinkable for a factory worker to join the same club as his boss, just as they would
not have celebrated the Munich October Fest sitting next to each other in one
of the large beer tents, exceptions always granted.
This stratification of cultural life explains why, for example, there existed
no fewer than five singing clubs in the small town of Weinheim, north of Heidelberg. One of these attracted the local workers; another, the town’s civil
servants. Artisans dominated the third one, and the shopkeepers and traders
the fourth. Finally, there was the Singverein (singing club), the oldest organization in town, whose membership was made up predominantly of the local
elite. A similar segmentation of associational life appears to have occurred in
other towns. Thus in 1896 no less than 74.4 percent of the membership of
Hamburg’s ninety-seven singing clubs were card-carrying Social Democrats.
Some 52.1 percent were trade unionists, and a mere 10 percent belonged to
none of these organizations. In 1910, the equivalent shares in Leipzig even
amounted to 85 to 90 percent. Some of the associations made membership in
the SPD a condition of acceptance. Initially, the share of nonworkers or nonSocial Democrats appears to have been higher in some of the cultural clubs;
151

Culture

but soon so many Social Democrats applied for membership that the sociology as well as the ideological orientation of the organization underwent a
marked shift. Conversely, complaints could be heard occasionally at the level
of the national organization that some local branches were becoming too
bourgeois.
While the attitudes of the authorities and of other social groups, as well as
the sociology of the cultural associations, seem to confirm Lidtke’s concept
of an “alternative culture,” organizational forms and the substance of associational life must also be considered. Certain forms, such as constitutions and
written rules of procedure, were required by law and thus cannot be used
against Lidtke, even if the authors of these procedures took the “bourgeois”
equivalents as their model. On the other hand, there are indications that some
of the routines and petty squabbles of the older middle-class associations,
normally criticized as Vereinsmeierei, began to rub off on the style of the proletarian movement. Sports clubs were especially prone to developing quite
rigid hierarchies. Sociability frequently also imitated the customs of bourgeois associations, and if group photos are any guide, there was a more general trend toward the propriety of mainstream associational life.
The criticism of such adaptive behavior, which was voiced at various levels, pinpointed the dilemmas of a Social Democratic cultural movement that
operated in the trendsetting milieu of a bourgeois society. The dilemma was
even more acute with regard not to the styles but to the content of associational life. Thus the sports clubs came under fire because they were accused
of having fallen for the competitive ethos of the bourgeoisie. By 1911 this
criticism was taken seriously enough for the national organization of the Social Democratic gymnasts movement to pass a resolution that, while competition between individuals was acceptable, there should be no competitive
events between clubs. Internal critics were also unhappy with a tendency to
adopt the traditions of Friedrich Ludwig Jahn, the revered founder of the
bourgeois gymnasts movement. On the other hand, there were those who defended these practices, feeling that physical fitness was useful at the workbench or in the daily political struggle against the existing monarchical order.
While it would be wrong to dismiss these phenomena, Lidtke is right in
pointing to the many indications that extraneous elements were but selectively
incorporated and their meaning was recast. Thus, the focus of the Jahn movement on nationalism became displaced by internationalist concepts of freedom and liberty. The names that the Social Democratic associations gave
themselves also indicate that their self-image was one of separateness. Some
choirs called themselves “Among Us,” “Freedom,” or “Forward.” An analysis of their song collections shows that choirs chose songs with the aim of
generating a Social Democratic sense of solidarity and political consciousness. Religious and patriotic texts were excluded. The focus was on workers’
152

High Culture and Popular Culture

songs; popular tunes were given new lyrics. On social occasions, following,
for example, a May Day parade, when members moved to the gemütliche
part, one would intone the “Workers’ Reveille” and the “Workers’ Marseillaise.” Since the singing was frequently accompanied by the consumption of
plenty of alcohol, these events regularly incurred the disapproval of Social
Democratic teetotalers. Overall, these activities and the language used in them
appear to have been designed to create internal cohesion and distance from
nonsocialist associations.
An examination of theater and literature shows, however, that the relationship between bourgeois and proletarian culture was nevertheless not as
clearly one of juxtaposition as Lidtke made out. There emerged, as has been
mentioned, various theater groups that were close to the working-class movement; but their performances remained largely naive and amateurish. A number of committed socialists, among them Willi Münzenberg, Manfred Wittich,
and Ernst Däumig, also produced plays. But these works tended to suffer
from an unresolved (and probably insoluble) tension between art and agitprop. This was also the problem with a five-volume collection of poetry that
appeared under the title of Deutsche Arbeiterdichtung in 1893 and to which
Karl Frohme, Adolf Lepp, Max Kregel, and others contributed.
The debate that ensued among Social Democrats became quite sharply
polarized. Some, like the dramatist Otto Krille, took the position that “tendential art” was valuable not merely from a political-ideological point of view,
but also from the standpoint of aesthetics. It was Franz Mehring, above all,
who objected to this notion, postulating that politics and great art were irreconcilable. He accorded a universality and timelessness to the aesthetic principles of the classical period and its literary giants. In his view, Goethe and
Schiller were the models to be emulated. However much they represented the
tradition of bourgeois theater, their works were to be read and staged for the
cultural refinement of the rank-and-file. At the same time, with the support
of August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht, Mehring rejected Naturalism because he found it too pessimistic. Having shunned tendential art, opting instead for the classics, the SPD leadership tried to curb an openly ideological
theater. Political enlightenment and education remained confined to the arena
of politics rather than that of the stage. Not surprisingly, therefore, the party
promoted the Volksbühne movement, which offered plays that lived up to
Mehring’s standards.
This should not lead us to assume as a matter of course that working-class
Volksbühne audiences stepped outside the sphere of Lidtke’s “alternative culture,” overwhelmed by the magnetic force of a hegemonic bourgeois culture
whenever they saw a play by Goethe or Schiller. One must ask which plays
were in fact selected for subscription. Even more crucial is the question of
what working-class audiences took away from any given evening at the
153

Culture

Volksbühne. Although we shall probably never know for certain, as exit polls
did not yet exist, we should not assume that these audiences came away with
the same impressions as bourgeois theatergoers in the more expensive seats.
This assumption would seem to be justified when considering reader responses to literature. Here we move on much firmer ground because some
documentation on the borrowing habits of members of workers’ libraries has
survived.39 We also have information on lecture offerings and attendance.
As to the latter, the Party School, not surprisingly, concentrated on politics
and ideology, and Rosa Luxemburg was among the most popular lecturers in
1909/10. Other lectures and seminars had a more practical content or were
devoted to general topics of a more historical-political character. In the last
years before World War I, poetry readings showed a preference for Goethe,
Ferdinand Freiligrath, and Heinrich Heine. Programs also included Reuter,
Wilhelm Busch, and the great Russian poets. At party or trade union libraries,
most librarians tried to keep a good selection of the classics of Marxism on
the shelves. They bemoaned the poor taste of their readers, who forced them
to make “trivial literature” available. Consequently, Marx’s Das Kapital rarely
appears on the borrowing lists. Bebel’s book Die Frau und der Sozialismus
was more popular and also sold well in shops. All in all, the belles lettres
were most in demand. At the top of the 1908 borrowing list for Leipzig was
the adventure story writer Friedrich Gerstäcker, whose books were checked
out 2,844 times. Goethe and Charles Dickens appeared in the twelfth and
thirteenth places. According to the annual report of the Berlin Transport
Workers’ Union Library, Alexandre Dumas’s books were borrowed some 800
times, with his Count of Monte Cristo being particularly popular. Emile
Zola’s books came in second place. Other popular authors at Social Democratic workers’ libraries between 1908 and 1914 were Ludwig Ganghofer,
Clara Viebig, Maxim Gorki, and Jules Verne.
These lists can be fruitfully compared with those of Leipzig’s public libraries. One list, covering the fall of 1903 to the fall of 1904, shows Clara
Viebig at the top, followed by Edward Stillgebauer, Elisabeth von Heyking,
Franz Adam Beyerlein, Gustav Frenssen, and Thomas Mann. Apart from the
ranking differences, the preferences of Social Democratic borrowers seem to
indicate that works, whatever their literary merit, were read not merely because of their gripping plots, but also because they presented a social-critical
message. This may be particularly true of Zola and Dickens, but probably
also of Dumas’s Count of Monte Cristo, at the end of which justice and human greatness win out.
In general it may therefore be assumed that the patterns of stratification in
German society discussed above in Part II were reflected in the cultural
sphere.40 Indications of this can be found not only in the separatism that
marked the behavior of Social Democratic associations, but also in the hos154

High Culture and Popular Culture

tility with which other groups and the police viewed the workers’ cultural
movement (not to mention the SPD and trade unions). It also seems that artworks that were clearly products of bourgeois culture were absorbed through
the filter of the class experiences of industrial workers. They were taken in
selectively and partly reinterpreted. However, Lidtke’s notion of a tangible
“alternative culture” should perhaps not be understood in the sense of a
“ghetto culture” that existed in isolation and ostracism on the margins of the
majority culture. The workers’ cultural movement was sufficiently deeply
immersed in its national environment to be influenced not only by its aesthetic but also its ideological norms. This is strongly reflected in the increase
of reformist moods and tendencies within the labor movement at large, as
well as in the desire to gain recognition from the rest of society and in the
growing stress on respectability. The fact that this recognition was persistently denied by the majority has already been dealt with in our analysis of
social stratification and will be taken up again when we consider the political realm in Part IV.41
In this connection it is also relevant that, though anxious to preserve their
organizational autonomy, working-class cultural associations always insisted
on equal treatment, not least by the authorities and the police. If these demands could be fulfilled without revolution, a growing number of members
were, it appears, prepared to integrate themselves into the mainstream of
Wilhelmine culture, or at least into those currents that neither looked backward nor proclaimed a cataclysmic “transvaluation of all values.” The currents with which the workers’ cultural movement felt an affinity were those
that rejected cultural pessimism and took a positive view of industrialism and
its urban culture. The labor movement as a whole welcomed in principle industrial and technological change, also in its cultural implications.
What they were critical of and wanted to reform were the ways in which
economic, social, and political power were distributed in society. In this latter respect, the labor movement of course differed fundamentally from those
conservative and bourgeois groups who viewed the processes of industrialization, urbanization, and secularization with deep skepticism. If the cultural
distance of the labor movement was narrowing, it was toward those liberal
forces that were themselves wedded to a fuller exploitation of the potentials
of industrial society through gradual transformation. As these forces perceived industrialization as a cultural as well as a socioeconomic phenomenon, they, too, were searching for norms and values deemed appropriate to
the machine age and a laboring industrial society. In other words, there were
affinities that made the workers’ cultural movement something less than a
strictly separate phenomenon that developed an osmotic relationship with
bourgeois culture. We must also bear in mind the considerable pride in Social Democracy’s organizational achievements. This pride was not always
155

Culture

sharply set apart from a more generalized patriotism that the Reich government cunningly exploited in July 1914. At that point defensive responses to
the allegedly imminent threat posed by Russian autocracy were mobilized to
bring the working class and its movements into the war.
The movement that represented the optimistic position within the dominant culture rallied in a number of organizations, among them the Werkbund.
Within a year of its founding in 1907, this association had 492 members; by
1914, the membership had grown to around 1,870. Its founders hoped that
the Werkbund would fulfill a number of missions. They started from the basic
premise that in the twentieth century a bourgeois culture that was not urbanindustrial would be unthinkable. Accordingly, the Werkbund saw itself as a
mediator between industry and the arts. In particular it promoted the applied
arts by interesting entrepreneurs in modern design and industrial architecture. Two of the key figures in the movement, Hermann Muthesius and Friedrich Naumann, believed, in marked contrast to the cultural pessimism of
other intellectual circles, that the dawn of the machine age would usher in a
higher stage in man’s cultural development from which all individuals, not
just the producers, would benefit. This is why they hoped to bring about a
synthesis between high culture and popular culture that would ultimately create and foster a democratically organized society.
This latter idea was taken from British and American models that the
founding fathers of the Werkbund had in front of them. On the British side
was the Arts and Crafts movement, inspired by William Morris. Through it
the Germans incorporated an artisanal tradition, though without Morris’s anticapitalism. However, they did adopt his criticism of the production of inferior goods that merely undermined the producer’s joy of crafting them. The
emphasis was therefore on high quality, also as a way of motivating workers
and raising their self-esteem. In the United States, the architect Frank Lloyd
Wright had been trying since the 1890s to unite artists and entrepreneurs
within the framework of a democratic industrial culture. Similar professions
of democracy notwithstanding, the Werkbund continued to display elitist
traits. The average consumer, it is true, was to be educated to develop a new
sense for style and quality; yet the undoubtedly beautifully designed products that the movement began to offer were hardly for mass consumption.
Only the wealthy could afford them.
One reason for this apparent contradiction was that many members saw an
unbridgeable gap between the unique creativity of the individual artist and
the standardization of industrial products. Thus, when Muthesius raised the
question of standardization on the occasion of the opening of the Werkbund
exhibition at Cologne in July of 1914, he unleashed major conflicts and
barely avoided a secession. His critics were not opposed to the creation of a
coherent modern style; but they objected to his demand that this idea be pur156

High Culture and Popular Culture

posefully implemented by the collectivity of artists. Standardization was to
be the result of the stylistic decisions of the individual artist. As Henry van
der Velde, one of Muthesius’s critics, put it, his aim was the reproduction of
a “singular creation” on thousands of copies under the strict personal control
of the artist.42 The stress, he added, was on “singular creation” and uncompromising quality. In these circumstances it is not surprising that the Werkbund’s efforts were directed less toward educating the consumer than toward
effecting a close cooperation with industry as a first step toward generating
a new sense of quality and art. The main task was the introduction and development of a modern product design.
These ideas met with a positive echo among some entrepreneurs (even
though most of them came from the new branches of the second Industrial
Revolution, such as electrical engineering or chemical manufacturing) who
were more used to thinking in the social and political categories of the modern movement. Thus, Peter Bruckmann, a silverware manufacturer from Heilbronn, had made himself the spokesman of a number of modern entrepreneurs
at the time of the Werkbund’s founding. During the same year, Walther Rathenau’s Allgemeine Elekrizitäts-Gesellschaft (AEG) appointed Peter Behrens
to become the company’s chief product designer. Two of Behrens’s most
famous students were Walter Gropius and Mies van der Rohe. A large corporation like AEG, of course, could be more open to experimentation with unusual designs than many of the smaller firms. It was also in the forefront of
developing completely new products in the field of electrical household
goods, which facilitated the introduction of new styles. It was more difficult
with established goods to change the catholic tastes of the consumer and to
combine art with engineering science.
Nevertheless, there are many examples of Werkbund artists successfully
realizing their ideas for industrial production before 1914. Behrens designed
electric tea pots and street lights for AEG. In 1910, he was responsible for
the styling of a sewing machine by Pfaff. Meanwhile van der Velde was designing modern chairs. August Endell and Gropius created interiors for railroad sleeping carriages. Other Werkbund members were anxious to leave
behind the playful ornaments of the decorative art of the Jugendstil. Their
aim was to create functional forms and clear lines. Accordingly, the Austrian
Josef Hoffmann built his “seating machine” in 1905.
Meanwhile the movement also exerted considerable influence on industrial architecture. In 1909 Behrens designed the building for an AEG turbine
factory. A building constructed in 1910/11 on Berlin’s Brunnenstrasse for the
manufacturer of small electric motors features a facade powerfully emphasizing the vertical and horizontal. Another noteworthy building from this period was Alfred Messel’s design for the Wertheim department store in Berlin.
New ideas were developed in interior design and landscape architecture, and
157

Culture

there was strong interest in the design of housing estates and suburban settlements for industrial workers. In short, even a cursory glance at these creations
makes one realize where the Neue Sachlichkeit, or New Sobriety, movement
and the Bauhaus of the Weimar period had their roots. Some of Werkbund’s
aims may have been close to the mainstream of the time, like its nationalism
and the missionary zeal with which they wanted to flood the world market
with modern German goods of high quality. At the same time, they were
unanimous in their criticism of the educational ideals of German universities,
not only with the progressive entrepreneurs and engineers with whom they
collaborated, but also with the representatives of the Technological Institutes
and the applied sciences.43

11. The Sciences and Humanities
A. Basic Issues
Whoever speaks of the development of culture during the Imperial period
cannot avoid dealing with the human and natural sciences and their organization. As in other countries, most research took place in institutions of higher
education. But there were also many independent institutes that either undertook research themselves or promoted it. Among these, the Kaiser Wilhelm
Society, founded in 1910/11 to stimulate basic research, assumed an important role.44
All these institutions were primarily devoted to expanding the frontiers of
science through theoretical discussion and empirical research. Colleges and
universities had the additional task of providing basic training in scholarship.
The ideas and practices underlying this system gained Germany high prestige abroad and were partly adopted by other countries in the late nineteenth
century. Even if many students preferred a superficial studium generale and
the social life of fraternities, for the serious young scholar there was ample
scope in the labs and lecture halls for learning about the rules of advanced research. Starting from the notion that research and teaching were inseparable,
institutions of higher learning transmitted these skills through a finely graduated system of large lectures at the one end of the spectrum and the very small
seminar at the other. Professors had themselves undergone arduous training.
Following their admission to the doctorate, they were expected to submit
a second (habilitation) thesis. Only after passing this and a “colloquium” before the respective full faculty assembly would they be allowed to give lectures. However long and exhausting the years of preparation for this second
qualification and the subsequent period as a Privatdozent might be, there was
no guarantee of a much-vaunted professorship. Such an appointment was not
only dependent upon the faculty, but also on the approval by the ministry for
158

The Sciences and Humanities

cultural affairs of the given federal state, and both were time and again guided
by profound methodological or ideological prejudices. Thus there existed only
a few professors of Jewish background, however highly qualified as scholars
aspirants might be. To be a Social Democratic professor was virtually a contradiction in terms. Werner Sombart was falsely suspected of being a closet
socialist and found his career adversely affected because of it. Gustav Mayer,
who openly professed his Social Democratic beliefs and who, after long hesitations, decided, with the support of the highly respected Friedrich Meinecke,
to submit to the habilitation ordeal, could not marshal the requisite number
of votes in the Berlin University faculty after his “colloquium.” His venia
legendi was refused.
The atmosphere in institutes of higher education was no less conservative
in social terms. Even men like Max Planck who pursued revolutionary ideas
in their research were not consistently liberal. Conscious of the prestige that
they enjoyed both in German society and abroad, they tended to be rather full
of themselves and displayed a marked elitism. With a good deal of justification, they have therefore been called “the German mandarins.”45 But all too
often this elitism was the facade, behind which there existed a human wreck
who had long passed the prime of his scholarship. Worn out by the long years
of initiation prior to gaining a professorship, they would often teach the
knowledge of the previous generation, while being intolerant of the ideas of
the next.
In the discipline of history, the 1860s and 1870s were a period of an arid
and modest empiricism that was highly specialized. The orthodoxies of the
Prussian School dominated the field, which adhered to an uncritical glorification of Bismarck’s work of unification. The literary sciences were barely
less traditional. For Albert Bielschowsky, a student of Wilhelm Scherer and
Erich Schmidt, “the phenomenon of Goethe amounted to a collection of
anecdotal-biographical facts which were lovingly, pedantically, and sentimentally reported” by him.46 Analysis was replaced by solemn exegesis. The
Prussian legend emerged between the lines even in Wilhelm Dilthey’s highly
acclaimed book Das Erlebnis und die Dichtung. Just as in the arts, the humanities in the 1870s did not courageously advance into uncharted waters,
and the prevailing conservatism was felt for a long time thereafter. However,
by the late 1880s new developments had gotten underway, leading the famous theologian Ernst Troeltsch to conclude that all aspects of life had begun to “sway.” 47
B. The Natural Sciences
Troeltsch’s dictum was certainly true of the natural sciences. First, great breakthroughs occurred in chemical and electronic research. A number of phenomena that had puzzled scholars before began to generate serious doubts about
159

Culture

the hitherto unshakable world of classical physics. Was it really tenable that
the universe was composed of a limited number of molecules and atoms whose
structure existed for all eternity? The metaphysical dimension was raised by
the assumption that there existed a God who had created this universe. The
viability of this scientific conception became undermined at the end of the
nineteenth century, partly because of new research and partly because of
fresh theoretical and philosophical considerations.
In 1889, Heinrich Hertz demonstrated the identity of light, heat, and electromagnetic waves. Wilhelm Röntgen and others discovered the existence of
ultraviolet rays and the phenomenon of radioactivity of certain elements at
the upper end of the periodic table. Together with the discoveries of Ernest
Rutherford and Niels Bohr, this research called into question the assumed
immutability and indivisibility of atoms. Further investigations showed that
during the disintegration of inherently unstable (radioactive) elements very
small amounts of energy were set free. Suddenly matter and energy appeared
as the two sides of the same coin.
Around the turn of the century, on the basis of his research in thermodynamics, Planck developed the hypothesis that transformations of energy occurred in bursts. Finally, in 1905, Albert Einstein postulated that time and
space, just like energy and mass, were interrelated. Meanwhile the laws of
Euclidean geometry had also begun to crumble. According to Einstein, these
laws were invalidated in the proximity of large masses of matter, where space
was curved. However difficult it may have been for the average person to
grasp such notions, it was clear that a revolution had been set off that ultimately became condensed in Einstein’s famous mathematical equation of
E = mc2. 48
The four-dimensional space-time continuum of modern science beyond
Euclid had been born. With it the received image of the universe also began
to disintegrate. The former fixed points of a supposedly static universe, whose
particles and movements were governed by the laws of mechanics, began to
fade. Particles were ephemeral and could in principle also appear in other
guises. In the end it even became doubtful if there were laws of Nature in the
traditional sense. The assumption of relativity seemed more a promising
approach.
Physical chemistry made important contributions to the revolution in science. In 1906, Walter Nernst developed his heat theorem that subsequently
became the Third Principle of Thermodynamics. Developments in organic
chemistry may not have been quite so dramatic, but thanks to the research of
Emil Fischer and others major breakthroughs were also achieved in this field.
Germany gained a leading position in the world in dyestuffs. While Fischer’s
work made the link with biochemistry, biology made rapid advances of its
own. No more than brief reference can be made here to developments in
160

The Sciences and Humanities

medicine, particularly in the fields of serology and bacteriology. In 1882,
Robert Koch discovered the tuberculosis bacillus and two years later the carrier of cholera. In 1890, Emil Behring developed a serum against diphtheria,
while Paul Ehrlich became the founder of modern chemotherapy.
Although dismissed as being insufficiently scientific by some, psychology
also emerged in this period, at first on a strictly experimental and quantifying basis. Though mostly practiced by fully trained physicians, it subsequently moved to the margins of the natural sciences, the more it turned to
the possible societal causes of pathological human behavior. Sigmund Freud’s
hypotheses concerning the interpretation of dreams and female hysteria were
controversial enough even in their day. Last, but not least, there was Otto
Weininger, whose 1903 book Geschlecht und Charakter went through six
editions during the following three years. In the book he asserted that the female psyche was determined by women’s biological functions.
While contributions by scientists in other countries can hardly be overestimated in the field of physics, major impulses were provided by scholars from
Central Europe. This was also true when it came to considering the philosophical implications of the new vision of the universe. Among the first to do
so was Ernst Mach in Vienna who, in light of recent developments, proposed
a total separation of metaphysics from the sciences. In his book Die Mechanik
in ihrer Entwicklung (1883) he even went so far as to portray time and space
as metaphysical concepts that should be thrown overboard. Nature, he wrote,
did not know such confines. The body’s temporal and spatial position was
determined only in relation to other objects. Influenced by Mach, Einstein
took the final step on this journey into uncertainty when he replaced the idea of
particles by the notion of “events” that unraveled within the atom. Matter was
thus no longer something tangible, but a process that had physical properties.
Not surprisingly, all these discoveries and hypotheses unleashed heated
debates among the community of scientists. Mach’s position on metaphysics
ran into trouble when he failed to put forward an alternative unifying principle that held the universe together. Yet many of his colleagues did not wish
to abandon the search for such a principle. Thenceforth, the question of a
prima causa that would have led them back to metaphysics remained in the
background. What now propelled physicists was the prospect of finding a
“world formula” of the kind that Werner Heisenberg would work on so hard
a generation later. If it was correct that the processes of Nature evolved independently of humankind, Mach appeared to be heading in the wrong direction when he argued that reality merely consisted of perceptions and that
modern physics could be constructed exclusively as a sensual experience. If
Nature—as he postulated—was indeed no more than the most rational adaptation of the human mind to the world of human experience, all research was
bound to end up emphasizing what was individual and limited.
161

Culture

For many of Mach’s colleagues this degradation of the physical and mechanical world went too far. They did not expect anything good to come from
the attempt to link imagination to experience alone and thus to lapse into a
pure positivism. The image of the universe that they were developing instead
might never match reality completely; but at least there was a chance of approaching it asymptotically in the course of an incessant refinement of ongoing research.
In short, they asserted the continued legitimacy of asking questions about
the world’s structure and evolution beyond what was purely human. The
imaginativeness of the researcher was to be given free rein, so long as there
was a guarantee that the results of his experiments correlated with those of
other scholars who had independently undertaken their work in another part
of the globe. In this sense, the quest was also for the creation of a common
platform on which, pace Ernst Mach and irrespective of their sensibilities, all
physicists would be able to operate and interact rationally, promoting the internationalization of modern science. In the process, the “hard sciences” of
physics, chemistry, and mathematics might grow together, just as the various
branches of physics were being unified. The ultimate dream was that one day
all scientists would be united under one roof.
Whatever the future may have held in store, before 1914 space, time, and
energy had ceased to be viewed as immutable categories. Einstein’s relativity theory became the core and the symbol of a new theoretical understanding of the universe. Scientists had not yet officially declared God to be dead;
but explanations of what held the world together distanced themselves from
transcendental explanations and concentrated on the discovery of causal connections based on the human capacity to reason. It is no less significant that
all researchers in the laboratories and the debates that were carried on in the
academies were instilled with an optimism that it would be possible, one day,
to know the universe’s hitherto veiled structures in all their dimensions. Relativism, it is true, had complicated the process of scientific cognition; but it had
also opened up new opportunities that generated great hopes for the future.
This scientific optimism was reinforced in Germany by a sense that researchers were able to work in the most favorable milieu imaginable. Tertiary
education attracted the most talented individuals and was assumed to offer
them optimal room for intellectual development. State funding of scientific
projects, augmented by donations from industry, was thought to be generous.
This small scientific elite, several of whose members became candidates for
Nobel Prizes, was well looked after in terms of its economic status. In order
to attract him to Berlin in 1913, Einstein, for example, was offered a professorship without teaching obligations, the directorship of the yet to be established Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics, and a lucrative membership in
the Academy of Sciences. Small wonder that most professors—however rev162

The Sciences and Humanities

olutionary their research—were politically conservative and monarchist. It
was not inconceivable that there existed a connection between the fluid and
complex cosmic order that they were investigating and the notion of a pluralistically organized and colorful human society on planet Earth. However, a
few exceptions always granted, most scientists did not make this connection
with its implications for social and political change. They did not see a tension between their own revolutionary work, on the one hand, and their lives
in a strictly divided, hierarchical society, on the other. They believed that the
monarchical order would lead the country toward a golden age, both in science and in politics and economics.49
C. The Humanities
The scientists’ optimism and self-confidence was not as widely shared by
their colleagues in the humanities, even if it would probably be misleading
to assume that the cultural pessimists—who, as we have seen, were so influential in the arts—also dominated the universities.50 For that matter the influence of Kant, Hegel, and Ranke remained too strong in Germany even at the
end of the nineteenth century. What, despite this dichotomy, continued to
unite those in the humanities was their somewhat arrogant view that the insights to be gained from their disciplines were more profound than those developed in the sciences. It was not just that they saw the world in terms of
C.P. Snow’s “Two Cultures” but also that they insisted on the primacy of the
humanities. The historian Max Lenz, in a condescending wisecrack, called
his Naturforscher (natural science researcher) colleagues “Naturförster”
(nature foresters).51 In arguing their case, those in the humanities asserted, as
they had done before, that the difference was due to the divergent methodologies and vantage points with regard to the object of research.
Apart from their confrontation with the sciences, what united scholars in
the humanities was that they operated with much less fixed categories. Certainly by the end of the nineteenth century many scholars were no longer as
confident as before that there existed a reality behind the phenomena and that
the world was held together by a well-ordered system. This shift toward relativism was particularly marked among the idealists. Hegel had seen in history the expression of a universal reason that assumed concrete form in
institutions and through which the dialectical march toward the Absolute
Idea proceeded. However, when the late nineteenth century saw a Hegel Renaissance, the view that the world’s historical process moved rationally according to laws found few supporters.
Similarly, the determinism of the Marxists, whose materialist interpretation of history was supposed to have put Hegel’s idealism on its feet, lost
much of its orthodox rigidity. Many continued to adhere to the idea that history ran through different stages. Yet after the death of Marx in 1883 the belief
163

Culture

began to fade in parts of the working-class movement that the evolution of
capitalism would inevitably end in a revolution from which a new and ultimately communist social order would be born. Instead political forces gained
ground that stressed democratic action on the part of the masses and a reformist transformation of capitalism from the inside.
Among the cultural philosophers and historians, Karl Lamprecht was almost
alone in his particular search for laws of historical development. His determinism, too, met with skepticism and rejection. His work was directed against
those among his colleagues who equated scholarship with the straight-laced
presentation of “facts.” The natural sciences, he wrote, had “long overcome
the age of a descriptive method of the phenomena that merely differentiates
by striking individual characteristics.”52 He also turned against the dominance of political history and demanded that the cultural, economic, legal,
and intellectual aspects of human history be included in the analysis. In this
sense he may be called a relativist.
A rejection of the earlier certainties also marked the neo-Kantianism of
the late nineteenth century. It pervaded the work of the philosopher Heinrich
Rickert at Freiburg University, who, together with Georg Simmel, Max Weber,
and Georg Jellinek, has been counted among the “fathers of scientific value
relativism.”53 Immanuel Kant once started from the firm assumption that logical and ethical judgments possessed a universal and timeless validity and
that humans were participants in a transcendental reason. Rickert, writing a
century later, saw the pluralism of values during different epochs and of values that often contradicted each other. However, he did not go so far as to
abandon the belief that they were nevertheless all an expression of an eternal
morality. In this sense, his theory of knowledge did not take the final step into
a nirvana. This step was taken by other philosophers who will be discussed
in a moment.
First, mention must be made of the metamorphosis that Rankeanism underwent when, toward the end of the nineteenth century, it once again began to
outpace the so-called Prussian School.54 Ranke’s religiously founded historicism had seen nations and states as “divine thoughts.” Writing from a universalhistorical perspective, he was also convinced that world history was moving
toward a higher, divinely sanctioned, and ultimately harmonious order. His
epigones in the philosophical faculties of the German empire were more inclined to operate with a secularized notion of power. They started from the
assumption of a colorful quilt of nation-states. Over time this conception of
history became infiltrated by Social Darwinist and imperialist ideas that once
again undermined the relativist starting-point. For Ranke the peak of historical development was a superior order that was in harmony with God. For
Rankeans of the Wilhelmine period it was the victory of the most viable nation in the international struggle for survival. No doubt this interpretation of
164

The Sciences and Humanities

the fate of nations was also informed by the nationalist expectation that, given
Germany’s cultural and other achievements, she would win this victory. As
Hans Delbrück hoped, this was where the marriage of “power and culture”
would ultimately take place.
Thus the humanities moved away from the certainties of Hegel and Marx,
of Kant and Ranke, toward a more relativistic view of the world that, it should
be noted, was in principle still optimistic. This shift had implications for the
theory of knowledge, whose practitioners slowly became aware of the difficulties facing them. How, for example, was one to explain rationally man’s
irrationality, which had meanwhile been discovered and could no longer be
denied? The debates unleashed by such questions within the humanities also
reveal a shift into subjectivism. It was a mood that corresponded strikingly
with the proliferating relativism. There was a growing suspicion that cognition
was dependent on the viewer’s vantage point and that humans would never
have access to absolute truths. As Wilhelm Dilthey put it, it might be possible to describe and develop taxonomies. But whatever the explanations advanced, they would all rest on subjective life experiences.
This shift was remarkable because the humanities, in typical overestimation of themselves, had long adhered to the view that man’s capacity for cognition was limited only with regard to the physical world. Here, so it was
assumed, one observed no more than external connections that would never
be able to open a door to deeper insights. The humanities, by contrast, were
thought to be in a superior position to the natural sciences. The former facilitated objective cognition because the researcher was able to acquire firsthand knowledge of humans and society. The main difficulty was seen in the
scholar’s capacity to transmit his/her insights to others. Thus Dilthey was initially convinced that man was in principle capable of “recogniz[ing] himself
and the society and history created by him.”55 However, since he also believed
in the subjective sources of cognition, he had obviously begun to argue himself into a corner when he simultaneously postulated that knowledge was objectively possible. He tried to resolve this contradiction by hypothesizing a
common denominator for object and subject, which he called life, though this
was to be understood not in the sense of organic nature as viewed by Henri
Bergson, but that of historical existence. While this solution was hardly satisfactory, it is nevertheless characteristic of the age. Now the “objective
spirit” could no longer reside in Reason, but in the somewhat more nebulous
“structural links between the vital units” to be found in “communities.”56 With
this an irrational element had been taken into the theory of cognition. In this
respect, Max Weber was certainly more logical when he took the final step
in this debate. He denied the possibility of an objective search for universal
values and retreated into examining value systems within a particular cultural
epoch.
165

Culture

Meanwhile the Marxists did not allow themselves to be dragged into the
theory-of-knowledge problems that liberal and conservative scholars agonized
about. For them non-Marxist ideologies and value systems were at heart reflections of tangible material interests and as such easily accessible to analysis. The neo-Rankeans continued to believe for a long time that they could
escape the dilemmas of a scholarly subjectivism with the help of their peculiar notion of Verstehen, or understanding. They assumed with Ranke that humans were endowed with a unique capacity to detach themselves from their
own time and to immerse themselves in an earlier epoch that would be reconstructed and brought to life through their empathetic interpretation of the primary sources.
However, there were others already waiting in the wings for whom history
was not a purposeful process, as both the Marxists and Rankeans thought.57
With veritable fascination they had seized upon the irrationalities of that
process and of the human agency within it. Having spied the dark impulses
in the human soul, they had lost all hope for a better future and lapsed into a
deep cultural pessimism. Progress in a rationalist sense appeared to them to
be a totally questionable concept. And so they proclaimed the crisis of all existing value systems and retreated into a misanthropic relativism. They were
no longer interested in investigating the relationship between societal reality
and human norms. Instead what they aimed at ultimately was the radical
transvaluation of both. As for the possibility of cognition, they nurtured a
pure subjectivism and abandoned the idea that humans could make a scientifically founded choice between basic values.
Arthur Schopenhauer, who died in 1860, was among the most important
thinkers at the beginning of this seismic shift. He thought that, thanks to
spontaneous intuition, he had broken through the world of superficial phenomena, whose laws the natural sciences were trying to discover. For it was
beyond the barrier of these phenomena that the will could be found as embodying actual reality. This will comprised not only conscious aims and desires,
but all un- and subconscious impulses as well. According to Schopenhauer,
all human thought and action consisted of restless acts of will. What determined the development of humankind was not the logic of history, but creative ingenuity. By the end of the nineteenth century, then, the idea had made
great strides in the humanities that reason was controlled by “life” and that
great achievements were not the result of a determined intellectual inquiry,
but of a heroic deployment of the will. The most compelling advocate of this
position was Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), poet, musician, essayist, and
classical philologist, who had to give up his professorship at Basle University in 1879 for reasons of poor health. Above all, he influenced a younger
generation of intellectuals and artists who supported the “transvaluation of
all values” that Nietzsche had proclaimed.58
166

The Sciences and Humanities

If Schopenhauer had continued to insist on the connection between voluntaristic irrationality and humanity, Nietzsche now broke them apart. He proclaimed the collapse of the great metaphysical systems of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries that science had brought about. What was more, since
Nature and Life were at heart irrational, the task was in his view to affirm the
concomitant irrationality of mind and morality. As far as morality was concerned, Nietzsche would merely recognize the existence of relative yardsticks. What was right for one person at a particular point in time could be
wrong for another at a later date. Since humans were blindly driven by their
impulses, the real value of life did not lie in an ascetic retreat from the world,
but in the affirmation of the will through struggle. Other values did not exist.
The central figure, Nietzsche maintained, was not the person who strove
to find universally applicable norms, but the hero who—following only his
self-set standards—would transcend himself. God was said to be dead, but
superman lived and asserted himself in this world, because there was no
other world beyond, just as there were no value systems. The domination of
the “herd” was replaced by an aristocracy of the strongest and most brutal.
The place of Christian-humanist principles was filled by pitilessness and
pride. Pain was given a positive connotation, because it offered the chance to
overcome it. Happiness was replaced by heroic creativity.
At first sight, Nietzsche appears to base his ideas on an image of humankind and the world whose structures and movements were geared exclusively to conflict and that was impervious to change. Even the hero could do
no more than to engage in a constant struggle. As there was no hope of salvation, heroic struggle was the only way to realize himself. And yet Nietzsche’s profound pessimism and disdain for humanity still had an optimistic,
though much less strikingly obvious, reverse side. At least in his later works,
Nietzsche saw an alternative to what he believed was the wrong path taken
by European civilization during the preceding two thousand years. Change
was therefore not completely out of the question, even if his alternative vision displayed some traits of antiquity when the old patriarchal morality was
still intact. In other words, his utopia contained backward-looking elements,
extolling the virtues of a time when the “evils” of the present had not yet
gained the upper hand.
If we try to understand why Nietzsche was so popular among a younger
generation, the fact that his books did not lend themselves in style and content to quiet, contemplative reading is certainly important. His books and essays agitated; they politicized philosophical discourse that had hitherto been
viewed as a scholarly discipline. Nietzsche took aim not only at Christianity
and utilitarianism, but also at socialism and democracy. Ultimately, there
were very few aspects of contemporary politics and culture that did not, in
one way or another, become the object of his vitriolic attacks. Often writing
167

Culture

in mere aphorisms and entangling himself in contradictions, he railed at industrialization and capitalism, enlightenment and Jewry, romanticism and
sentimentality, historicism and the militaristic Prussian state. And time and
again he spoke in favor of creating an elite that was not tied down by existing moral norms, while attacking the morality of the “herd” and, of course,
Marxism.
Other intellectuals also recognized the magnetic power of Marxism, viewing it either as a danger or a ray of hope. After all, Marxism had never been
satisfied with the formulation of abstract ideas, and its adherents always postulated the inseparability of theory and practice. They thought to have not
only an explanation of existing conditions, founded in history and rationality, but also a guide to changing them, though not through an act of will by
a heroic individual, but through collective action. However far removed the
Marxists were from Nietzsche’s followers, the latter, along with other antiMarxists, were no doubt correct in drawing attention to Marxism’s advocacy
of radical political change.
Accordingly, many concepts developed in the humanities at this time were
intended as an antidote to this movement and its utopia. As the examples of
Gustav Mayer and Franz Mehring showed, the academy may have been successful in barricading its doors to individual leftists; but the penetration of
Marxist ideas could not be stopped and hence was believed to require an intellectual response.
Some professors, such as Weber, Simmel, or Ferdinand Tönnies, took this
debate very seriously, just as the rise of sociology as a new academic discipline cannot be understood without the challenge that Marxism posed theoretically and methodologically. It was only against the background of this
challenge that Weber could develop his thoughts on value relativism, his concepts of “calling” and “status,” and more generally his articles and books on
the influence of ideas on society and on mentality and culture. Having analyzed capitalism’s rise and the “demystification of the world” under the impact of modern rationalism, he became greatly worried about an impending
age of highly organized bureaucracies and of the Fachmensch, the expert, in
which humankind would be forced into an “iron cage of serfdom.” In his
1900 book Philosophie des Geldes (Philosophy of Money), Simmel wrestled
with city culture in the age of capitalist mass production and mass consumption. He also examined the impact of the changing character of labor upon
the psychology of the worker. Meanwhile, Tönnies turned to the tension between Gesellschaft und Gemeinschaft, society and community. In economics
it was above all the “Kathedersozialisten” around Gustav Schmoller, Lujo
Brentano, and Adolph Wagner who were searching for a third way between
Marxism and classic economic liberalism. Their Verein für Sozialpolitik became an interdisciplinary forum where they met with historians and lawyers.
168

The Sciences and Humanities

While these men were preoccupied with the intellectual challenge of Marxism, most of their colleagues in the humanities barely cast an eye over the
relevant literature. Instead they allowed themselves to be guided, on the basis
of a scanty knowledge, by their prejudices and anxieties when they witnessed
workers’ demonstrations and strikes. With the exception of Ernst Troeltsch,
who engaged with Karl Kautsky’s interpretation of early Christianity, this
was also true of Protestant theologians. Meanwhile the Catholic position—
officially defined since 1891 in the papal encyclical against Liberalism and
Marxism—also became increasingly affective. Though theoretically wedded
to a notion of Verstehen that deliberately tried to distance itself from the present and to devote itself to a strict reconstruction of the past, the discipline of
history offers a good example of the progressive politicization of the humanities in the decades before 1914.
It has even been argued that historical scholarship became in essence a
veiled attack on the Marxist interpretation of the past. At least many academic historians believed that their work contributed to countering the influence of the political Left, when they highlighted the primacy of foreign
policy and of international over domestic power politics, or celebrated Bismarck as the towering figure of his age who had reconciled power and culture. As Max Lenz put it, historical scholarship revolved around the hope “to
discover the firm ground upon which a national consciousness can form that
is moved by the common idea of eternity.”59 However, there were also a number of professors who proposed to complement a social imperialist perspective that stressed nationalist solidarity and foreign expansion by policies of
domestic reform. Their aim was to integrate the working class into the existing
social order and to wean it from Marxism. Yet, ultimately even these socialreformist concepts remained subordinated to the primacy of foreign policy.
Geopolitical arguments and the demands for greater efficiency abroad served
as a cover behind which domestic ideological and political objectives could
be pursued. In this atmosphere of fear and suspicion it was not surprising that
academics like Sombart and Lamprecht, who advocated an expansion of historical methodology beyond the orthodoxies of diplomatic and political history, came to be suspected of being closet Marxists.
The most influential historian of his time was Heinrich von Treitschke,
who did not even go through the motions of draping his politicized view of
the past in a scholarly mantle. A professor at Berlin University and a member of the Reichstag, Treitschke was, before his death in 1896, a prolific writer,
taking a stand on the major political questions of his time. Unlike that of the
neo-Rankeans, his language was strident when he appeared in the invariably
overcrowded lecture halls. Few academics in the humanities achieved Treitschke’s political prominence. Most of them devoted themselves to teaching
and research in their increasingly specialized fields. Only occasionally would
169

Culture

they make political statements that reflected in most cases their conservativemonarchist attitudes. From time to time, the better-known among them would
write an essay in one of the many nonscholarly journals, taking positions on
topical political questions, few of which in retrospect make scintillating reading. Moreover, a sizeable group of intellectuals operating on the fringes of
the academic world were more regular contributors to these journals and
often used their writings to vent their cultural pessimism.60
At the other end of the spectrum, however, was another type of journal
that praised the blessings of the machine age and was read by engineers and
technicians. Some of the ideas presented in these journals were influenced by
Frederick Taylor, the American engineer who wanted to revolutionize industrial production and attitudes toward the factory among employers and employees alike. The Taylor Movement, which came to Germany soon after the
turn of the century, proposed the scientific study of factory organization with
the aim of achieving more than a mere rationalization of production; rather,
the followers of this movement wished to create a technological-industrial
culture that appealed to the material interests of all involved and harmonized
the daily routine of industrial labor. Although they harbored a few doubts
about Taylorism, it is not surprising that engineers and those in the engineering sciences inside and outside the academy were generally fascinated by
Taylor’s message. After all, it turned the engineer, rather than the worker, into
the key figure of modern industrial society and reassured them that the Marxist menace, which engineers were no less worried about than the rest of the
middle class, would be contained by the system of Scientific Management.
The sciences thus presented themselves in two guises under the Kaiserreich.
On the one hand, there was the theoretical and empirical research that was
conducted in studies and laboratories. Its results put Germany’s institutions
of higher learning into the top ranks internationally. Of course, the many scientific discoveries of the time rarely reached a wider public, and Einstein was
everything but a popularly known personality before 1914. One is tempted to
correlate the relativization of the classic scientific “truths” that the natural sciences promoted with the relativism that began to spread among the humanities
at about the same time. But this link, if it existed, was at most indirect. The
“two cultures” do not appear to have had much knowledge of what was happening on the other side of the fence. Certainly the humanities, in their desire
to uphold the notion of the “otherness” of the sciences, perpetuated a very
simplistic appreciation of Naturförsterei. The new images of the universe that
physicists were developing eluded them almost completely. More generally,
no more than a small number of contemporaries outside the academy appreciated the significance of this particular revolution. Nietzsche’s hypotheses
were no doubt more widely known than Einstein’s theories, not least because
they were more easily reconcilable with the ideology of the Right.
170

The Press, Its Readership, and Intellectuals

However, not all scientists remained in the ivory tower. Many saw their work
not as a contribution to the international community of scholars but as part of
a national project. Meanwhile the humanities, wedded to the same principle,
pursued themes and hypotheses whose ideological bias they were frequently
unaware of. The Germanist Rudolf Unger, for example, in his book Hamann
und die Aufklärung, presented the theoreticians of the “Storm and Stress” period in the early nineteenth century as opponents of the eighteenth-century
Enlightenment. But he failed to mention that he presented his own opposition to the eighteenth century and anti-rationalism in the same breath. Others
were either less naive or less worried about compromising their reputations
as scholars. In articles and speeches they dutifully participated in the debates
on the great questions of the time. Their tone was often pessimistic, and they
thus reinforced notions of a great cataclysm. On the Left of the ideological
spectrum, there was much talk of the impending collapse of capitalism.
Meanwhile the more radical Right predicted the demise of the decadent
bourgeois world. True, there were also optimists, and not just among the engineers and scientists. Yet, if cultural pessimism gained a wider audience toward 1914, it may also have been due to the anxieties that proliferated with
regard to the future viability of the Hohenzollern Monarchy. Additionally, academic and intellectual elites now had at their disposal a mass press with
which to articulate their pessimism and peddle their solutions to the crisis to
the general public. The colorful debate about Germany’s future, which became increasingly polarized toward 1914, was reflected in the wide variety
of papers whose orientation, on closer inspection, similarly fell into two large
camps. Pluralization and polarization developed in tandem.

12. The Press, Its Readership, and the Role of Intellectuals
In an age of radio, television, and electronic mass consumption, it is not easy
to imagine the extent to which the German Empire’s culture was based on the
written and spoken word. Cinema attendance, it is true, began to rise markedly just before 1914; but the press remained the most important medium
through which people informed themselves about their locality or the wider
environment and through which ideas and opinions were spread. However
highly developed the art of public speaking in parliaments, in associational
life, or at political rallies may have been, the spoken word had a larger impact
only when it was recirculated in newspapers, journals, books, and pamphlets.
It is important to emphasize this because it demonstrates that the Kaiserreich did have a functioning public sphere. Here—as we also saw with respect to censorship of the arts—the authoritarian state was time and again
reminded that the age of absolutism was over. However, this experience did
not diminish the authorities’ determination to let the emergent civil society
171

Culture

know who held ultimate power, both under the written constitution and in
constitutional reality. In other words, however significant the existence of a
“liberal” public sphere is for an understanding of Imperial Germany’s history, we should not forget to examine the reverse side of the coin. If one took
too much license in expressing opinions, the state’s repressive instruments
were still available and could be mobilized for illiberal purposes.
That contemporaries were conscious of these realities is evidenced by the
behavior of the Social Democratic Reichstag caucus during the period of the
antisocialist laws. The deputies’ immunity and freedom of speech had not
been touched by the proscription of the party’s organizations. However, the
privilege of free speech in Parliament proved an asset only if the statements
were extensively reprinted in the bourgeois press. Not least for this reason,
Social Democrat deputies were careful not to make speeches that were too
radical and might provide the authorities with a pretext to try to suspend their
parliamentary immunity.
Against the background of these developments, two further factors were
important for the rise of the printed word as a means of mass communication
in the nineteenth century. To begin with, there was a decline in the illiteracy
rate, measured by recruits in the armed forces, to below 10 percent between
1875/76 and 1894/95. The literacy rate as a percentage of the total population was even higher. This was particularly true in urban areas, where it was
easier to obtain printed materials. Second, technological breakthroughs, together with the proliferation of the telegraph and railroads, helped to open up
a mass market. Technical progress facilitated cheaper production of newsprint and, with the advent of rotation presses in 1872, a staggering acceleration of printing. The twin rotation machines that first appeared in 1895 were
capable of printing 12,000 copies per hour. Typesetting machines were introduced in 1884. This meant that the daily newspapers—linked as they were to
one of the telegraphic news services—could receive dispatches from the farthest corners of the globe and release them on the mass market within hours.
The statistics give a rough picture of the consequences of these developments.60 Thus in 1912 there existed over 4,000 journals and newspapers (some
of which appeared in several editions per day), an increase of 1,000 since
1895. The estimated total of copies per annum was 5 to 6 billion. In 1903 the
Deutscher Journal-Katalog listed some 300 titles under the section of critical
and literary journals alone. The best-known among them were Hans Delbrück’s
Preussische Jahrbücher and Maximilian Harden’s Die Zukunft. Satirical journals also flourished, among them Simplicissimus, Kladderadatsch, and the
Social Democratic Wahre Jacob.
Book production also shot up. In 1875, around 12,000 titles had been published. By 1910 this figure had almost trebled, reaching 30,317. Soon journals offered something for every taste—from light entertainment to serious
172

The Press, Its Readership, and Intellectuals

literature and intellectual debate. Picture and fashion journalism had emerged
in the middle of the nineteenth century in the form of the Leipziger Illustrierte (1843) and Bazar, published in Berlin since 1855. Humor and satire were
spearheaded at the same time by journals such as Die Fliegenden Blätter and
Die Lustigen Blätter. With the improvements in photography and reproduction, these publications soon gained competitors. The advertising sections of
all these papers are no less interesting to cultural historians than the news and
opinion pages. Here the reader could find advice on health and fashions,
beauty, and higher education. The adverts were addressed to a bourgeois consumer society that had come into prosperity and disposed of sufficient leisure
time to occupy itself with its outward and inner conditions.
As far as the readership is concerned, it is significant that the large dailies
established themselves relatively late. Until then the weeklies and monthlies
predominated, which could not provide up-to-date information and therefore
specialized in the publication of essays, literary opinion columns, and serialized novels. The German press, including dailies, was typically regional in
character, even beyond the newsletters of the innumerable local associations
and clubs. The Generalanzeiger press, which was financed through advertising and could hence be distributed free of charge, played an important role.
The Gartenlaube gained a supraregional readership that was wealthy enough
to afford a subscription. Many of its readers were women. Its editor, who pioneered the serialized novel in Germany, succeeded in pushing the circulation to 400,000 as early as 1876. The journal presented a mix of “poems by
our best poets, always well illustrated,” short-stories, letters, and reports on
nature, health, and cultural news. The educated bourgeoisie found this mix
particularly appealing, and its success allowed the journal to attract wellknown authors, including popular women writers such as Courts-Mahler,
Hillern, and Marlitt. The new mass media were no less lucrative for contributors than they were for publishers. Thus Sudermann received the princely
sum of 10,000 marks for the first serialization rights of his novel Es War.
Among the mass-produced literature was also the colportage novel that
could not be obtained through subscription or in bookstores, but were offered
by traveling salesmen or at newspaper stands. They were devoted to the representation of the trivial: stories about the American Wild West, about love,
or about private investigators and crime. The methods of distribution tended
to awaken the suspicions of censors, who thought that this type of literature
was prone to contain immoral or politically subversive ideas. Clearly, Reclam’s
classics series, of which by 1914 some 14 million of the slim volumes had
been sold, was much more acceptable to censors.
Finally, magazines designed to popularize science constituted a genre that
offers insights into contemporary mentalities. Richly illustrated and reaching
a circulation of some 100,000 copies, these magazines tried to prove that the
173

Culture

sciences were a cultural force in their own right. They mirrored the optimistic
vision of the role of science and technology that was described above and
that contrasted strikingly with the cultural pessimism expressed in the arts
and humanities. Another contrast is found in the thrust of the sciences in the
years before 1914. While Einstein developed his theory of relativity, popular
science magazines gave the impression of unity and promoted a “remystification of the world.” 61
The rise of the daily newspaper did not undermine the regional roots of
the mass circulation press. Only a few papers—especially those published in
Berlin—attained national importance. As early as 1876 no fewer than 83 newspapers appeared in Berlin alone, among them the Berliner Tageblatt and Vossische Zeitung. Important regional papers whose opinions were taken note of
in the capital were the Münchener Neueste Nachrichten, Frankfurter Zeitung,
Kölnische Zeitung, Norddeutsche Allgemeine, Hamburger Fremdenblatt, and
Magdeburger Zeitung. The growth of a daily press also reflected the increasing social differentiation and politicization of German society. For, although
there existed 1,900 publications in 1912 that called themselves “supra-party,”
none of the many papers were ideologically neutral. Another 870 openly appealed to right-wing and conservative readers. Some 580 papers were classified as national-liberal or left-liberal. Around 480 publications were close to
the Catholic church or the Center Party. Finally, the Social Democratic press—
forever having to operate under the vigilant eye of the police censor—experienced an impressive expansion. Among the 60 dailies that were published
after the lapse of the antisocialist laws in 1890, no more than 19 initially appeared on all days of the week. By 1912 this latter figure had risen to 90.
Still, by comparing these figures with the number of “supra-party” papers
that must in effect be counted among the conservative and middle-class press,
much can be gauged concerning the structure of the readership and opinion
formation. Certainly no prosperous bourgeois or East Prussian landowner
would have dreamed of subscribing to or buying the Social Democratic Vorwärts. Conversely, it would have been unthinkable for a Social Democratic
worker to open the agrarian-conservative Neue Preussische Kreuzzeitung. A
Catholic worker from the Ruhr area or Silesia would most likely read local
papers close to the Catholic Center Party. All in all, an analysis of the press
culture of the Kaiserreich provides indirect pointers to the ideological stratification of German society that will be examined in Part IV. 62
The rapid growth and pluralization of the book and newspaper market
opened up careers in journalism for thousands of people. Many of them were
permanently employed as reporters and correspondents, as editors and typesetters. But opportunities also existed for freelancers of all descriptions. Frequently academically trained, they may be described as intellectuals. Many
of them defined themselves as apolitical producers of culture. Others rejected
174

The Press, Its Readership, and Intellectuals

the notion of “art for art’s sake.” However, what united many of those who
worked in journalism with those who favored “art for art’s sake” was a widespread elitism and disdain for the “masses.” Given the development of German politics and society before 1914, none of the members of either camp
succeeded in escaping from a politicization of their literary activities.63 And
those who saw themselves as members of the revolutionary avant-garde were
even quicker to recognize that their “revolution” was inseparably connected
with the political and societal environment in which they lived.
Beyond this basic attitude began the differences in position. Two of these
began to take shape from the 1890s onward, if not before. There were those
who understood their writing as an affirmation and conservation of the status
quo. These conservative intellectuals were confronted at the other end of the
spectrum by those who ascribed to themselves a critical role in politics and
society. In the terminology of the period, most of them had their ideological
home on the Left. Whether they identified with Left Liberals or Social Democrats, what was decisive was their shared desire to change the status quo,
whether through revolution or reform. Given their relations with the established powers, their writings were closely watched by the police; at the same
time, the government and the bureaucracy had no inhibitions in supporting
publications with a conservative and monarchist bias. In this respect, the political Left fared no better, and probably worse, than the advocates of modernism and an aesthetic revolution in the arts.
However, leftist intellectuals eventually gained a competitor on the Right.
Here arose another group of writers who in speeches, books, and articles also
advocated a transformation of the existing order and of the Prusso-German
political system in particular. It may be difficult to find a common denominator of the concepts of societal change that they advanced. Some of these
rightist intellectuals have been described as forerunners of the fascist movements of the interwar period.54 Even if this view has met with objections, it
is indisputable that the German Empire was increasingly besieged, in the last
years before World War I, by its intellectuals on the Right and Left. Their
publishers saw to it that their products were widely available in the “department store of ideologies.”64

175

Part IV: The Realm of Politics

13. The Constitutional Framework
A. Basic Issues
The first three parts of this volume attempted to lay out the economic, social,
and cultural framework on the basis of which the political system and the
politics of the German Empire evolved after 1870/71. While analyzing this
framework, we made repeated references to Part IV and promised that we
would connect the issues that had arisen in the spheres of the economy, society, and culture to the realm of politics. Indeed, we argued that some of
these issues can be properly understood only if complemented by an analysis of the realm of politics.
Thus, when dealing with labor conflicts in Part I, it became clear that not
only their incidence but also their outcomes were related to the state of politics at particular points in time. When discussing the development of society
and problems of stratification, attention was drawn to the fact that the experience of social inequalities would find expression and could best be shown
to be tangible in a political system that, while monarchical and authoritarian
in its constitutional structure, nevertheless had given all male adults the vote
and had hence offered them an opportunity to express their opinions at the
polls. In other words, if those opinions remained more subterranean in daily
social interactions between landlord and land laborer, between the middleclass “mistress of the house” and her domestic servant(s), between factory
owner and his blue-collar workers and white-collar employees, they became
publicly articulated in politics, be it at the end of the workday in the local pub
or at the dinner table, by raising one’s voice at a party’s political rally, or by
going to the polling station on election day. When examining the manifold
aspects of German culture in this period in Part III, it again became clear
when dealing, for example, with cabaret and the question of censorship or
with official suspicions of working-class cultural associations that cultural
production and ostensible leisure activities could not be studied in a vacuum
but were similarly linked to the realm of politics.

The Constitutional Framework

Above all, the larger question that ran through all previous sections concerned whether economic, social, and cultural conflicts increased over time
and thus confirmed the suspicions of the pessimists, who felt that, however
prosperous and dynamic German industry, commerce, and finance may have
been, the Kaiserreich’s position abroad and at home was not improving. On
the contrary, it seemed to them that the Reich was running into a serious crisis; that, as 1913/14 approached, it was reaching an impasse. As mentioned
in the Introduction, an earlier generation of postwar historians had confirmed
this deterioration of the country’s situation with the benefit of hindsight and
on the basis of what was thought to be powerful evidence. To them, the inability of a monarchical constitutional system to open up and take account of
the massive economic, sociocultural, and political changes that had taken
place since 1871 were now undermining its future viability. The unwillingness of those who had the power to introduce political reforms was believed
by historians to have led to growing conflict and a radicalization of the disaffected and disappointed masses of voters. In the end, this process would
either lead to paralysis and civil war or the imposition of a regime that abolished the constitution and ruled with the help of the army to defend the status quo.
Subsequently, another generation of historians came along to disagree with
this position and to highlight the many features of Wilhelmine history that
pointed in the opposite direction. Germany, the protagonists of this view asserted, was on the path toward constitutional reform and would have developed into a British-style constitutional monarchy if it had not been for a
disastrous war that broke out in 1914.1 It has been one of the central lines of
argument of this book that the German Empire found itself on a trajectory of
growing pluralization as well as polarization. This means that between its
founding and World War I it became a more diverse and highly complex society, many features of which have been examined in previous chapters. But,
with the approach of 1914, it also experienced a coagulation of its various
parts and fragments into larger blocs. There are two ways of testing these arguments. The first is to see how far the often latent tensions that have been traced
in the realms of economy, society, and culture are reflected in the politics of the
time. The second test relates the question of the reformability of the PrussoGerman monarchy in the face of an increasingly total war. As this war, which
was not going well for Germany, imposed enormous stresses on the population, was the government finally prepared to make political-constitutional concessions that had been demanded insistently before 1914 and were demanded
again in 1917/18? If it was not prepared to make these concessions even at
the height of a wartime emergency, it becomes more plausible why the Kaiser
and his advisers did not make them in peacetime when the pressure to intro-

177

Politics

duce reforms was comparatively less great. This second test will be conducted in Part V.
At this point we first turn to politics between 1871 and 1914, continuing
our thematic approach by dealing with the structure of the Bismarckian constitution, the evolution of the parliamentary system and its political parties,
and with the many extraparliamentary associations that emerged as part of
the trend toward pluralization as well as bloc formation. The chapter will
conclude with a history of domestic and foreign policies that will be more
narrative, setting the stage for the unfolding of the July crisis of 1914 and the
outbreak of World War I, taken up at the beginning of Part V.
B. The Evolution of the Constitution
The Reich Constitution of 16 April 1871, whose basic structure remained unchanged until the end of World War I, was not a completely new document.
Rather it incorporated elements of the Prussian Constitution of 1850 and the
North German Confederation of 1867. Bismarck held firm ideas about the
shape of the Reich Constitution; but other political forces were also involved
in its creation. What emerged in the end was a framework that was sui generis,
that is, not known in other Western European countries. Generally referred to
as “Prusso-German constitutionalism,” this framework brought together four
features—absolute monarchy, representative parliament, democratic plebiscite,
and federalism.
However, it would be wrong to assume that these basic features were finely
balanced. Rather the balance of power was tipped decisively in favor of the
monarchical element. The preamble provides a first indication that, unlike
the United States, Germany had not been unified through a “revolution from
below,” but by a contract “from above.” At its core, the unification of Germany was based on an alliance of German princes and was proclaimed by
Wilhelm I, “by the Grace of God German Kaiser and King of Prussia, in the
name of the German Reich [and] after the consent of the Federal Council and
the Reichstag” had been granted.2 Presented with the document in the spring
of 1871, the political parties in the Reichstag, the new national parliament,
made no more than a few minor changes to it. Clearly, the compromise was
in the end an uneven one. The reason for this was not only that parliamentary
forces were relatively weak, but also that major debates over the shaping of
the German political system had taken place in 1867 in the context of the
North German Confederation when the faith of many Liberals in being able
to affect serious reforms had been weakened.3
What is particularly striking about the Reich Constitution are the farreaching powers of the Kaiser. He alone had the right to conduct the country’s foreign policy and to make decisions on whether to go to war or to stay
at peace. He was also the supreme commander of the armed forces. He nom178

The Constitutional Framework

inated and dismissed the Reich chancellor, the state secretaries of the Reich
Offices (ministries), and the higher civil service. Apart from executive privileges, the monarch also had legislative rights. They were limited by the Federal Council, representing the German princes, and by the Reichstag. Both
had to approve the bills that the Reich government had drafted with the
Kaiser’s approval. If they refused, the Constitution directed all three organs
to seek compromise, and this in turn gave both the other princes and the parliamentary deputies influence and leverage.
On the other hand, the monarch and his chancellor had at their disposal
powerful means of exerting pressure on deputies to pass a bill in question:
there was the constant possibility that the Kaiser might exercise his right to
dissolve the Reichstag prematurely in the hope that elections would produce
a more compliant representative assembly. If this proved impossible, he could
also threaten to send deputies home for indefinite periods and to stage a socalled Staatsstreich, which in this context amounted to a coup, backed by the
army, in which the constitution was dissolved altogether. This was no empty
threat. Bismarck, in trying to stem all gains in parliamentary influence and
power, repeatedly considered such a coup. Under his successors during the Wilhelmine period rumors of an impending Staatsstreich circulated frequently.
The workings of the Reich Constitution therefore can only be fully understood if we take into account that, in principle, the Kaiser had at his disposal
the use of military force and could set in motion a violent solution to any domestic political conflict. Even if this instrument was never used, the threat of
its use was a powerful political tool to wield. However, this power began to
wane toward 1914. At that time members of the Reich government, Reich
Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg in particular, harbored the fear
that, given the size of the working-class movement, a coup would merely
lead to civil war. He articulated this dilemma during the internal debate on
the infamous memorandum that a retired general, Ludwig von Gebsattel, had
sent to the Crown Prince in 1913; but his objections to implementing Gebsattel’s radical proposals were also symptomatic of the impasse that the
monarchy had reached in domestic politics.4
The Federal Council, as a permanent forum of the German princes or their
delegates, could not be bullied, like the Reichstag, into approving a bill whenever the Kaiser waved a dissolution order. However, the threat of a Staatsstreich
tended to put the non-Prussian princes’ nerves on edge and to induce them to
act as mediators and work harder for legislative compromise. There was a flip
side to this. The kingdom of Prussia, linked to the Kaiser through a personal
union, had a mere seventeen out of fifty-eight votes in the Federal Council.
This was sufficient to block changes that Prussia opposed. But it also meant
that the Reich chancellor, in order to move forward a bill that he wanted to
see ratified, depended on the votes of the other, mostly larger federal states,
179

Politics

such as Bavaria or Saxony, which—unless the bill was withdrawn altogether—
frequently forced him into long negotiations and modifications even before a
bill was sent to the parliamentary assembly. And when, after all this, the compromise that had been agreed upon in the Federal Council reached the Reichstag floor, further changes could and would be proposed by deputies. Clearly,
there were limits to the effectiveness of the threat to dissolve the Reichstag
or stage a Staatsstreich when it came to daily legislative business.
The relationship between the Crown and the Reichstag was further complicated by another peculiarity of Prusso-German constitutionalism: because
the Reich government was appointed by the Kaiser (and could be dismissed
by him alone), the chancellor, who was not responsible to parliament, could
not automatically count on the kind of reliable majority without which a particular bill could not pass into law—unlike in England where the government
emerged from the parliamentary majority and hence could reasonably rely on
its support. All the Reich chancellor could do was to campaign for parties
during election time likely to stand by him. He constantly needed to keep these
parties on his side during the legislative session. If he failed, he might have
to contemplate a Staatsstreich, or risk seeing all state activity grind to a halt.
In short, he was forced into an unending and delicate juggling act that became more and more difficult to maintain, as economic and political interest
groups proliferated, society became enormously more complex, and the country’s international situation deteriorated toward 1914.
It is not difficult to visualize the problems created for the political process
by the triangle between Reich executive, Bundesstaaten, and the parliament.
During election campaigns, the constitutional structure furthered demagogic
sloganeering by parties. As they were not responsible for the formation of a
government, they would try to win over voters by presenting irresponsible
platforms. Meanwhile, members of the Reich government were under pressure to help those parties and candidates whom they knew were favorably
disposed toward the government’s agenda. And once the elections had yielded
such a majority, any pro-government alliance was bound to remain precarious
and had to be propped up with ad hoc concessions, which the deputies—
excluded from responsibility for the Kaiser’s unrepresentative government—
had recklessly come to expect. If concessions led to more irresponsible demands, the system was ultimately threatened by paralysis and by becoming
ungovernable. The advocates of a Staatsstreich saw the way out of this
dilemma by undoing the constitution. Others hoped to escape it through constitutional reforms that would give the Reichstag a greater say, but with it also
greater responsibility. However, since the Kaiser and his advisers stubbornly
resisted such reforms, demanding them amounted in practice to advocating
revolution, the more so since the Social Democrats, by 1912 the largest party
in the national parliament, were thought to be agitating for one.
180

The Constitutional Framework

Although the Constitution concentrated a great deal of power in the Reich
monarch, Prusso-German constitutionalism obviously amounted to a very
cumbersome system, the smooth operation of which required great skill on
the part of the monarch and his advisors. If tensions rose within society and
if domestic and foreign policy options began to shrink, the entire system, unless modified to permit greater participation and support, was threatened by
political paralysis. Because the top leadership was predisposed to resist reform, Bismarck’s creation, engulfed after 1890, if not before, by rapid socioeconomic change, was in a precarious state.
Bismarck always saw and feared this constitutional dilemma and tried to
avoid it by resorting to a number of wide-ranging political maneuvers. One
of them was to pinpoint “Reich enemies” and use them as scapegoats. He also
adopted an active colonial policy and introduced social insurance schemes in
the hope of appeasing the masses. While we will return to these techniques
later,5 the task at this point is to examine how the first Reich chancellor tried
to coordinate the executive and legislative machinery and to streamline it
without having to resort to comprehensive constitutional reform. One of his
approaches was to facilitate the search for legislative compromise in the Federal Council by linking Reich policy more closely with that of Prussia, by far
the largest federal state. Initially he tried to engineer this through personal
unions, later by merging entire ministerial offices. If these plans ran aground,
it was not just because the other federal states feared a “Prussianization” of
the Reich; over time the Prussian Ministry of State, the kingdom’s actual cabinet, also developed an aversion to this form of centralism and possible absorption by the Reich. At the heart of these fears lay the electoral laws, which
were reassuringly restrictive in Prussia and other federal states, but menacingly
democratic at the Reich level. In other words, Prusso-German constitutionalism, for all its monarchist elements, was marked by yet another peculiarity:
the universal male suffrage to elect the national assembly.
When Bismarck introduced this suffrage system in the Reich, he expected
that the conservative rural population would elect conservative deputies to
the Reichstag who would contain the group he feared the most at the time:
middle-class Liberals.6 But his hopes were soon disappointed. The massive
migrations had depleted the agrarian eastern provinces. With the growth of
industry came an increase in the number of industrial workers whose socioeconomic situation soon drove them toward political parties that advocated
political change and constitutional reform. After the chancellor had ignored
the earlier warnings that universal suffrage might have dire consequences
that would destroy his calculations of the 1860s, he admitted in 1879 that, if
faced with the choice between strengthening the powers of the federal states
or of the Reichstag, he would opt for the former.7 Indeed, long before the chancellor’s fall, the Reichstag electoral law, as the historian Hermann Baum181

Politics

garten put it in April 1890, had begun to threaten “not only the state, but our
entire civilization,” because it “brought to the fore in all matters the coarse
instincts of the masses.”8 After his fall and the lapse of the antisocialist laws,
more and more people voted for the Social Democrats and hence for a political force that the Kaiser and his ministers flatly refused even to consider for
inclusion in their constant search for stable legislative majorities. Only in the
1907 national elections did the SPD suffer a setback, but only in terms of
seats; the number of their voters rose from 3 million in 1903 to 3.3 million
four years later.
This development had another, frequently underestimated consequence:
the more the Prussian government, protected as it was by a restricted suffrage,
saw a unitary state looming on the horizon that was parliamentary-democratic,
the more its archconservative members were inclined to distance themselves
from the policies of the Reich, whose government could not avoid dealing
with the Reichstag and Federal Council. Thus began the retreat of Prussia,
the largest and most influential monarchical state, behind the walls of a reactionary particularism, buttressed by a three-class voting system that greatly
favored the Prussian agrarian conservatives. It is from behind these walls that
they worked harder and harder “to put a brake on the democratization of the
Reich and to impede its parliamentarization.”9 Worsening the situation, “the
struggle for leadership” between the Reich and Prussia after the turn of the
century exacerbated the country’s political and constitutional woes;10 for
without Prussian cooperation, the Reich could not really be governed.
Whatever those later troubles, the nightmare of a democratic-parliamentary
unitarism was frightening enough to Bismarck, as early as the 1880s, that he
was tempted to consider solutions to the constitutional dilemma that went beyond his attempts to simplify the Federal Council’s work. Once or twice he
thought of revoking the universal suffrage in the Reich with the help of the
army; he also tried to create economic councils, constituted on the basis of
professions. These bodies were to act as a corporatist counterweight to a
Reichstag elected on the basis of parliamentary constituencies. He also considered establishing a Reich Economic Council, a plan that similarly failed.
Consequently, the first chancellor and his successors had no choice but to
govern with volatile party majorities since the alternative of a Staatsstreich
had become too risky. Meanwhile, decision making in the Federal Council
also became more difficult, thanks to the above-mentioned obstinacy of Prussia and the reluctance of other federal states to play along, especially after the
turn of the century when problems began to mount.
Only within the Reich executive branch was Bismarck relatively successful in promoting centralization under his leadership. The Reich Constitution,
it is true, did make him dependent on the monarch, who could dismiss him
at will. But in actuality the relationship between Wilhelm I and his chancel182

The Constitutional Framework

lor had slowly become reversed. Unlike his son and his grandson, this Kaiser
was not particularly interested in ruling personally; therefore in most cases
he was only too happy to follow Bismarck’s advice and lead. Thus, the Reich
chancellor’s office became the most important power center in Berlin. Until
1890 it was directed by Bismarck, who did not shy away from using modern
means of charismatic leadership and mass propaganda. Even if historians
have become more cautious in characterizing his rule as a Bonapartist dictatorship, the Reich chancellor had certainly learned something from Napoleon
III during his years in Paris as a Prussian diplomat.
It is also clear that the trend toward charismatic centralization that accompanied the growth of the Reich bureaucracy continued long after Bismarck’s
fall.11 However, there was a marked change in the relationship between his
successors and the new Kaiser who ascended to the throne in 1888, after the
death that year of both his grandfather and his father, Frederick III, the Kaiser
of one hundred days. As was his privilege under the Reich Constitution, young
Wilhelm II wanted to use his powers fully himself. It is only against the background of these ambitions that we can understand Bismarck’s abrupt dismissal by the monarch in 1890 and the latter’s persistent attempts in the years
thereafter to recast the executive branch of government in such a way that all
lines of decision making ran to him rather than to the Reich chancellor.
The results of this reorganization, which dragged on until about 1898,
have been the subject of divergent assessments by historians. John Röhl has
argued that the Kaiser and his advisors succeeded by then in creating a centralized government that was based on Wilhelm’s “personal rule” as well as
a further centralization that was based on a “royal mechanism.”12 HansUlrich Wehler and others have denied that the Reich’s “real constitution” was
successfully reshaped in this way. They have underscored instead the emergence of a largely leaderless polycracy that—propelled by impersonal forces—
consisted of several competing power centers.13 The weak and erratic Wilhelm
II was in this view no more than a “shadow emperor,” and other institutions
and forces are said to have filled the vacuum left by Bismarck. A resolution
of this conflict of views might be achieved by sharply dividing the Wilhelmine period into two phases. Up to the turn of the century, it seems, the Kaiser
did succeed in tailoring the governmental machinery to his specifications. However, when it came to deploying this machinery in the fields of foreign and
domestic policy after 1900, and when, on top of it all, political difficulties
began to accumulate both at home and abroad, the monarch lacked the imagination, strength, and steadiness to control both the executive and the increasingly well-organized and vocal movements in the political arena. It was from
this point onward that the civilian and military bureaucracy, together with
parliamentary as well as extraparliamentary forces, began to jockey for strategic positions from which to fill the void that the monarch had left.
183

Politics

While Röhl has continued to defend his position, differences of opinion
have erupted among the representatives of the polycracy perspective. The
question is to what extent larger centers of power and influence can be discerned in the constitutional development of the Wilhelmine period. While no
one denies that such centers came into existence, the disagreement pertains
to their actual identity and how important they were. Manfred Rauh has advanced the hypothesis that toward 1914 the Reichstag emerged as a major
center of gravity, powerful enough to propel a “parliamentarization” of
Prusso-German constitutionalism.14 Geoff Eley and a number of British scholars of German history have argued that the extraparliamentary sphere became the arena in which the major developments of the period were being
prepared after the successful mobilization of new political forces “from below.”15 Margaret Anderson’s recent study probably also falls in this category,
even if she is not so much concerned with the question of parliamentarization as with the gradual assertion and exercise of democratic practices at the
grassroots’ level of German society through universal male suffrage.16 But
she also shows how arduous it was to weaken the counterforces that threw
themselves into the path of those attempting to democratize. We will return
to these conflicts below in the context of a more detailed examination of the
question of pluralization and polarization in the political realm.
A third group of historians has identified as crucial the executive’s growing power in a wider sense that they relate to the rise of modern bureaucracies and the interventionist state.17 While these arguments about Germany’s
political development will also be scrutinized in subsequent chapters, the
ordering of the economic and financial structures of the Reich must be discussed first.
C. Civil, Economic, and Financial Codes
For an understanding of how the country came to be organized in terms of
civil law and its ordering function in the society and economy, the introduction of the Bürgerliche Gesetzbuch (BGB, Civil Code) in 1900 is of fundamental importance. In hundreds of paragraphs the BGB standardized norms
of family and inheritance law that had been covered until then by the federal
states and frequently even by customary law at the local level. The Civil
Code, drafted by liberal-conservative jurists and professors, was celebrated
at the time of its ratification as a great advance in the creation of a modern
bourgeois society. But, on the negative side, the code abolished overnight numerous local rules and common-law customs that had been in use in the federal states until 1900. This was particularly true of the legal position of
women, which had been much stronger in various parts of the country. Overall, the BGB strengthened the position of men and husbands inside and outside the family.
184

The Constitutional Framework

Other legal norms relating to industry, commerce, and finance had been
established step by step in the decades before 1871. The Commercial Code
of 1861 defined the rules by which businessmen were expected to abide. The
Reich Constitution of 1871 therefore contained no more than a few articles
that regulated, in rather global terms, questions of tariffs, as well as of railroads, postal and telegraphic services, and shipping. The Reich was given
legislative responsibility for refining the law with respect to these specific areas. This means that the Reich’s economic constitution cannot be found in a
single document like the Constitution of 1871. It was made up of a multitude
of successively ratified laws and, increasingly, court decisions. The 1897 ruling of the Reich Court concerning cartels is a good case in point. In it cartels
and syndicates—that is, horizontal cooperative agreements between independent companies to fix prices and production quotas—were declared to be
binding contracts in private law.18 Firms in breach of cartel agreements, which
various branches of industry had meanwhile concluded in larger numbers,
could be taken to court. It was a crucial ruling that moved German industry
and commerce away from the principle of market competition in the direction of a protectionist capitalism. This capitalism differed from that of the
United States, where the Sherman Act of 1890, notwithstanding various subsequently ratified exceptions, explicitly defended the principle of competition against restrictive economic practices, such as cartels.
If the state as a regulatory agency advanced but slowly into the economic
field, governmental interest in the financial constitution had long been strong,
and Bismarck made sure to incorporate earlier clauses in the 1871 document.
In this respect he knew the population and its representatives to be on his
side; they were no less anxious to establish firm rules under which taxes were
raised and state expenditures allocated. After all, “freed from all ideological
sloganeering and empty phrase-making, the sober figures of the state budget”
more than any other official material told the “bare facts of the political and
social condition” of the Kaiserreich.19 Article 69 of the Constitution stipulated that the Reich’s income and expenditures were to be estimated in advance on an annual basis, and that a law approving the budget was to be
ratified by the Federal Council and the Reichstag before the beginning of each
fiscal year. The army budget alone was fixed on a more long-term basis. It
was put before the legislature every seven (and later every five) years, and
even then only proposed additional expenditures were open to parliamentary
scrutiny. Similar rules for the annual submission and debate of the nonmilitary budget existed in the federal states and local communities.
In the federal states the restrictive suffrage systems, often based on an income tax qualification, guaranteed the dominance of the wealthier classes
through their elected representatives and hence the passage of conservative
budgets that had been drawn up by conservative state governments.20 Univer185

Politics

sal suffrage at the Reich level and the different social composition of the national parliament, however, made it much more likely that finance bills might
run into trouble. There was even the possibility that a more radical majority
might change appropriations or cut expenditures beyond what the Reich government found acceptable. If compromise proved impossible to achieve and
the government was not prepared to withdraw its bill, Germany faced the
same deadlock that Prussia did during the constitutional conflict of the 1860s:
the executive would be forced to carry on with an emergency budget in the
hope that a compromise could be struck at a later date, leading to the budget’s retroactive approval by a more progovernment Reichstag. The other alternative was to bypass the constitutional structure altogether by staging a
Staatsstreich. Although it never came to this crisis point, the Reich budget did
become a major annual battleground between an unrepresentative government, on the one hand, and an “irresponsible” parliament, on the other, ultimately culminating in an intensely bitter struggle over the 1913 budget. And
since the budget was “the realization of a program of political action” that
deeply affected society’s future as a whole, looking at the huge conflicts over
successive Reich finance bills proves especially instructive for studying the
above-mentioned constitutional dilemma and the threat of ungovernability.21
First, however, we must inquire into how the power to raise different types
of taxes was divided up between the Reich, the federal states, and the local
communities. The Reich Constitution gave the central government the ultimate power over all tax legislation. Yet Article 70 also specified that the sources
of Reich income were restricted to tariffs, postal and telegraphic services,
and to whatever indirect taxes on consumption the legislature agreed to levy.
Loans could only be taken out to cover “extraordinary expenditure.” The
powers to raise potentially very lucrative direct taxes, by contrast, were given
to the federal states. Local communities and cities were left with taxes on land
and buildings, local duties, and profits generated by commercially run public utilities, such as gas works. They could also expect some funds from the
federal states, for example, for education. In Prussia, a law ratified in July
1893 provided guidance to the local communities on how to deal with their
finances. Even more important was the question of fiscal equalization in the
case of deficits or surpluses at one of these three levels. The solution found
to this particular question contained further potential for major conflicts, due
to the above-mentioned division of direct and indirect tax rights between the
Reich and federal states. Some 80 to 90 percent of Reich expenditures went
to the armed forces and were distributed among the four independent military contingents of Prussia, Saxony, Bavaria, and Württemberg (Table 73).
These budgets proved particularly vulnerable to sharp increases once the pre1914 international arms race began. If Reich income from tariffs and other
indirect taxes could not cover armament expenditures, the federal states were
186

The Constitutional Framework

expected to chip in with so-called matricular contributions to balance the
Reich budget.
The reasons for this system are not difficult to fathom: the Reich had to
be prevented from using its supreme authority for a transfer, by legislation,
of direct tax rights from the federal states to the center. If this happened, the
propertied classes would be exposed to the threat of a democratically elected
parliament voting for progressively higher taxes on income and wealth. It
was difficult enough to get the well-to-do to pay direct taxes in the federal
states, where, thanks to their restrictive suffrage systems, they were protected
by reassuringly conservative majorities in the regional legislatures. The
Prussian minister of finance, Johannes von Miquel, experienced these difficulties firsthand when he introduced a bill that imposed a progressive rate of
0.6 percent rising to 4 percent on incomes of over 900 marks per annum.22
The conservative deputies in the diet found this plan outrageous and resisted
it. The prospect of the Reichstag trying to tap a lucrative source of income
with even steeper direct tax rates greatly alarmed the country’s wealthy, including those—and there were quite a few of them—who had become artful
tax dodgers.
Against the background of these realities concerning the distribution of
wealth and power in Germany, we can begin to see one reason why Bismarck
abandoned free trade in 1879 and resorted to successive tariff increases during the 1880s. His aim was not only to help industry and agriculture as they
clamored for economic protection in this period of retarded growth, but also
to augment Reich income at a time when the increasing activities of a more
centralized Reich government inevitably triggered additional expenditures.
Apart from indirect taxes on tobacco and alcohol, tariffs presented a good
source of income. Indeed, in 1879 tariffs appeared so lucrative that some feared
the Reich would become wasteful and profligate. In order to block this development, parliament ratified the so-called Franckenstein Clause that required
the Reich to transfer to the federal states all annual income from tariffs and
indirect taxes over 130 million marks.23 It also meant that the “matricular contributions” that hitherto had been provisional became a permanent feature of
the fiscal code. Thenceforth a peculiar system of moving tax revenue back
and forth between the Reich and the federal states fell into place, making them
mutually dependent upon each other. The dangers of this system of financial
equalization came into full view only when the Reich stopped paying the federal states excess revenue from tariffs under the Franckenstein Clause the
moment its own expenditures had begun to surpass its income from tariffs
and indirect taxes. Thus, the federal states suddenly found themselves in the
role of paymaster, obliged to transfer money to Berlin in the shape of regular and rapidly rising “matricular contributions.” Unhappy at this turn of events,
they began to push the Reich to increase indirect taxes and tariffs and take
187

Politics

out loans for “extraordinary expenditures,” even if the latter were in fact used
to pay for ordinary budget items.
The consequences of this development were dramatic for the economy
and politics. The Reich debt rose to 5 billion marks by 1914, placing, together
with the debts of the federal states (16.3 billion) and local communities (7.5
billion), a heavy burden on the capital market and adversely affecting private
investment.24 Loans became more expensive. Meanwhile the leftward drift in
the Reichstag’s political composition had made it more and more difficult to
increase tariffs and indirect taxes. After all, these taxes hit the weekly budget
of low-income groups particularly hard. The penny added to the price of a
loaf of bread because of higher grain tariffs was a socially explosive issue
and grist to the mills of the Social Democrats, who highlighted the tax system as a typical expression of an unjust Wilhelmine class state. They also
pointed to the Reich’s supreme fiscal authority and demanded that the government transfer direct tax privileges from the federal states to the center.
The propertied classes were terrified at this prospect. They feared heavily
progressive income taxes imposed by a leftist Reichstag that had been elected
by a majority of men with meager incomes who were incensed by the seemingly endless raising of taxes on items of daily consumption.
Of course, there was the alternative of increasing “matricular contributions” to plug the Reich deficit. But this also became a dangerous device,
especially in the less populous smaller states, where the contributions were
raised as a per capita tax. Moreover, the annual variations in the size of the
required contributions threatened to throw state budgets into disarray, as reliable projections became impossible. Finally, the financial crisis at the top
also undermined the financial health of local communities, especially in the
country’s economically weaker regions. What all this added up to was that,
as early as 1904, the entire financial constitution was in serious disorder.
Federal states felt besieged from both sides and, led by conservative Prussia,
were less and less prepared to make any payments, whether to Berlin or local administrations. Although it had become increasingly clear that the financial constitution was in dire need of a fundamental overhaul, attempts at
reform repeatedly bogged down. The Reich finance bills of 1906 and 1908/9,
designed to plug the deficits, quickly turned out to be totally inadequate.
Above all, these bills sparked major domestic conflicts that, as we shall see,
greatly exacerbated the growing crisis of the Prusso-German constitutional
order as a whole during the final years before World War I (Table 72).25
However significant the story of taxes may be for the development of the
Kaiserreich, the ways in which revenue was spent and redistributed in society deserve no less intensive study (Table 73). However, we are dealing here
with an issue on which the Reich Constitution did not contain any instructions beyond the requirement that both the Federal Council and Reichstag
188

Parties and Elections

ratify an annual plan. In order to understand where the money went, we must
investigate how socioeconomic and political power were actually distributed
and wielded in Imperial Germany.26

14. Parties and Elections in a Period of Dynamic Change
A. Problems of Parliamentarization, Party Structures,
and the Sociology of Parties
During the past thirty years, the question of whether the Kaiserreich was on
the road to parliamentarism has generated a good deal of heat among scholars, not least because this question is closely bound up with the problem of
the reformability of Prusso-German constitutionalism and of the extent of the
pre-1914 crisis. Writing in the 1960s and 1970s, Fritz Fischer and HansUlrich Wehler took rather pessimistic views of the situation, asking whether
the Kaiser’s decision to go to war in 1914 was an attempt to cut the Gordian
knot of a domestic and foreign policy deadlock.27 Subsequently, other historians, Thomas Nipperdey and a group of British and American historians
among them, doubted that Germany had purposefully maneuvered itself into
a cul-de-sac.28
Alfred Milatz and Ernst Deuerlein pointed out long ago that the possibilities of reforming the Bismarckian Constitution were “limited.”29 That was
putting it rather mildly. According to Article 78, any bill proposing to change
the Constitution would fail if fourteen of the delegates of the federal princes
in the Federal Council voted against it. Since Prussia commanded seventeen
votes, a single federal state had an absolute veto, and this state increasingly
saw itself in the years before 1914 as the last bastion of monarchism and of
the social and political status quo against the democratizing pressures of the
prewar decades. In view of the Reich’s deteriorating domestic and diplomatic
position after the turn of the century, chances of effecting peaceful constitutional change through legislation were therefore pretty much nil. Although
reform was vital for the monarchy’s survival and, for this very reason, was
urged by many far-sighted contemporaries, the balance of actual power was
tilted too heavily against such reform.
However, a constitutional system can, at least in principle, undergo tacit
reform due to subterranean shifts in power relations between the individual
organs of the Constitution. In two studies, Manfred Rauh has tried to advance
“a complete theory of the reichsdeutsche constitutionalism,”30 arguing that a
“silent parliamentarization” was in fact well underway in pre-1914 Germany.
In his first book he traced this alleged development up to 1909. He later extended his analysis of this parliamentarizing process in a second monograph
up to “its (provisional) end in 1917/18.” In particular he interpreted parlia189

Politics

mentarization as a long-term process that started off with a power shift away
from the federal states toward the Reich, and thereafter from the monarchical Reich executive branch toward the Reichstag. Parliament had effectively
penetrated the executive’s exclusive sphere of decision making, he maintained, including in the field of foreign policy. According to Rauh, another
indication of major shifts is found in the changing behavior of Reichstag
deputies, who, he believed, began to interact in ways typically found in fully
fledged parliamentary systems.
More recent studies concerning the power structure of the late Kaiserreich have taken more ambivalent positions. The voices of the deputies, it is
true, became louder in matters of foreign policy as Germany’s international
isolation increased toward 1914. There were votes of no-confidence, even if,
given the structure of the Bismarckian Constitution, they did not lead to ministerial resignations. On the contrary, criticism merely confirmed the Imperial
court and military in their view that preserving the monarch’s constitutional
right to conduct the country’s foreign policy and to decide on whether to go
to war had become more vital than ever. While the parties did display modes
of behavior that were “adequate to a parliamentary system,” at the same time
there were “considerable tendencies to adapt to existing constitutional conditions and to accept the game rules of political influence-wielding that had
been shaped by the constitutional system of government.”31 Ultimately it was
thought impossible “to decide with certainty” which of the two currents
“would in the final analysis prove more powerful.”
One way of reaching firmer ground in this debate is to examine—as we
shall in Part V—the enormous resistance that the government and conservative military and civilian elites put up toward the end of World War I when
defeat appeared on the horizon and it would have been wise to make constitutional concessions to an increasingly restive and radicalized population and
its representatives. What must be remembered at this point is that Bismarck
gave the Constitution its peculiar antidemocratic, federal structure precisely
in order to make the parliamentarization of the political system more difficult. It also seems wise to differentiate between contemporary perceptions
and developments that have become visible only with the benefit of hindsight. There were, after all, those who were prepared to defend the status quo
to the hilt, if necessary with the force of arms. To them a gradual slide into
Western-European parliamentarism was tantamount to revolution. However,
there were others who advocated a transformation of the existing power
structure and who hoped to make the Reichstag the key decision-making center. If the debate on parliamentarization periodically reached a crescendo, it
may be that the prospects for a silent constitutional change were more propitious at such junctures than they were in the years of crisis before 1914.

190

Parties and Elections

One of these periods coincided with the founding of the German Empire,
when the Liberals dominated the Reichstag and Bismarck could not get any
legislation passed without their support. But this sharing of responsibility did
not directly challenge the uneven distribution of powers that the Constitution
had just established. The Liberals were satisfied with participating in the formulation of the many new laws that had to be ratified after 1871, realizing
that they needed the monarchical state to guarantee stability at home and
abroad during this initial period. However, this did not mean that they had
abandoned for good all plans to move the Reich toward genuine parliamentary government. On the contrary, believing themselves to be indispensable
to Bismarck, many of them, among whom their leader Rudolf von Bennigsen
was most prominent, came to feel that time was on their side in promoting a
slow transformation of the Constitution. All they had to do was to wait for
the tide of history, which had created parliamentary systems in Western Europe, to sweep into Germany. The drawback of this position was that it impeded the formulation of concrete claims to power as the deputies were busy
passing legislation on all sorts of more specialized issues.
Even more importantly, Bennigsen underestimated Bismarck’s determination not to let time work for the Liberals, but to use the 1870s to promote the
consolidation of the conservative-monarchical order. This is why the chancellor, whose personal position had been further strengthened by the state-building
effort after 1871, did his best to keep his state secretaries subordinated to him
directly and to prevent them from becoming ministers answerable to parliament.
Above all, Bismarck worked tirelessly to resolve in his and the monarchy’s
favor the basic tension within the constitutional structure between representative and autocratic-monarchical government.32 An opportunity to effect
such a further shift came with the onset of the “Great Depression.” In those
early years of retarded economic growth, Bismarck skillfully succeeded in
dashing the Liberals’ earlier hopes for the future. Backed by political forces
that had meanwhile organized themselves into powerful pressure groups outside the Reichstag, his model of autocratic rule slowly gained the upper hand.
Divided among themselves, frustrated by the success of the “second founding of the Reich” in 1878/79 (i.e., the chancellor’s turn against the Social
Democrats and away from free trade), and now led by a generation of more
conservative-nationalist deputies, the Liberal parties thenceforth became the
mouthpiece of groups that were less interested in major constitutional reforms and more concerned with economic success and political stability. The
higher and more comprehensive goal of parliamentarization moved to the
margins of the political goals of the National Liberals, represented primarily
by the numerically weak Left Liberals. Yet even then, when he could have
been more relaxed about the Liberal threat, the chancellor and many conser-

191

Politics

vatives never lost sight of it and did their level best to remove, if possible forever, the danger of parliamentarization.
An appreciation of the victory of the Bismarckian system over the liberalconstitutional optimism of the Gründerzeit of the early 1870s is vital for an
understanding of developments during the Wilhelmine period. The inability
of the Kaiser to give teeth to his “personal rule” after the turn of the century,
and the polycentrism that subsequently resulted, no doubt increased the opportunities of the Reichstag and the major parties to influence political decision making.33 This was particularly true in the wake of the Daily Telegraph
affair of 1908, when the British paper published tactless remarks by Wilhelm
II that further weakened the prestige of the Kaiser. It has been argued that the
state secretaries, unlike in Bismarck’s time, now seemingly behaved like ministers in a parliamentary system: they lobbied and consulted with deputies.
Naval Secretary Alfred von Tirpitz tried to make members of parliament
more amenable to approving higher naval estimates by inviting them on carefully staged tours of Imperial shipyards to admire the building of Germany’s
awesome battleships. However, these tactical maneuvers in no way changed
the monarchist loyalties of the ministers. These considerations would also
seem to apply to the pressure from Social Democratic and Catholic voters to
fill the universal suffrage with a more democratic spirit. “Practicing democracy,” as Margaret Anderson has shown, had many advocates at the grassroots
level, while the authorities and conservative groups resisted the demands for
fair elections.34
Furthermore, we should not mistake the growing criticism of “personal
rule” by Reichstag deputies as a demand for the parliamentarization of the
Hohenzollern monarchy. Factors that must always be added to the equation
include the country’s increasing difficulties both at home and abroad, the rise
of the “unpatriotic” Social Democrats, and the impact of universal suffrage
for men, all of which promoted political polarization among the parties and
made it even more difficult to reach a broad and lasting consensus on basic
issues and to draw up proposals for constitutional reform. Nor did the manifold extraparliamentary pressure groups contribute to this process. Indeed,
the deepening of ideological differences made it difficult and ultimately wellnigh impossible to forge majorities for even the most ordinary bills. Basically, the party system had to be reformed before there could be an effective
movement among the parties for parliamentary government, and such a reform was not in sight in the last years before World War I. Apart from the Social Democrats and the small band of Left Liberals, the parties showed little
inclination, even as the crisis of “personal rule” deepened, to work together
to reform the Reich Constitution or to promote parliamentarism as a mediumterm objective. These realities lead us into a more detailed analysis of party
structures and sociology.
192

Parties and Elections

The parties had not been given an explicit role in the Reich Constitution.
Individuals and local notables elected as deputies were assumed to be subject
only to their consciences when they voted on a particular issue. Nevertheless,
even before 1871 political parties had come into existence almost everywhere
in Central Europe. It was tacitly assumed that they would participate in the
process of opinion-formation. At the same time, the early party organizations
did not have the same stable features as those of the late Wihelmine period.
They had started as electoral associations run by local elites, and this is what
they continued to be for many years after the Reich’s founding in 1871. It
took the Conservatives, who were moreover badly split in their attitude toward Bismarck, several years to develop consolidated party organizations.
During the early 1870s the Free Conservatives, who had supported Bismarck
in his unification policy and who, as a reflection of their attitude, after 1871
operated under the name of “Deutsche Reichspartei,” barely consisted of more
than a few informal electoral committees and even fewer electoral associations. The Central Committee included no more than a fraction of the thirtyseven Free Conservative deputies who had been elected in 1871, and the
remaining vacancies were filled by cooptation.
The Old Conservatives, who were convinced that Bismarck’s policy of
unification had been fundamentally wrong, split again in 1872 after much
wrangling in connection with the debate over a new District Code (Kreisordnung). When the remaining Old Conservatives lost no fewer than thirty-five
of their fifty-seven seats in the 1874 Reichstag elections, many of them concluded that the time had come to reconcentrate their forces and to make
peace with the Reich chancellor (Table 79). The German Conservative Party
was born two years later, and during the 1877 Reichstag elections the new
party almost doubled the number of its seats to forty. After the 1878 elections
it even had fifty-nine deputies in parliament. Still, the party continued to rely
less on a well-oiled organization than on its informal contacts in the higher
bureaucracy and at the various courts. Its spokesmen, most of whom were socially connected with the agrarians, had many such contacts. It was only due
to pressure increasingly exerted on them by the example of the—in terms of
voter mobilization—more successful Social Democrats and the Catholic Center, and also in reaction to their economic decline, that the agrarian Conservatives built up a more effective party machine.
Meanwhile the National Liberals had won no fewer than 125 seats in the
1871 elections, followed by the Progressives (46 seats) and the Liberal Reich
Party (30 seats) (Table 79). For the moment these groups remained tied to
each other in rather peculiar ways. In parliament they formed three independent caucuses, while running a common network of electoral associations and
committees throughout the country.35 In 1874 the National Liberals gained
as many as 155 seats. The Liberal Reich Party, by contrast, suffered heavy
193

Politics

losses and remained a splinter group until its merger with the Liberal Association and the Progressives. The subsequent history of German liberalism is
a story of increased organization, but also of painful divisions, disappointments, and decline. This decline occurred first at the Reich level and later in
the regions and local communities, although the Liberals tended to retain
strongholds in some major cities.
As the parties changed, so did the ways and means by which laws were
prepared. As long as the politics of notables predominated and the Liberals
were at the peak of their success, it was rare for formal negotiations to be
held between the Reich government and the majority parties. Bismarck focused his attention on influential deputies, whom he invited to his famous
evening receptions. If a vote had to be prepared at all, the preliminary work
took place in so-called Free Commissions, which informally and confidentially brought the leading deputies together. At first there were only a few
permanent expert committees, which were occasionally complemented by ad
hoc special committees. But on repeated occasions, compromises that had
been struck informally in advance were torn up in the plenary session. The
frustration felt by party elders over such setbacks hastened the introduction
of greater party discipline, which in turn promoted the emergence of more
stable party structures and clearer procedures.
One of the advantages to Bismarck of his informal gatherings and consultations was that he could exclude parties and politicians he found undesirable. In the first years after the German Empire’s founding, members of the
Catholic Center Party were treated as the pariahs of parliamentary life. This
particular party had its roots in southern Germany in the 1860s. In the summer of 1870, the decisive impulse came from the Rhineland to create a supraregional Catholic movement. The Center captured 63 seats in the first Reichstag
elections and, three years later, commanded no fewer than 91 (Table 79).
During the 1880s, the number of Center Party deputies hovered between 98
and 100, displaying an impressive stability of electoral support thereafter
right up to 1912. The Center, which did not have a particularly strict organization at first, could count on the support of an active associational life and
of the church hierarchy. Not surprisingly, the latter favored Catholic notables
and the local clergy. However, it is unlikely that they could have operated so
smoothly and succeeded in making tangible inroads into the traditional electoral strongholds of the Liberals if they had not come under external pressure
resulting from the Kulturkampf. More than anything else, Bismarck’s and the
Liberals’ struggle against them welded the Catholics together. When this period of ostracism came to an end, the common bonds began to weaken. Toward 1914 a number of Catholic industrial workers decided to vote for the
Social Democrats, as memories of the Kulturkampf faded and no longer provided a particularly strong ideological glue. Meanwhile, in Protestant Prus194

Parties and Elections

sia and at the Imperial court, animosities against the Catholic church and the
Center Party remained too strong to herald the complete end of their stigmatization as “Reich enemies.” Faith-based politics may have become less important than the politics of class in the final years before World War I, but it
remained a factor to be reckoned with.
The experience of being stigmatized as a dangerous “Reich enemy” also
united the political arm of the working-class movement during the 1870s. In
1875 the Allgemeinen Deutschen Arbeitervereine (General German Workers’ Associations) combined with the Social Democrats under the leadership
of August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht. The first electoral successes were
very encouraging. In 1871 there were merely two Social Democratic deputies
(Table 79). Three years later, this figure had risen to nine and by 1877 to
twelve, with almost 10 percent of the voters casting ballots for the new leftist party. By August this party counted over 38,000 members in 291 local
groups. The antisocialist laws put a severe damper on the growth of the Left.
After their lapse in 1890, the growth of SPD representation in the Reichstag
was arrested only once, that is, during the 1907 elections. By 1912 the workers’ party conquered no fewer than 110 seats and became the largest party in
the national parliament, with consequences for domestic politics that will be
examined later in this part.
Social Democracy’s status as a new type of party, very different from the
loose organizations of notables, first emerged during elections throughout the
1870s. Many years ago, Sigmund Neumann tried to develop a taxonomy for
this new type of organization by differentiating between representation parties, on the one hand, and integration parties, on the other.36 In comparison to
the parties of notables (Honoratiorenparteien), integration parties were more
firmly set with regard to both ideology and organization. From the start, they
tried to attract voters and their families, young and old, on a permanent basis. It was a successful recipe that, according to Neumann, soon began to
have an impact on the older liberal representation parties. In order to survive
in elections, they too had to transform themselves into integration parties.
From the 1870s onward, the Honoratiorenparteien thus began their slow
decline. Parties now built more durable structures that survived beyond election campaigns. Political work inside and outside parliament increasingly occurred in formally constituted committees that had their own bylaws and
procedures. The work of the diets in the federal states developed along similar lines.
To be sure, informal channels of influence and power did not disappear, and
even in the Social Democratic Party, which in so many ways was the pacemaker
of organizational modernization, an ostensibly democratic-representative
constitution often became a facade behind which powerful politicians made
their deals. This tendency to form oligarchies, which Robert Michels wrote
195

Politics

about in connection with the pre-1914 SPD,37 was even more marked among
parties of the Right. Although, following a broader trend toward participation, they began to put on “democratic gloves,”38 authoritarian rule by a few
continued to be regarded as a virtue.
All in all, the organization of the country’s political parties in 1913 was
therefore quite different from that of 1871. Only the basic pattern of four
large blocs (Social Democrats, Liberals, Conservatives, and the Center), supplemented by divergent minority parties (Poles, Danes, Alsace-Lorraineans,
and Guelphs), remained unchanged (Table 79). The internal structures and the
modes of operation had meanwhile undergone a striking metamorphosis.
A look at the type of politician who could be seen wheeling and dealing
in the Kaiserreich’s assemblies shows that it would be erroneous to equate
changes in party organization with a silent parliamentarization. The basic
trend, which sooner or later affected all parties, was for the amateur to be
slowly replaced by the professional. If nothing else, the growth and complexity of parliamentary business made this shift virtually inevitable. In the early
days of the Bismarckian period, it was perhaps still possible to take the train
to the capital to be present for a crucial vote, but otherwise to continue with
one’s main profession in business or agriculture back at home. Nor were the
costs of serving in parliament so high that they could not be met by a deputy’s
ordinary income. With the passage of time, however, political work became
more expensive and time-consuming. The shift from representation party to
integration party, as observed by Neumann, can also be gleaned from a growing debate on whether parliamentarians should be paid expenses and salaries.
That this demand should be promoted more and more insistently indicated,
furthermore, that the social composition of the assemblies was changing.
Conservative opponents of expense accounts rightly argued that, in the age
of universal suffrage for men, any such payments would act as an “incentive
for wider circles to put themselves forward as candidates.”39 Of course, conservatives had nothing but disdain for the “mercenaries of parliament” who,
on top of it all, did not even have the “proper” social background.40 Such attitudes contributed to delaying the introduction of payments to Reichstag
deputies until 1906. But in the long run not even the delaying tactics of the
conservatives and the Reich government were able to prevent the rise of the
professional politician who, beyond the routine of attending the plenary sessions, had made himself an expert in certain fields and served on specialized
committees.41
Heinrich Best has collected more detailed information on the social profile
of deputies. His material signals that a major sociological change occurred,
adding that it remained incomplete and unfolded in a segmented fashion.
Thus, the trend toward professionalization was much more prevalent in the
SPD than elsewhere. The percentage of farmers and men from small towns
196

Parties and Elections

among the deputies remained higher than might have been expected from the
share of the total population living in urban centers. Among Social Democratic deputies, 60 to 65 percent were city-dwellers, while a mere 7 to 10 percent came from rural areas. None of the other parties had so many urban
members. The Social Democratic Party also had a larger share of deputies
who were party functionaries or lobbyists and hence professionals in a double sense. The greater “modernity” of the Social Democrats is also evident
in their religious affiliations, or lack thereof. Compared to their colleagues in
other parties, more of them had been seized by the wave of secularization and
hence did not list a formal denomination in their resumés.42
Other calculations indicate a less segmented process of secularization.
Thus the “transition from an ascriptive to a competitive mode of recruitment
of political elites” is reflected in the successive drop in the number of aristocratic deputies up to 1912.43 The share of university-trained deputies remained
above 50 percent throughout, but it also began to decline. A similar drop
affected members who had received legal educations. Meanwhile the share
of deputies who held positions in modern pressure groups increased. With respect to other sociological criteria, our knowledge of the Reich’s changing
parliamentary elites still needs to be refined. As regards Social Democratic
candidates for Reichstag elections, a few data point to an underrepresentation
of unskilled workers even in this party. Tobacco workers formed an exception here, but their share declined from 7.1 percent in 1898 to 3.8 percent in
1912. Meanwhile the share of skilled workers in the Social Democratic Reichstag caucus grew from 53.6 percent in 1898 to 66.4 percent in 1912. During
this time the percentage of candidates who failed to gain a seat remained relatively constant at around 75 percent. Next to the tobacco workers, workers
in the lumber industry, printers, and editors of party newspapers also saw their
share of seats decline. Metal and construction workers, by contrast, made
gains, as did party and trade union functionaries.
The gradual displacement of the parties of notables by integration parties
and of the amateur politician by the professional might be thought to have facilitated communication among the deputies. However, professional homogenization did not mean that social background became any less significant.
Early on, Bismarck had expressed his dismay at “the suffocating increase in
party bickering and hatred among the caucuses.”44 In the years before 1914,
as political and ideological conflicts deepened, a continued consciousness of
social differences tended to exacerbate the situation, making cooperation more
difficult. The coordination of campaign styles at the national level worked in
the direction of bloc formation. Both the party system and the social composition of parties therefore moved in a direction that impeded parliamentarization. The attempts under the Hohenzollern monarchy to effect constitutional
change were impeded by the emergence of a number of tightly organized polit197

Politics

ical blocs, led by politicians with uncompromising ideological commitments
and interests.
B. Electoral Systems and Electoral Behavior
The analysis of electoral systems offers further evidence of the problems raised
by Rauh’s hypothesis on parliamentarization. As was the case in many other
European countries, political systems at the local and regional levels restricted
suffrage that contributed to the progressive hardening of party politics. The
most frequently cited example is Prussia’s indirect three-class voting system,
which was important if for no other reason because two-thirds of Germany’s
adult male population resided in Prussia. As indicated by the name, there
were three types of voters, categorized according to their tax bracket. Voters
in the highest taxation class (about 2.0 percent of the population, depending
on the year) selected one-third of the electors, who in turn elected a corresponding number of candidates to the Prussian Diet. Another third were
chosen by voters in the middle tax bracket, constituting 4 to 14 percent of
taxpayers. The majority of those eligible to vote—some 80 to 85 percent—
belonged to the third category and cast their ballots for the last third of the
electors. This meant that a vote in the first category tended to carry sixteen
to twenty-six times more weight than one in the third category. A good 10
percent of eligible voters (i.e., men over twenty-four years of age) fell below
the tax threshold and were hence barred from voting altogether. Given these
realities, it is not surprising that, for example, during the diet elections of
1908 the mainly agrarian Conservatives gained 47.9 percent of the seats,
although no more than 16.7 percent of the voters cast ballots for them. Authorities made matters worse by refusing to adjust the borders of electoral
districts to take account of the huge migration movements from the countryside to the cities. They did so for blatantly political reasons.
But official stubbornness met with increasingly persistent protests, to which
the Prussian government finally responded in 1910 by producing an electoral
reform bill. This bill called for the replacement of the indirect system of electors with a direct one and proposed to merge constituencies whose populations had become very small. It also realigned the tax levels and introduced
a partial plural ballot that favored the educated bourgeoisie. It says much about
the state of domestic politics and the balance of power that the conservative
opposition to this very modest bill eventually succeeded in toppling it. The
Prussian three-class voting system remained in force until it was abolished in
the revolution of 1918. Voters who thought these and many other injustices,
big and small, objectionable continued to protest, both before 1914 and during
World War I. Yet, it was difficult to bring about even the most gradual political change. Those who held the reins of power simply refused to acknowledge the momentous social and economic transformations that the Reich had
198

The Constitutional Framework

meanwhile experienced and to introduce a greater measure of fairness at the
ballot box.
There are other telling examples from outside Prussia. Since 1868, the
Kingdom of Saxony had used an electoral system that bestowed voting rights
only to those who possessed a residential building lot and made annual payments of a certain minimum in direct taxes.44 As a result of these restrictions,
no more than half of the male population of this federal state was able to go
to the polls. After the turn of the century, pressures mounted to initiate reforms; but with fears of Social Democracy in the “Red Kingdom of Saxony”
rising, government and parties maneuvered to achieve not only advantages
for themselves, but above all to block a further advance of the Left. In 1909
a system was finally introduced that lifted some of the existing restrictions,
but the idea of universality was quickly undermined by a new set of conditions. Under the new requirements, voters had to have been Saxon citizens
for at least two years prior to the elections and to have paid their taxes. Furthermore, wealthy Saxons now obtained up to three additional votes. Anyone
who was over fifty-nine years of age or occupied an elevated position received one additional vote. Another restriction was that the chamber was
elected every six years and candidates had to gain an absolute majority, enabling other parties to form temporary local alliances in order to keep Social
Democratic contenders out.
The Bavarian system was similarly based on an income qualification and
other restrictions so that about one-third of the men of minimum age were
excluded altogether. As in Prussia, the polls merely identified electors, and
until 1881 ballots were not filled in behind the curtain of a polling booth, but
written out in public. By 1914 a certain degree of democratization had occurred in Baden and Württemberg, where the principle of direct elections was
introduced in 1905/6. Meanwhile Hamburg, Lübeck, and Brunswick actually
tightened their systems. Thus, over half of the 192 seats in the Hamburg Chamber were elected by specially protected groups of patrician notables, while
the remaining taxpayers elected a mere 84 deputies. By the turn of the century a number of other changes were made. In view of the unstoppable advance
of the Social Democrats, the tax qualification was sharply increased in 1906,
triggering massive popular demonstrations against this “robbery of the voting right.” These outbursts were ruthlessly suppressed by the police.45 Many
other urban communities with tax categories similar to those in Prussia raised
their tax qualification levels at the very moment when the existing bourgeois
majorities came to be threatened by the gains by the Social Democrats in local elections. Only in a few cases, such as in Barmen or Düsseldorf, were the
suffrage restrictions actually eased.
Voting inequalities were also perpetuated by the stonewalling tactics of
authorities who were responsible for determining constituency boundaries.
199

Politics

In Bavaria they engaged in active gerrymandering, repeatedly changing boundaries in such a way that parties loyal to the government were favored. The
Prussian State Ministry, and later the Reich government, perpetuated inequality by inaction. The extensive migrations from the eastern provinces to new
industrial centers further west ought to have resulted in regular reviews of
voting districts, but this never happened. Accordingly by 1914 a mere onetenth, in some cases one-thirtieth, of eligible males in the east’s depopulated
rural regions elected the same number of deputies as voters in densely populated industrial zones. This explains why the Conservatives, with the exception of the 1881 Reichstag elections, always gained a higher percentage of
the seats than was justified on the basis of votes obtained (Table 80). Being
handicapped or privileged as a voter was therefore not just a matter of one’s
tax bracket, but also of where one lived, and was ultimately dependent upon
socioeconomic status.
In comparison with the restricted suffrage systems of the federal states and
the local communities, the direct, universal, and secret ballot for the Reichstag that Bismarck had taken over from the Constitution of the North German
Confederation was a revolutionary innovation. Judging from the initial turnout
in the early 1870s, it may have taken some time for eligible men to become
accustomed to going to the polls. But with turnout at 80 percent and higher,
which indicates that those eligible began to take voting very seriously, participation was not a problem, once ordinary voters had a sense that each ballot
counted (Table 79). Where this sense was lacking, as it was in many federal
states with restrictive systems, turnout figures were much lower, though even
here participation increased over time. Without discussing in detail the first
chancellor’s cunning political calculations, it is important to remember that
he did not take the step into universal suffrage because he had been won over
to the idea of democracy. Rather he was hoping to weaken the forces of urban liberalism by counting on the innate conservatism of the rural populations. His calculations turned out to be badly flawed, later causing Bismarck
and, even more so, his successors many agonies. That the strategy behind the
introduction of universal male suffrage had backfired is reflected not only in
the fact that, as we have seen, the Reich government repeatedly toyed with
the idea of a Staatsstreich, a forcible revision of the Reich Constitution that
would have abolished universal suffrage, but also in the official inaction when
it came to adjusting constituency boundaries to demographic shifts.
The system of a second ballot (Stichwahl) opened up further possibilities
for undermining the principle of equality at the polls. As the rise of the Social Democrats since the 1890s challenged the strongholds of other parties in
many regions, second ballots to determine the winners of races that had been
inconclusive on the first ballot were held with increasing frequency. This provided local nonsocialist parties with the opportunity to form alliances and to
200

Parties and Elections

agree on a single candidate whenever the first ballot had shown that the Social Democratic contender might win. The combined effect of all these rules
and practices was that in the 1890s the share of the Social Democratic vote
was twice as high as that of the seats gained by the party (Tables 79–80). In
the 1907 Reichstag elections it was even three times higher. Only in 1912 the
proportion once again became more balanced (34.8 percent of the votes compared with 27.7 percent of the seats). By that time, it even happened in southwestern Germany that the Left Liberals would link up with the SPD to defeat
more right-wing opponents in the second ballot. It is not difficult to see that
such alliances made the other parties even more frantic and hostile.
Beyond the question of how universal and equal male suffrage was actually practiced in selecting Reichstag members, there were also violations of
the principle of secrecy, especially in the rural constituencies of East Elbia.
Thus, it was by no means an unusual sight that, on election day, land laborers
would be marched straight from the fields to the polling station. There they
were given the “correct” ballot paper, which the local “estate owner, in his
role as poll supervisor,” would then “graciously” accept, occasionally using
as ballot box “an empty cigar case or a soup bowl without a lid.”46 Margaret
Anderson has recently analyzed this system with respect to the rural parts of
the country as well as some industrial districts.47 Later the Social Democrats
turned the tables on their opponents and learned to apply gentle pressure in
their industrial strongholds to insure that local shopkeepers or publicans voted
for them. Catholic and Protestant priests also developed techniques of exerting moral pressure to get their flock to vote for a “Christian” party.
Overall, however, the outcome of elections was not determined by various
corrupt practices, but by the ideological commitments and interests of the
voter. Nothing demonstrated this more clearly than the fact that the political
stratification of German society increasingly coincided with socioeconomic
class lines. Exceptions always granted, this applied above all to Protestant industrial workers, for whom it became less and less thinkable to vote for a
nonsocialist party. In the 1912 Reichstag elections, the Social Democrats obtained over 4.2 million votes (Table 79). Most of these came from the reservoir of approximately 5.5 million male industrial laborers who had reached
the age of twenty-five. The SPD’s share of the voting public was very high
in a number of large industrial cities. This is also where most of the 1.0 million members came from whom the party had meanwhile recruited. By 1912
a larger number of voters belonged to the “new Mittelstand” who by moving
toward the Left wanted to show their dissatisfaction with the overall drift of
Wilhelmine politics and the role of the other parties.
Another partial exception to the rule that class determined party affiliation
or support was the high number of Catholic workers for whom denomination
remained the more decisive factor. Politically they inclined toward the Cath201

Politics

olic Center Party and the Catholic trade union movement. Socially, political
Catholicism remained a heterogeneous phenomenon, and the successful integration of so many diverse elements into one party over a long period of
time remains a considerable achievement. Unlike their Protestant counterparts, Catholic workers turned toward Social Democracy in larger numbers
only in the last years before 1914.48 In the southwest, the Center Party proved
an effective political force when, after the end of the Kulturkampf, it succeeded
in challenging the strongholds of liberalism in that region. Supported by the
800,000 members of the Volksverein für das katholische Deutschland, the
party attracted Catholic estate owners from Silesia, Catholic bankers and industrialists from the Rhineland, Catholic peasants and artisans from Bavaria,
and Catholic miners from the Ruhr area. For a long time, the electoral support from these groups remained remarkably stable at 22 to 23 percent (Table
79). With the rise of the Social Democrats after 1890, it declined to about 19
percent, where it remained fairly steady until 1911. The 1912 Reichstag elections resulted in a further drop of 3 percent, as Catholic workers began to
move to the Left in larger numbers. Votes were also lost in Upper Silesia,
where the Polish minority movement drew the most support. The simultaneous decline of political Catholicism in Alsace-Lorraine, by contrast, was
probably due to a change in the method of vote counting in comparison with
the 1907 elections. Its total number of seats in the Reichstag shrank from 105
in 1907 to 91 in 1912.
On the Right, the denominational factor remained of significance insofar
as no Protestant estate owner would have voted for the Center. Most likely,
such an individual would have voted for the German Conservative Party. Nor
was it thinkable for a Junker to support the Social Democrats or, with a few
exceptions, the National Liberals. The Free Conservatives found their dwindling
electoral support among industrialists and those agrarians who—favoring
Bismarck’s unification of Germany—had, as in Silesia, links with industry.
The numerous secessions and regroupings among the Liberals reflect not only
the political-ideological crisis into which Bismarck’s policies had thrown them
after 1878/79, but also the diversity of the middle classes. Unlike the other large
parties or, for that matter, the minority movements, they did not operate in a
social or ethnic milieu that was clearly delineated. Meanwhile the Danish minority party usually attracted between 14,000 and 16,000 votes; only in 1912
did this figure rise to 17,000. During the 1870s and 1880s, Alsace-Lorraine
regularly dispatched some fifteen deputies to Berlin; these gained the support
of 150,000 to 235,000 voters. This figure declined to just over 100,000 after the
turn of the century, before returning to 162,000 in 1912. It is quite likely that
this latter surge was connected with popular disappointment over the Reich
government’s failure to effect tangible constitutional reforms in this region.
The move toward minority parties is most marked among the Poles. During the
202

Parties and Elections

1870s and 1880s, minority candidates usually obtained no more than 200,000
votes. There was a slight rise over the next decade, although it remained under the 250,000 mark. It then shot up in the 1903 elections to 348,000, later
reaching 454,000 in 1907 and 442,000 in 1912. All these results reflect the
negative consequences of governmental policies that discriminated against
minorities.49
The figures presented above confirm a picture of growing political mobilization among the population, just as they show the emergence of powerful
blocs. Meanwhile the rise of minority parties, which had no fewer than thirtythree Reichstag deputies by 1912, must be taken as an indicator that Wilhelmine society was losing its capacity to integrate divergent forces in support
of the status quo. The Jewish minority, which for various reasons never formed
a party of its own, mostly voted for Left Liberal candidates. In the eyes of
many German Jews, these were the only politicians who openly dissociated
themselves from a rising anti-Semitism.
An analysis of electoral behavior during Reichstag elections explains much
about the changing material and psychic condition of German society under
the Kaiserreich. There were, it is true, many distortions, among which the exclusion of the female half of the population was the most glaring. Nevertheless, thanks to suffrage for men of all classes, national elections represent a
much better barometer of the mood of the male population than the restrictive systems in the federal states. The Prussian and Saxon elections, which
guaranteed in advance the preponderance of the wealthy, are therefore less
interesting in themselves than they are in their repercussions at the Reich
level. They not only complicated relations between the Reich government
and the federal states, for example, in connection with taxation and the equalization of financial burdens,50 but also enhanced the leftward drift of ordinary
voters. These voters noted with bitterness that their vote in Saxony, Hamburg,
or Prussia was not worth very much. But this was different at the Reich level;
thus, the Left’s political rise in the years before 1914 was partly fueled by a
protest movement against blatant inequalities at the regional and local levels,
as well as the direction of domestic and foreign policy. This may also explain
the continuing high voter turnout.
C. Ideological Main Currents
The history of the German Empire provides many examples of how the majority parties in the Reichstag, in the diets of the federal states, and in the local assemblies ruthlessly exploited the advantages of the electoral laws and
their victories at the polls to promote and uphold their voters’ interests. Nevertheless, it would be wrong to assume that the programs and ideological
positions with which they justified their policies were no more than smokescreens covering up hard-nosed social and economic calculations. The ideol203

Politics

ogies that they embraced did have a solid core that leaders and supporters
genuinely believed in. Their programs were not just empty propaganda ploys.
Rather they served to integrate and mobilize members and helped to distinguish “their” party from those of their opponents.
Although Bismarck was, socially speaking, one of them, the Prussian Conservatives found it very difficult at first to reconcile themselves to his work
of unification. Unlike the Free Conservatives, who were enthusiastic about
the founding of the Reich, Prussian Conservatives continued to fear that Prussia, as the bastion of archconservative ideas and politics, might become overwhelmed by the more liberal and “democratic” southern and western parts of
the new Germany. They were particularly hostile to universal male suffrage
in the Reich. If this principle were ever expanded to Prussia with its threeclass electoral system, it would have spelled the end of Conservative predominance in the Kaiserreich’s largest state. This is why Bismarck’s introduction
of universal suffrage for men was seen by them as a revolutionary act. In their
eyes he was also a dangerous man because in 1866 he had unceremoniously
deposed legitimate rulers, such as the king of Hanover, and incorporated their
territories into Prussia. It was a sin against the notion of Divine Law and
princely legitimacy for which they never quite forgave Bismarck. Following
long internal struggles over its basic ideology, the German Conservative Party
finally recognized the new realities of a German national state in July 1876.
Still, as the writers of the party platform were quick to add, “We insist that,
within this entity, the justified independence and peculiarities of the individual states, provinces, and ethnic groups be preserved.”51 The statement also
stressed the importance of the “monarchical foundations of our public life
and of a strong state authority.” It advocated “orderly” economic and civil
liberties. Finally, the task was “to counter the excesses of the false dogmas
of Socialism” and to end the struggle against Catholicism in order to initiate
the “revival of Christian and religious institutions.”
All these elements reappeared in the party’s Tivoli Program of December
1892, this time expanded by demands that showed how much rapid socioeconomic and political change had put the agrarians on the defensive. They
pledged to uphold the idea of Divine Law and of the monarchy most vigorously against the onslaught of parliamentarism and democracy. The Tivoli
Program, which launched a radical attack on the “unpatriotic” socialists, also
assumed a distinctly anticapitalist and anti-Semitic tone.52 The party demanded the continuation of economic protectionism in order to maintain “a
strong Bauernstand [estate of farmers].” Crafts as well as “honest trading and
manufacturing” were also to be given state aid. Overall, the program showed
clearly that a majority of conservatives had left their earlier aristocratic-elitist
positions and were trying to offer, with mixed success, an ideological home
to peasants and other social groups in the rural parts of Germany beyond their
204

Parties and Elections

traditional East Elbian “home base.” True, Prussian Conservatives remained
deeply split over the wisdom of abandoning Honoratiorenpolitik. Many supporters continued to adhere to what can only be described as an archconservative monarchism and would have no dealings with the radical right-wing
rabble-rousers in their midst who were playing with the fire of democracy.
This was so in 1892 just as it was during the years of crisis before World War I.
Although the party was by no means unanimous in this respect, it is in
light of its quest to broaden its popular base that we must also see its antiSemitism—hitherto mainly the preserve of a few splinter parties. Nor should
we deduce from the later “downfall”53 of these parties that anti-Semitism as
a creed was diminishing toward 1914. On the contrary, hatred of Jews, which
had long remained latent among broad sections of the population, became
more widespread and vocal among members of social groups who felt fundamentally threatened by the anonymous forces of industrialization, urbanization, and secularization. Searching for an identifiable minority that could
be turned into a scapegoat for all social ills, many who were unable to cope
with the structural changes around them found solace in anti-Semitism. Catholics tended to relate this phobia to a century-old prejudice of their church
against Jews as the alleged “murderers of Christ.” Protestant conservatives
and the educated and commercial bourgeoisie were more likely to look down
upon Jews as “socially inferior.” What was new in the second half of the nineteenth century was the development of a strain of biologistic anti-Semitism.
Its adherents started from the alleged existence of “inferior races”—a notion
that appeared in many rightist organizations after 1900, if not before. And
Jews were quickly put into this category. In short, anti-Semitism had become
more open and widely acceptable in Wilhelmine society. It frequently used a
coded language (comprised of words such as “un-German”), whose meaning
was well understood by most people.54
The pinpointing for “un-German” behavior increasingly went hand in hand
with a radical nationalism. From the 1880s onward, this nationalism was reinforced by an imperialist ideology that often appeared in the guise of a cultural mission. A growing ethnocentrism and intolerance can be observed with
regard to the Polish minority in the east. It was particularly vociferous in the
Society of the Eastern Marches (HKT) and in the Pan-German League, the
latter aiming to unite all German-speaking Germans in eastern Europe. Others turned to the growing colonial movements whose members were convinced of Germany’s superior cultural and moral achievements, which they
proposed to bring to “primitive” peoples in other parts of the globe. Nor did
militarism—defined here as the percolation of military attitudes and values
into civilian society—remain confined to a small group of eccentrics. In its
special form of “navalism,” this militarism acted as an ideological bridge to
imperialist ideas that began to spread among the nationalist-liberal bourgeoisie.
205

Politics

All in all, the middle classes proved particularly receptive to the varying forms
of nationalism, militarism, and imperialism.
Disagreements among the welter of middle-class movements arose, however, when it came to the question of how to use these ideas in domestic politics. The turn toward conservatism in 1878/79 dealt a serious blow to the
earlier hopes for reform and parliamentarization; but this did not mean that all
Liberals wanted to use “loyalty to the Reich,” colonial enthusiasm, and the
notion of a powerful military state in order to preserve the domestic status quo.
In addition to those inclined toward reformist positions, other groups of Liberals advocated the pursuit of a successful foreign policy as a means of undermining the influence of agrarians. Others even asserted that any lasting successes
in the international arena could only be won if, rooted in a parliamentarydemocratic constitution, they had the backing of the broad majority of Germans. Such arguments, occasionally blended with state-interventionist ideas,
represented a shift from the unbridled economic liberalism of the early
1870s. They also produced a limited rapprochement with the right wing of
the Social Democrats.
Following the formation of a unified Social Democratic Party at the Gotha
Congress of 1875, there was too little time until the beginning of the proscription period three years later to decide on whether the new movement, its
radical rhetoric notwithstanding, should unfold more along the Lasallean idea
of collaboration with the state, or whether the Marxist concepts of Bebel’s
workers’ party were to predominate. The Erfurt Program of 1891—published
one year after the lapse of the antisocialist laws—provided an opportunity to
clarify the ideological foundations of Social Democracy. What emerged instead was a contradictory statement. The first part offered a largely orthodox
Marxist analysis of bourgeois-capitalist society, culminating in the postulate
that “class rule and the classes” be abolished.55 The second part was preceded
by the following statement: “Starting from these principles, the Social Democratic Party demands for the time being.…” But, curiously, none of the
demands that were listed required a socialist revolution for their implementation. Here the Erfurt Program spoke of an extension of civil rights, the abolition of the death penalty, free medical care, progressive taxation, secular
schools, and improved protection of labor.
The tension between two ideological positions that surfaced in the Erfurt
Program thenceforth permeated the debate among Social Democrats during
the Wilhelmine period. On the one hand, many radicals worked for a revolutionary transformation of existing conditions with all weapons of political
struggle, including that of the mass strike; on the other, the “revisionists” advanced, from their strongholds in southwest Germany and Hanover, the
cause of reformist solutions and of a gradualist transition to socialism. The
two were held together by an intermediate position, of which Karl Kautsky
206

Parties and Elections

became a prominent representative. He supported in principle the notion of a
revolutionary transformation of the capitalist system, but argued that it would
not come as a result of revolutionary activism on the part of a united proletariat. Instead he counted on the expectation, predicted by “scientific” Marxism, that capitalism would collapse under the weight of its own inherent
contradictions. This ideological attentisme did much to relieve the pressure
on the radicals, on the one hand, and the reformists around Eduard Bernstein,
on the other, to secede from the party. Similarly, the prestige of Bebel until
his death in 1913 remained an important factor in keeping all Social Democrats in the fold.
At the same time, it should be obvious that none of the three interpretations of the country’s future that coexisted within Social Democracy held any
attraction for the other parties. The Left Liberals more than once considered
cooperating politically with the Social Democrats. But since none of them
wished to live under socialism, not even if it were achieved by gradual reform, this cooperation could only go so far. A similar reluctance held back
leftist Catholics in the Center Party and in the Christian trade unions, even
though they repeatedly spoke up for individual Social Democrats and local
groups that had been subjected to tough police measures or to unfair sentencing by the courts in connection with strikes.56 Basically all other political
forces were united in their opposition to Social Democracy and labored hard
to woo the industrial workers away from the SPD’s ideological hold over
them. Marxism was seen as a fundamental threat, and none of the other movements seriously thought of supping with the devil.
However, in the face of rapid industrialization and urbanization, there was
no escaping the “workers’ question.” Catholic priests in the working-class
districts of major cities were among the first to take up the concerns of the
proletariat, or at least of its Catholic members. During the 1870s, the evolution of Catholic social thought had been hampered by the church’s preoccupation with the Kulturkampf. Put on the defensive by the rise of liberalism,
the Vatican finally proclaimed its doctrine of papal infallibility in 1870. In the
decade thereafter, the foremost task appeared to be to uphold traditional
rights concerning the pastoral support and religious education of the Catholic
population. Although Bismarck quickly deescalated the Kulturkampf, the
fortress mentality that had seized the Catholic population survived the fall of
the first Reich chancellor. In a famous article published in March 1906, the
Rhenish Center Party politician Julius Bachem urged his fellow Catholics to
leave the “tower,” but larger segments of German Catholicism continued to
live in an ideological and political bulwark. While the traditional “social-moral
milieu”57 persisted in the provinces, a Catholic working-class milieu was created in the industrial cities, especially in the Ruhr area. This milieu had its own
ideological horizons that Social Democracy, with its comprehensive interpre207

Politics

tation of the world, succeeded in penetrating to some degree only during the
last years before World War I.
However deeply rooted the Center Party was in the Catholic faith, the social heterogeneity of its voters endowed it with a good deal of flexibility in
matters of daily politics. The exploitation of this room for maneuver shows
more clearly than in other movements that the Center Party was not just held
together by ideological and programmatic principles, but also by particular
interests. These interests were articulated most forcefully by a large number
of associations that operated in the extraparliamentary sphere and tried to use
the political parties as their front organizations.

15. Organizations and Movements in the
Extraparliamentary Sphere
A. Basic Issues
Extraparliamentary interest groups developed virtually in parallel with the
political parties, and by 1914 they had in effect filled all nooks and crannies
of the space ordinarily assigned to them in complex societies. This is why the
great variety of these groups must be stressed from the start. The more colorful German society became under the impact of industrialization, urbanization,
and increasing social differentiation, the more varied became its associational
life. In the end there was hardly a human activity that an interested individual could not pursue with like-minded people in the context of an organization.
A number of these associations have already been mentioned in connection
with the expansion of culture and science, and thus will not be covered here.58
Nor is this a chapter that will deal with the activities of the Imperial Automobile Club, groups devoted to sexual reform, occultist sects, or stamp collection. These associations tended to view themselves as nonpolitical, even if in
a very general sense many of them did have a political effect, and toward
1914 increasingly so. Here the task is to analyze those organizations that
were openly oriented toward the sphere of politics and, as lobbies, directly or
indirectly attempted to influence the executive, the parties, and the public at
large.
The social sciences usually differentiate between politically active economic pressure groups, on the one hand, and political associations and movements, on the other. This would appear to be a sensible differentiation as far
as the Kaiserreich is concerned, if we look at memberships, both individual
and corporative; for it was in terms of membership that economic interest
groups were restrictive, whereas political associations were, at least on paper,
open to any person or organization that identified with their goals and laws.
It is also important that economic lobbies tended to be geared more toward
208

Organizations and Movements

influencing government officials and deputies. Political associations, including the so-called national associations, regarded influencing public opinion
as their most important mission.
B. Lobbies
Groups that represented the interests of economic enterprises had existed before 1871. At that time they also fulfilled certain tasks in public law. Thus,
the chambers of commerce were partly private, but also had a public mandate; for example, they were required to examine and certify trainees. The
Prussian Landesökonomien and Agricultural Associations enjoyed similar
privileges, and after the founding of the German Empire they continued to
exploit the opportunities that their special relationship with the state administration afforded them.
The early 1870s, and even more so the period of the “Great Depression,”
saw the emergence of economic lobbies in the modern sense. The Association of German Iron and Steel Industrialists was founded in 1873. A few
years later the Association for the Preservation of the Common Economic Interests in the Rhineland and Westphalia (because of its long name also known
for short as Langnamverein) rose to become one of the most influential lobbies. The creation of cartels and syndicates must also be seen in the context
of a growing organization of commerce and industry.59 Some associations
covered a region, others a branch of industry. Sooner or later it made sense
for a group of organizations to form a national association—like the Central
Association of German Industry (CDI), founded in 1876. In the late 1870s,
most of these associations devoted themselves to pressuring the executive
branch of government and elected representatives into adopting measures to
protect them against retarded economic growth. Thus the introduction and
subsequent increases of external tariffs between 1879 and the early 1890s
was due in no small measure to the indefatigable activities of lobbies. Although, behind the facade of unity, conflicts and power struggles regularly
occurred among the members, for a long time heavy industry remained the
most influential group in the CDI.
Only when heavy industry proved reluctant to abandon protectionism during the upswing of the 1890s did the strains within the CDI become too great.
There was a revolt and secession of the more export-oriented and manufacturing branches, leading to the creation of the League of Industrialists (BDI)
in 1895. After the turn of the century, the peak associations and their member organizations continued to focus on articulating the interests of industry
and commerce with regard to such issues as external trade treaties and taxation. But increasingly these interests were interpreted more broadly, and ultimately all of these groups were engaged in debates on Wilhelmine foreign
and armaments policy and attempted to shape the various reforms of Reich
209

Politics

finances. The Hansabund proliferated after the bitter debates surrounding the
1908 Finance Bill. Although its members included a number of organizations
that were not economic lobbies in the strict sense, the group certainly reflected the growing polarization in the aims of the industrial peak associations. The BDI became one of the pillars of the Hansabund.
What kinds of groups were mobilized by this new organization in the wake
of the defeat of the Finance Bill by Conservatives and its substitution by a
bill that hit the commerce and manufacturing industries hard is evidenced by
its membership. The Hansabund presidium included the chairmen of the Association of Florists in Hamburg and Environs, the League of Commercial
Associations in Württemberg, and the Bremen Chamber of Small Traders.
These titles also indicate the great variety of organizations that had meanwhile
formed and increasingly come together as large and powerful economic blocs
under the roof of one of the peak associations. Meanwhile the artisans had
forged their own lobbies outside the chambers, and ultimately there was hardly
a professional group that did not have its own organization and public voice.
The repercussions of this hectic activity in the extraparliamentary sphere
could be felt within the political parties, which became more sensitive to economic concerns. Meanwhile their earlier interest in constitutional reform receded into the background.
The rising importance of social policy and the success of the workingclass movement also forced the lobbies to deal with these issues. Collective
bargaining between employers and workers’ representatives began in some
branches of industry, accompanied by an incipient recognition of trade unions.
Large-scale industry on the whole remained bitterly opposed to this trend.
Encouraged by the conservative CDI, employers’ associations aimed at the
containment and even the destruction of trade unions. The first moves to coordinate this activity were made in 1903/4, culminating in the founding of the
Main Office of German Employers’ Associations in April 1904. The split between BDI and CDI soon also affected the politics of this new association, as
the members of the BDI took a more moderate line on the question of an antistrike fund and its uses. Unable to find a common base, the moderates created the Association of German Employers’ Organizations. It was only in
1913 that the two movements merged to form the Federation of German Employers’ Associations. Henceforth this federation was charged with coordinating the interests of industry and commerce with regard to social policy
and wages. In all there existed some 3,670 business associations in 1914.
C. Trade Unions and Professional Associations
Social Democratic trade unions had recruited some 75,000 to 80,000 members up to 1878, when they were proscribed by Bismarck’s antisocialist laws.60
They subsequently continued their work underground. The mid-1880s saw a
210

Organizations and Movements

limited revival of the Fachvereine (specialized associations), of which there
were approximately 1,000, with a total membership of approximately 58,000
in 1885. After the lapse of the antisocialist laws in 1890, the trade unions, as
the representative of the economic interests of the urban-industrial working
class, experienced an amazing growth, while agricultural workers continued
to be barred from forming unions until 1908. By the turn of the century, the
Social Democratic “free trade unions” comprised some 680,000 members. A
peak was reached in 1913 with 2.5 million members (Table 81). However,
there were major differences in the degree of unionization in different
branches of industry. Parts of the metal industry were close to the 50 percent
mark, while in other branches around 10 percent of the workforce was unionized. At the same time the number of full-time functionaries rose to 2,867.
By 1914 some 10 percent of working women had also joined a union. Syndicalism remained an insignificant phenomenon, spawning a few splinter groups
before World War I, mainly among Ruhr miners. In the mid-1890s, a Catholic trade union movement appeared on the scene. By 1900 it had attracted
some 77,000 members, rising to 343,000 by 1913. The liberal Hirsch-Duncker
unions succeeded in mobilizing no more than 107,000 workers.61 It is very
telling of the general situation of the Poles in the Reich that migrants to the
Ruhr area, who had gone into mining, formed their own union, the Zjednoczenie Zawodowe Polskie, whose membership reached 50,000 in 1912.62
Ideological differences, as well as the numerical imbalances between the
unions, stood in the way of a more long-term cooperation between them, even
though all made the improvement of the material situation of the industrial
working class their main plank. The question concerned how best to achieve
this. The Hirsch-Duncker unions advocated cooperation with employers. The
free trade unions, by contrast, adhered to notions of industrial relations that
started from a conflict model and considered strikes to be a legitimate weapon
for obtaining improvements. Since employers regularly resisted, there were
periods when Germany was shaken by massive strikes.63 However, such conflicts did not mean that the Social Democratic trade unions were very radical. This is merely how they appeared in the eyes of entrepreneurs and the
authorities at the time. Recent research by contrast has tended to highlight
the conservatism and moderation of the union leaderships. Unlike the radicals on their left, such as Rosa Luxemburg, they refused to deploy the strike
weapon for political purposes. They were neither concerned with abolishing
capitalism nor with constructing a socialist state. Their main goal was to boost
workers’ living standards. What caused them to be additionally cautious was
the determined resistance of employers, who could count on the repressive
machinery of the state to support them in their anti-unionism.64 Finally, it was
a boost to reformist and gradualist attitudes among the free trade unions that
they had developed a certain pride in their impressive organizational achieve211

Politics

ments. In most large organizations, there was also a trend toward the establishment of an oligarchy at the top and routinization at all levels. Meanwhile
employers expected to win their fights not only with the help of the police,
the courts, and the army, but also by promoting company unions. To their dismay, these Werkvereine never attracted more than a few thousand members.
The trend toward organization is also reflected in the behavior of the middle classes as they joined numerous professional organizations. The artisans
assiduously guarded their guild-like Innungen, and professionals founded
their own interest representations (Table 83). The organization of physicians
went back to the period before the founding of the Reich. But in 1900 it
gained a competitor that assumed the expressive title “Association of the
Physicians of Germany for the Preservation of their Economic Interests,” or
“Hartmann-Bund” for short. Similar lobbies developed for dentists, veterinary surgeons, pharmacists, attorneys, and pastors. Teachers had their own
pressure groups, among them a League of Academically Educated Teachers
of Germany. One of the largest was the German Teachers’ Association, with
almost 132,000 members in 1914. With the expansion of industry, the commercial and technical white-collar workers began to organize as well. However, members of all these organizations joined not merely because they
wanted to improve their material position; they also demanded greater social
prestige and a recognition of their contributions to state and society. In this
sense, the professional associations were an expression of the upwardly mobile, educated bourgeoisie’s desire to set itself apart from the industrial working class not just socially, but also organizationally. Their activities resulted
in a major victory in 1911, when they succeeded in establishing an insurance
system that was separate from that of blue-collar workers. The country’s division into classes was now also visibly drawn along this particular dividing
line.
D. Agricultural Associations
Agriculture, for a longer period of time than industry and commerce, relied for
its interest representation after 1871 on preexisting corporations and councils
whose spokesmen had easy access to the bureaucracy and conservativeagrarian parties. There were also many social connections between largescale estate owners and the executive as high up as the princely courts of the
federal states. These links opened up manifold ways of influencing policy
making, especially during the “Great Depression,” which hit agriculture harder
than industry. The Association of Tax and Economic Reformers, it is true,
gained some importance during the agitation for higher agricultural tariffs;
but its work was probably less important since Bismarck heard much about
the “ailing farming community” through informal channels and did not need
much persuading. For various political and economic reasons, he had long
212

Organizations and Movements

convinced himself that the agrarians deserved the special protection of the
state. Actually, it was the peasants who first expanded or built up from scratch
a network of associations that took its place beside the older semipublic agrarian self-administration by means of chambers and other institutions. Thus a
variety of “peasant leagues” became active in Bavaria and other parts of Germany during the 1880s, replacing earlier particularist and mostly anti-Prussian
peasant organizations. These leagues did not merely see themselves as agricultural lobbies in the narrow sense, but they also tried to mobilize the peasants of their regions during election times with the help of anticapitalist and
anti-Semitic slogans.
The East Elbian Junker took the road of public agitation and populist
voter mobilization only in the early 1890s. At that time, Reich Chancellor
Leo von Caprivi, encouraged by the economic upswing and pushed by exportoriented industry, proposed to abandon his predecessor’s policy of high protective tariffs. If Caprivi succeeded merely temporarily and was soon forced
to submit his resignation, this was to no small degree due to an old-style campaign of personal influence-peddling at the Imperial Court that was waged
against him by his agrarian opponents; but it was also due to the activities of
the Agrarian League. This league was founded in 1893 and immediately took
up the fight against a lowering of tariffs. In subsequent years, the new association began to compete against the peasant leagues. It adopted a more modern style of mass mobilization and, as a result, triggered the decline of the
latter, at least in the Protestant regions of the country. Around the turn of the
century, the league had some 250,000 members, 75 percent of whom were
small-holders. In the Catholic regions, the Center Party, also helped by a
more effective populist propaganda, slowly replaced the peasant leagues with
its own organizational network. Although the denominational line continued
to divide the organization of agriculture, it is nevertheless a remarkable political feat that an association founded and run by large-scale estate owners
succeeded in convincing many small peasants that their interests were better
served by the Agrarian League than by their own peasant leagues.
One reason for this success is found in the Agrarian League’s style and
sloganeering. This organization evolved into more than an economic lobby in
the traditional sense, devoted to the discreet influencing of decisions that were
quietly prepared in government offices. Indeed, its main field of action became the provincial marketplace and the village pub. This is where the Agrarian League put into circulation those vague demands that suggested to the
owners of farms of all sizes that they all shared the same objectives: higher
agricultural tariffs, further subsidies, debt reduction, reduced protection for
farm laborers. However, these popular demands were combined from the start
with a vigorous agitation that claimed to tackle the real evils of the age: capitalism and liberalism, urbanization and Social Democracy, and—of course—
213

Politics

“international Jewry.” The league proposed that Germans reject these alleged
dangers in favor of the values of the old preindustrial society, complemented
by patriotism, “Prussian” parsimony, and the maintenance of a strong army.65
The propaganda that was crafted from these positions went well beyond
what the country had seen in the 1880s. It used the most modern technical
means, which, ironically, had first been developed by a despised urban culture. The slogans of the Agrarian League were shrill and did not shy away
from blatant lies. They deliberately appealed to latent prejudices and resentments in the agricultural population. There has been some debate as to whether
the Agrarian League was a prefascist organization.66 Be this as it may, the
Agrarian League regularly participated in election campaigns and built up an
elaborate infrastructure. It employed professional agitators who would appear at its many rallies. It distributed emotional propagandistic literature and
influenced the shape of major pieces of agricultural legislation. Many
deputies were in the league’s debt for its support of their election campaigns.
In 1898 some 118 Reichstag deputies from five parties were deemed to be
connected with the league. In 1907 this figure reached its peak at 138; by
1912 it had declined again to 78, in line with the more general weakening of
agrarian conservatism in the last years before 1914. The Agrarian League
also had many friends in the diets of the federal states where, thanks to the
restrictive suffrage systems, it also retained a greater influence than in the
Reich in the period immediately preceding World War I.
E. Nationalist Associations
If the Agrarian League, at least in principle, still operated as an economic
pressure group in the traditional sense, the nationalist associations that
emerged from the 1890s onward developed an exclusively political mission.
This, to begin with, is reflected in the social composition of their membership. Whether individual or corporate, membership was no longer restricted
to specific occupational groups or economic activities. In theory, anybody
could join a nationalist association, although in practice Social Democrats
and, in some organizations, Jews were distinctly unwelcome. This peculiar
exclusivity points to a fundamental line that separated the nationalist associations from the working-class movement. However, a noisy nationalism initially tended to drown out this antisocialist orientation. It was only after the
turn of the century that the uncompromising struggle against Social Democracy was openly put on a level with chauvinistic propaganda. The fight against
the working-class movement turned the nationalist associations, frequent
squabbles among themselves notwithstanding, into a powerful bloc. This bloc,
operating in the extraparliamentary sphere, articulated the hopes and fears of
the increasingly politicized middle classes in the towns and provinces.

214

Organizations and Movements

In this respect, we are particularly well informed about three groups: the
Pan-German League, which remained numerically small but wielded considerable political influence; the Navy League, which counted 300,000 members in 1906; and the Army League, which achieved a similar size (Table
84).67 Initially the propaganda slogans of all three groups, just as those of the
German Colonial Society, remained rather amorphous. They demanded a
strengthening of patriotism, a vigorous foreign policy, increased armaments,
the acquisition of colonies, and the dissemination of an allegedly superior
German culture abroad. The early propaganda of the Navy League contained
an array of economic slogans, which, buttressed by frequently warped statistics, were aimed at garnering the support of industry and commerce. Soon the
struggle against the “threat” of the working-class movement was added to the
arsenal of slogans. The emergence of the Reich Association against Social
Democracy, founded in 1904, was typical of the period. Friend-foe postures
proliferated. Germany, in the eyes of nationalist associations, was encircled
by internal and external enemies. The armament nationalism (Rüstungsnationalismus) that developed in Germany gradually assumed paranoid features. The demagogy and political lies of nationalist associations became
ever more crude. What made them convincing to many gullible people was
that they were packaged as “scientific” insights gained from nature and history. By 1914, this propaganda had reached its first climax, both in style and
content, and during World War I, it became even more extreme.
Although nationalist associations always claimed to be nonpolitical, the
gradual radicalization of their ideological positions was in fact their most distinctive characteristic. This is well illustrated by the outcome of the long
struggle between a moderate and a radical wing within the Navy League. At
the turn of the century, leaders and members asserted that the league was a
“supraparty” organization devoted to rallying all patriotic forces in general
support of the Kaiser’s naval and world policy. But more radical elements
soon chiseled away at this position. With a mindset that was even more authoritarian and nationalist than that of the “moderates,” these elements, who
purported to have the support of the rank-and-file membership and of many
other Germans, ultimately put forward a fundamental critique of government
policy and of the monarchical system as a whole. They pressed for gigantic
increases in armaments. If German foreign and domestic politics lapsed into
a state of serious crisis before 1914, it was to no small extent due to the agitation of nationalist associations. In this sense they were destabilizing to the
existing political order. However, this particular impact was counterbalanced
by the fact that the Rüstungsnationalismus of the associations, and their ardent fight against Social Democracy, clearly succeeded in rallying and to
some extent integrating disparate middle-class groups and individuals. Those

215

Politics

with Besitz und Bildung (property and higher education) who shared these
views thus helped buttress the existing order by combating liberal reformism
and the Social Democrats.
In view of this ambiguity, there is much to be said for the argument that
nationalist associations spearheaded a Wilhelmine populism of the Right.68 The
question remains how far the postulated self-mobilization and self-articulation
of lower middle-class strata can also be shown with reference to the social
composition of the membership (Table 85). Certainly, the ideology of a nationalist rallying (Sammlung) continued to be powerful, even if it proved difficult in practice to sustain beyond the short term. What is beyond dispute is
that nationalist associations accelerated the mobilization of the population at
all levels. This trend also seems to be reflected in the growth of the Heimat
movement, on which we now have a number of important studies.69 Its associations had originally been created to promote a sense of local pride and tradition, regional economic development, and tourism. But over time these
associations added the protection of the nation to their agenda, and this meant
increased defense against the perceived growing threat by the other great
powers as well as by Social Democracy. On the occasion of anniversaries,
and especially in 1913, when the “Wars of Liberation” against Napoleon I
a century earlier were commemorated, a good deal of dissatisfaction with
Wilhelm II came to the surface. But more important was the fact that the Social Democrats remembered and celebrated important historical events quite
differently from the associations and parties of the Right.70 Similarly, the nationalists’ efforts to rally the younger generation and to politicize the romanticism of the Youth Movement were not without success. Meanwhile the Social
Democratic youth organizations witnessed their own remarkable growth.71
Young Germans, like their elders, increasingly found themselves divided into
two different camps.
F. The Political Organization of Minorities
By examining the social situation of minorities in German society, it has already been possible to identify a number of larger societal trends.72 Further
insights may be gained by analyzing the position of minorities in politics and
within the country’s political culture. Insofar as such groups created their
own associations, they participated in the broader process of popular mobilization that accelerated the decline of the politics of notables after 1890. But
much can also be learned about the state of Imperial Germany by looking at
why minorities began to organize.
1. The Peace Movement
While the Navy League and other nationalist and militarist associations attracted sizeable memberships, other groups, whose origins went back as far
216

Organizations and Movements

as the Kaiserreich’s founding years, devoted themselves to peace and international understanding, working to expand international law and arbitration
as part of this effort. In 1874, Eduard Löwenthal founded the German Association for International Peace Propaganda, which he transformed into the
German Association for Obligatory Peace Jurisdiction in 1896. In 1886 Löwenthal’s group gained a competitor with strongholds in Frankfurt, Darmstadt,
and Stuttgart. Consequently, the peace movement remained decentralized for
a long time, even though the southwestern German groups produced a number of activists who succeeded, through their publications and lectures, in
sharpening its profile and in attracting national attention (Table 84). Still, it
was only in the context of the First Hague Peace Conference of 1899 that the
German Peace Society constituted itself at the Reich level. This society sought
to build up a mass organization equal to or larger than the most successful
nationalist associations. It had a number of prominent spokespersons, among
them Erich Fried, Ludwig Quidde, Bertha von Suttner, and Otto Umfrid.
Merchants and teachers were particularly strongly represented among the
membership. The German Peace Society’s propaganda started from the somewhat vague goal of creating a more humane, just, and harmonious international
order. Subsequently, Fried tried to fulfill members’ hopes and expectations
with a firmer “scientific” basis.
In spreading the idea of peace, international cooperation, and international
law, the German Peace Society hoped to gain the cooperation of families,
schools, and youth groups. Attempts were also made to win over the press,
the churches, and even the military. The popular response to the movement’s
ideas was far from encouraging. Realizing this, other members thought it better to try to influence elite groups, and in June 1911 they finally created the
Association for International Understanding. Its founders quickly discovered
that the elites were no more amenable to their ideas, not least because the
Kaiser flatly rejected their notions of peace. His attitude, in turn, put pressure
upon the bureaucracy to fall into line. The support that the Second Hague
Peace Conference of 1907 found in parts of the population moreover convinced Reich government leaders that only the Social Democrats stood to gain
from a reversal of Wilhelmine foreign and armaments policy. In the Reichstag, the Left Liberals showed a relatively serious interest in the ideas of the
German Peace Society, while the parties of the Right indignantly shunned
them. There were a few rather timid attempts at cooperation with the Social
Democrats, where Karl Liebknecht, above all, promoted a strongly antimilitarist platform. But social and ideological differences prevented this cooperation from being maintained on a more permanent basis, all the more so
because the SPD’s revisionists adopted some of the nationalist and imperialist stances of the National Liberals, while the radical Left continued to believe in revolutionary violence as a vehicle of history. For genuine pacifists,
217

Politics

all forms of violence were, of course, anathema. Worsening the situation, this
being an age of escalating arms races, irrational nationalism, and wild imperialistic dreams, Wilhelmine Germany offered fertile soil for the growth of
nationalist associations. It has therefore rightly been argued that the weakness of the German peace movement simply mirrored the strength of its opponents.73 For reasons of foreign and domestic politics, both the elites and
nationalist associations were very hostile to the notion of a “world without
war” and to the small band of men and women who propagated this idea.
2. Religious and Ethnic Minorities
Although the Alsace-Lorraineans and the Danes were better organized than
the Poles, the politicization and centralization of the associational life of the
Polish minority in the Ruhr area and in the east made great strides during the
Wilhelmine period. Harassed by the Prussian authorities, the organizations of
Ruhr Poles lost their originally purely cultural character. Links with Poles in
the east revived. The League of Poles in Germany, founded at Bochum in
1894, finally merged in 1910 with the “Straz” movement that had been built
up since 1905. Then, in 1913, this group formed an executive committee,
which worked alongside the Polish National Council that had emerged in the
same year.74 The common task with which the Polish minority and its press
were confronted, now more urgently than ever before, was the rebuttal of the
Prussian government’s relentless Germanization policy in the east.75
We have already mentioned the political mobilization of Germany’s Catholics through the Center Party and mass organizations like the People’s Association for a Catholic Germany (over 800,000 members).76 By the 1890s,
the Jews, who as an ethnic minority did not live in regional concentrations as
did the Poles and Danes, similarly began to raise their voices. They had gained
formal equality by 1871. Only those 79,000 Jews who had immigrated from
Eastern Europe, making up some 12.8 percent of the Jewish population in the
Reich by 1910, remained subject to the restrictive laws governing aliens. But
in the meantime Jews with German citizenship had become the victims of
less blatant forms of discrimination that must be seen in connection with the
proliferation of anti-Semitic sentiments.77
Jews were largely excluded from public service and from many private
clubs. The social and religious anti-Semitism of the earlier period was increasingly accompanied by a racist component. During the Wilhelmine period, the
most incredible biologistic conspiracy theories found more than a few enthusiastic adherents. A growing number of Jewish university students tried to
escape the prejudice of fraternities by forming their own groups, which were
combined in 1896 in the “Kartell-Konvent.” When anti-Semites conquered
sixteen seats in the 1893 Reichstag elections, many politically minded Jews
thought the time had come to found their own defensive organization, which
218

Organizations and Movements

they named the Central Association of German Citizens of the Jewish Faith
(CV). The group ultimately had over 100,000 members and saw its main task
as combating anti-Semitic propaganda. Its members tended to come more from
the educated middle classes than from the Jewish business elite. As indicated
by the group’s name, all members saw themselves as Germans and Jews,
even those who inclined more toward the left of the ideological spectrum.
While members of the CV undertook their defensive work in a spirit of
patriotism, other Jews denied that the Jewish minority could ever successfully be integrated into German society. They demanded self-determination
within a yet-to-be-founded Jewish state. Theodor Herzl became one of the
most prominent spokesmen of modern Zionism. He was also responsible for
calling the First Zionist Congress in August 1897. Shortly thereafter the Zionist Association for Germany emerged, but it attracted no more than a fraction
of the total membership of the CV. Initially, some Jews had been members of
both organizations. But in the years after the turn of the century, the goals of
the two associations became increasingly incompatible. The CV promoted
the political-ideological and economic integration of Jews into German society, while insisting on the preservation of their cultural identity; the Zionists,
by contrast, stood for separatism and emigration to Palestine.
That the two organizations should emerge at all points to a growing hostility toward Jews among larger segments of the population who blamed
them for the ills and tensions within German society and politics. Eventually,
the associational mobilization that was reflected in the founding of the CV and
of Zionism also affected Jewish women. In 1904, a Jewish Women’s League
was established whose membership grew to approximately 50,000. Jewish
women, as Marion Kaplan has shown, lived under a “double jeopardy”:78 like
their male Jewish counterparts, they had to deal with anti-Semitism; but they
also had to cope with the traditional Jewish family structure and a society at
large that was still patriarchically organized.
3. Women’s Associations
If Jewish men at least enjoyed rights as citizens, Jewish women, like their
non-Jewish sisters, remained subject to many legal and political restrictions.
Until the introduction of the Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, BGB) in
1900, differences in the treatment of the sexes under the law in the federal
states were considerable; but as a general rule women’s rights to own and inherit property, like their parental prerogatives, did exist, albeit in a limited
form.
The BGB standardized all the rules and common law practices of the federal states and in many cases worsened a woman’s position with regard to her
property, inheritance, and parental rights. The husband had the sole authority
over children. If there was a divorce, not only the social but also the legal and
219

Politics

financial consequences for the woman were severe, which helps to explain
why divorce rates remained low.79 The Criminal Code of 1871 contained particularly draconian sanctions against abortion and prostitution, and we have
already seen the restrictions imposed on women with respect to education,
career choice, and professional mobility.80
Discrimination against women was also glaring in the field of civil rights.
The Reich Constitution flatly denied women the vote. Federal states and communities had a range of rules, few of which were consistent. Thus in some
parts of the country, wealthy women had the vote in local elections. Elsewhere
a wealthy woman could not cast her vote in person, but through her husband,
who under the rules of the Civil Code relating to legal representation was not,
however, bound to her mandate. Such inequalities and their plain illogicality,
as well as the denial of the vote at the Reich level, opened up a wide field to
politically conscious women to press for change. Their problem was that this
patriarchal society had erected one further barrier that proved particularly
difficult to surmount: the association laws of Prussia, Bavaria, and Saxony
explicitly prohibited women from being involved in politics. Nor were they
allowed to join male organizations that pursued political aims. Again there
were exceptions to this rule in southwest Germany, Hamburg, and Bremen.
But in Prussia, the largest state, women were not even permitted to attend
political meetings. If the watchful eye of the local policeman spotted a skirt
at such a meeting, he could disband the rally without further ado. It was only
with the advent of the Reich Association Law of 1908 that this rule was abolished for all parts of the country. However, women were no more welcome
in nonpolitical associations, and so, even before the changes of 1908, they
had begun to found their own organizations.
The poverty of many lower-class families, the problem of prostitution,
and the discrimination faced by women in education opened up many opportunities for women to become active in nonpolitical ways and to form groups
for the purposes of charity and social reform. The General German Association of Women dated back to before the founding of the Kaiserreich. Its
leaders were committed to improving the education and training of women.
During the 1870s, they also tried—unsuccessfully—to influence the work of
the preparatory commission for the Civil Code that was finally adopted in
1900. When the “social question” moved to the center of public debate in the
1880s, many women seized the initiative at the local level to improve relief
for the poor and the protection of children.
The following decade saw a marked expansion of organized activity by
women. Meanwhile a younger generation of women took a more radical view
of existing problems and their possible solutions. They also interpreted gender relations in new ways. The founding of professional organizations for female teachers and commercial employees at this time also had a wider impact,
220

Organizations and Movements

and it is no accident that until 1914 women made their most tangible gains
in the field of education and training. The proliferation of women’s organizations of all kinds inevitably made it more difficult to differentiate between
charitable and political activity. The organizing effort reached a new plateau
in 1894, with the founding of the League of German Women’s Associations,
which combined 34 associations under its roof. Seven years later, this league
had some 70,000 members in 137 associations. By 1914 its membership had
risen to 250,000.
With the expansion of the women’s movement came a sharpening of disagreements over strategy and tactics. Prostitution and its control by the authorities became a bone of contention. For the radicals in the women’s movement,
prostitution was not merely a humiliation of women that had to stop; they
also took the view that the officially sanctioned system of bordellos that the
Hamburg authorities had established constituted a violation of a clause in the
Criminal Code banning the promotion of prostitution. The Hamburg police
defended themselves against the charge of being engaged in criminal activities by wheeling out public health decrees. They also made it more difficult
for the activists to present their case at public meetings. This in turn highlighted the absurdity of the prohibition against women’s attendance at political meetings. All in all, this ban had been undermined long before the Reich
Association Law of 1908 gave women the green light to engage in political
activities.
However much this law was welcomed by many women, in the meantime
other differences of opinion had arisen within the movement that were no less
political than the problem of prostitution. To begin with, there was the question of female sexuality and sexual freedom. This sparked a movement for
sexual reform and enlightenment whose arguments were remarkably modern.
Soon the movement’s demands began to impinge upon marriage and legitimacy rights. The radicals in the movement made rapid advances in the first
years after the turn of the century and succeeded in conquering influential
positions within the national association. But the liberal phase was soon replaced by a period of conservatism and secessions. Moreover, the founding
of the Catholic Women’s League introduced a denominational split. Soon the
more cautious tacticians gained the upper hand in the League of German
Women’s Associations, which had never been more than a loose federation
of associations with very heterogeneous aims. The conservatives, unlike the
radicals, started from the assumption that the private sphere was the main realm
of female activity and that women should devote themselves to their families.
Insofar as women had a public mission, it was to secure the future of the nation through childbearing. From there it was but a small step to arguments
about the duty to produce “genetically healthy” children and about the need
to restrict the sexual freedom of the allegedly degenerate and volatile lower
221

Politics

classes. The radical ideas about love and family that had been promoted by
the League for the Protection of Mothers in 1905 were anathema to the conservative eugenicists of the last years before World War I. The issue of preschool education became similarly polarized along ideological lines.
The liberal reformers and feminists met with vigorous opposition from
men that was no longer confined to male chauvinist disquisitions at the dinner table or in the smoke room. Nor was antifeminism just an individual posture. As early as the 1890s, resistance grew in some professional organizations,
for example, among male primary school teachers who resented the competition for jobs from female colleagues. By 1912 the backlash became organized in the League to Combat Women’s Emancipation.81 Among its more
prominent members were conservatives such as the painter Anton von Werner,
the historian Dietrich Schäfer, and the retired general August Keim. The
league’s propaganda mixed antifeminism with anti-Semitism, antisocialism,
chauvinism, and natalism. And behind this resistance against liberalization
and the removal of discrimination against women lurked, as so often in the
years before 1914, a fear of “social revolution” and Social Democracy.
Meanwhile conservative women in the BDF, even though their position
was not entirely logical, tried to mobilize women in the public realm for political purposes, while simultaneously extolling a passive ideal of femininity
in the private sphere. That patriotic and antisocialist activity by women became accepted as a legitimate activity outside the home may be taken as yet
another reflection of the growing crisis in German politics. When it came to
such important issues, even fiercely conservative men and women were agitated enough to be prepared to live with that contradiction. After 1908, most
nationalist associations added women’s auxiliary groups that promoted female activism for antifeminist objectives. Not surprisingly, this incongruity
did nothing to relieve tensions within nationalist associations or among the
sexes. Outside the family, men and women continued to live in their separate
spheres and within a larger society whose mainstream propounded the
virtues of military prowess and heroic virility while perceiving emancipated
women as a threat.
Over time the agitation against the removal of the many forms of discrimination against women also became inseparable from fears of a “social revolution” and of Social Democracy. Feminists were alleged to cooperate with
radicals in the SPD, and the debate on female suffrage came to be seen as the
test case. Since demanding the vote was a highly political act, which in Prussia, Bavaria, and Saxony could even trigger a police ban, the League of German Women’s Associations had always shied away from putting the suffrage
issue into its program. Nor were all its member associations in favor of female suffrage. This provided all the more reason for the Association of Progressive Women’s Groups, which had been founded in 1899, to take up the idea
222

Organizations and Movements

in its publications. Three years later, a number of prominent feminists, among
them Anita Augspurg, Lida Heymann, Minna Cauer, and Helene Stöcker, established the German Association for Female Suffrage. While its aims were
obvious from the start, it was only after the ratification of the 1908 Reich Association Law that this organization could launch its campaign throughout
the country without fear of immediate arrest by the police. Accordingly, its
main early activities consisted of discreet lobbying among Left Liberal deputies
to support the introduction of the vote for women. In this respect, the association’s successes were meager, as even the progressive liberals tended to pay
no more than lip service to the feminist cause. These disappointments merely
increased the determination of the radicals to take up the cudgels themselves,
as soon as this became possible after 1908. Organizing street demonstrations
proved the most effective means to attract public attention.
In 1910 these rallies became tied up with the mass meetings against the
Prussian three-class voting system that the Social Democrats were staging at
the time.82 Suddenly radical feminists faced being identified with the SPD, or
worse with the party’s left wing, whose representatives wanted to use the
mass demonstrations for their revolutionary aims. It also turned out that,
when Social Democrats demanded equality at the ballot box, their first thought
was the abolition of the restrictive suffrage systems in the federal states for
both males and females. Feminists were more concerned with gaining the
vote for women throughout the Kaiserreich and for Reichstag elections in
particular. Finally, the working-class movement had begun to create sections
for women within its own organizations whose political priorities were different from those of feminists. By 1914, some 175,000 women had joined the
SPD; they constituted 16.1 percent of the total membership (Table 82). Most
agreed with the view of their male comrades that the question of women’s
professional, sexual, and political emancipation would be resolved only after
the existing socioeconomic and political order as a whole had been radically
transformed. There could be no genuine equality between the sexes before
this had been achieved. In the view of the SPD, the interests of women were
therefore best served if they supported Social Democracy and stayed away
from feminist organizations.
Not surprisingly, many feminists found this difficult to accept. Some even
asked themselves whether a fully democratized suffrage system for all was
in fact desirable. Had it not been a mixed blessing that Bismarck had given
the vote to lower-class men? Was it, in this case, not wiser to retain the restrictive suffrage systems, but to include women with a weighted vote? In
short, the suffrage debate opened a Pandora’s box and thus began to divide
the advocates of women’s suffrage along class lines. The doubts and changes
of heart that followed were translated into the changes in leadership that finally occurred in December 1912, at a decisive meeting in Weimar. As in the
223

Politics

League of German Women’s Associations and elsewhere, conservatives now
took the helm of the suffrage movement. The radicals left in protest. Thenceforth conservatives worked with middle-class parties and helped to combat
the SPD. The suffrage campaign came under the spell of eugenicist notions of
“healthy” families. By 1913 things had gone so far that the journal Frauenstimmrecht published a long article dealing with imbecile and crippled illiterate males. They, the author argued, had the right to vote, while healthy and
educated women were deprived of it. In the end, the patterns of political mobilization among women coincided with divisions along the lines of social
class and ideology. Bourgeois feminists would join the established women’s
associations. Meanwhile, although the share of women in the SPD and the
trade unions remained small at 10 to 16 percent, most of its female members
came from a proletarian background (Table 82).
G. Pluralization and Bloc Formation
The emergence and subsequent omnipresence of interest groups is of central
importance to the development of the Kaiserreich. Associations began to mushroom in all spheres of life, and many were founded with the avowed purpose
of exerting pressure on governments, legislatures, and public opinion. They
contributed to the growing mobilization of the average citizen and to the high
turnout during elections. They accelerated the transition from the liberal representation party of notables in the early days of Bismarck to the modern integration party of the Wilhelmine period. The positive side to all this activity
is that it reflected commitment and a broad interest in politics. However, the
associations did not promote the parliamentarization of the Prusso-German
constitutional system. It would also seem wise to use the concept of democratization with caution in this context, except in the sense of a growing popular interest in participating in the marketplace of public opinion. Instead the
associations enhanced the dogmatization of politics. By the turn of the century, this also became true of the economic pressure groups that in the 1880s
had first helped to turn political parties away from constitutional reform and
toward economic issues.
However varied associational life in Germany was to an outside observer,
the increasingly politicized movements in the extraparliamentary sphere greatly
contributed to compressing political life into large and largely immobile ideological blocs. Nationalist associations in particular popularized the attitude
that the world was divided into friends and foes. Minorities suffered badly
from these changing attitudes, leading them to form their own defensive organizations. The Social Democrats constituted one such bloc, as they became
the most ostracized and discriminated against. For however fragmented the
majority inside and outside the Reichstag, with its many organizations, may
have been, and however tangible the differences in their interests, when it came
224

The Executive Branch

to the bogeyman of the “Red menace,” their shared fear brought them all together, pushing aside the relatively small band of those who tried to mediate
between the blocs and searched for ways of integrating the working class into
the existing order.
The rise of political parties and extraparliamentary associations also exerted pressure upon the executive. Of course, there was never any question in
this branch of government that the organizations of the Left had to be fought
hard. But the authorities were also vulnerable to the relentless and ever more
extreme demands of nationalist associations to be more active in foreign and
domestic politics. They had to proffer solutions. The problem was that the solutions that were ultimately implemented did not defuse the crisis of the
Kaiserreich before 1914, but rather moved the monarchy more deeply into a
political cul-de-sac.

16. Structure and Functional Changes in the Executive Branch
A. The Government Apparatus: The Kaiser and his Court;
Reich Government; Federal States and Local Governments
Beyond the larger structural questions of the Prusso-German constitutional system concerning the relationship between monarchy and parliamentarism, as
well as the development of both the Bismarckian and the Wilhelmine models
of “personal rule,”83 there is the issue of how the executive organs interacted
with one another and how the lines of daily communication operated from
top to bottom, all the way to the local communities, and from the bottom up.
As regards the higher Reich administration, the Bismarckian period was
marked above all by a tendency to centralize bureaucratic activity. The innumerable bills that had been ratified after the German Empire’s founding required a considerable executive machinery if they were all to be implemented
and enforced. If the Reich bureaucracy had been relatively small in 1871, it
now experienced remarkable growth. According to the Constitution, its members were servants of the Kaiser, on whose “graciousness” they all depended.
However, constitutional reality developed in such a way during the 1870s and
1880s that Wilhelm I never filled his powerful position according to the letter of the law. He left the governing largely to Bismarck so that the latter’s
office—reinforced by his role as Prussian minister president—became the
executive’s actual center of power. The heads of Reich offices, with their proliferating staffs, were not ministers answerable to the monarch, as they were
in Prussia, but state secretaries who reported to the Reich chancellor. Meanwhile the Prussian State Ministry, governed as it was by the principle of ministerial collegiality, stubbornly resisted Bismarck’s centralizing policies. The
Reich chancellor responded by placing “his” state secretaries as ministers
225

Politics

without portfolio in the Ministry of State. His approach to government, which,
to be sure, was in tune with broader organizational developments in the economy and society, also weakened the role of the Federal Council, which, according to the letter of the Constitution, was the Reich’s official government.
As chairman of the Federal Council, Bismarck had many other ways to push
ahead with his administrative centralization. More effective resistance to this
trend came only in the post-Bismarckian period, when Prussia began to rebel
against being submerged by the Reich. Prussian ministers feared that centralization would subvert federalism and strengthen the democratizing potential
of universal suffrage.
Finally, the relative passivity of Wilhelm I made it easier for Bismarck to
contain the court’s influence and the Kaiser’s “entourage.” There were quite
a few civil servants and officers at court, all of whom had been appointed by
the monarch personally. The simple fact that they regularly saw him during
meals, at receptions, and on frequent travels gave them considerable informal
influence. In the case of cabinet chiefs, who were responsible for civilian and
military appointments, this influence was even institutionally guaranteed.
These realities produced many frictions with civil servants outside the court,
who, led by Bismarck as Reich chancellor and Prussian minister president,
pursued their own personnel policies. Similar patterns of conflict arose in the
federal states, where an often inflated court bureaucracy existed alongside
the conventional executive machinery. The political frontlines often ran parallel to those at the Reich level, where the court represented the archconservative
counterweight to a state bureaucracy that was much more directly exposed to
the political forces in the country that were demanding change.
Given his towering position within the political system, Bismarck by and
large succeeded in winning his many battles with the Kaiser’s entourage. He
was able to influence the personnel polices of the cabinet offices and even to
contain the maison militaire. This constellation became much more complex
after his dismissal in 1890. To begin with, the relationship between the Kaiser
and “his” Reich chancellor changed because the former now wished to rule
by himself. There was also the growing influence of the entourage.84 These
changes had a great deal to do with the personality of Wilhelm II. Although
he had many intellectual gifts, he was an inconsistent, nervous person, incapable of working hard, listening to others, or thinking problems through systematically. Over time many of those who saw him in action or heard the
monarch make silly remarks during their daily contact with him began to pose
ever more seriously the question of whether he was unbalanced. Those who
came to believe that he was—and his very close friend and advisor Philipp
zu Eulenburg was among them—considered it their duty to support the Kaiser
emotionally and politically through thick and thin. After all, he was supposedly there by “the grace of God.”
226

The Executive Branch

They thus became his “handlers” not only because they felt a deep personal loyalty toward him, but also because they held the firm conviction that
the monarchy in its present shape and form was the best possible system of
government imaginable. Thus they tried to prevent Wilhelm II from committing blunders. They shielded him from uncomfortable situations and public
criticism, fearing that he might have a nervous breakdown. Caprivi, the first
Reich chancellor after Bismarck, still refused to allow his political strategy
to be guided exclusively out of consideration for the monarch’s eccentricities. His neglect of this aspect of government contributed to his early fall from
power. His successors made the “management” of Wilhelm II one of their
central concerns, and Bülow, who visited him every morning, became a master at “corseting” him in this way. However, from 1905 onward, if not before,
this fixation on one single person became increasingly problematic. Thanks
to earlier miscalculations in domestic and foreign policy, the Reich’s situation kept deteriorating, and it had become necessary to take serious account
of the political goals and demands of forces outside the court. The old and
intimate relationship between Wilhelm II and Bülow foundered in part because of these shifts. The recognition of outside factors at home and abroad
became part of a “policy of the diagonal,” which Bülow initiated and which
his successor Bethmann Hollweg tried to continue, albeit unsuccessfully.85
Since the imperial entourage failed to make this turn psychically and ideologically, fresh tensions arose between the court and the Reich bureaucracy.
The maison militaire in particular found it more and more difficult to accept
Bethmann’s conservative reformism. The entourage became “militarized,”86
promoting, if only from a sense of self-preservation, the deepening of trenches
that had already been dug to ward off Germany’s perceived external and internal enemies. The civilian Reich administration was viewed with growing
hostility. Within the Reich government, too, it became more difficult to keep
the armed forces under control. At first it was Naval Secretary Tirpitz who,
though subordinate to the Reich chancellor, pursued his own policy. Later the
army deviated from the civilian government’s line both at home (in the Zabern
Affair in 1913) and abroad (in the Crisis of July 1914). If one thinks of the end
result, that is, the decision to start a war, the problems created for Bethmann by
Tirpitz’s independence in questions of naval rearmament pale in comparison
to the “preventive war” policies that the army pursued in 1913/14. But they all
reflected changes in the ways in which the government machinery was run.
Although the Kaiser’s powers gave the Reich executive considerable influence, the Kaiserreich did remain a collection of federal states. Apart from
the pressure that the Reichstag parties, the economic lobbies, the nationalist
associations, and the press were able to exert upon the top leadership, the
monarch also had to take the policies and demands of his fellow princes into
consideration. That he was the king of Prussia and hence the head of the state
227

Politics

that contained two-thirds of the German population may occasionally have
offered advantages. But the personal union also created dilemmas for him,
and over time increasingly so. As a federal prince he certainly had to take account of the often divergent interests of Prussia. In turn, Prussia had a large
bureaucracy of its own and a diet whose electoral laws and composition sheltered the propertied classes, and the agrarians in particular, against political
change at the Reich level. There were also the other ruling houses and their
representative assemblies to consider. Although they had lost their sovereignty rights with regard to external representation, their powers over their
internal administrations remained considerable. The cities, too, had retained
tangible powers of self-government, and many of them had dynamic mayors
whose policies had the support of local assemblies elected on the basis of a
restrictive suffrage.
In particular, federal states and communes were responsible for education
and culture. They were in charge of the administration of laws regarding the
poor and of developing the urban infrastructure. They looked after local policing and the judiciary below the level of the Reich Court. This decentralization of public tasks had its own momentum in the sense that urban and rural
communities were themselves involved in the implementation and, in some
respects, even the legislation of policies. There was, it is true, the bureaucracy
of the individual federal states, whose long arm reached into the communities; but even in this era of centralization, communities retained a degree of
autonomy—and shrewdly exploited it. Some of the larger cities were led by
respected mayors who, in cooperation with local assemblies and patrician
families, took pride in building up an impressive infrastructure. The capitals
of the federal states as well as other towns had long traditions of maintaining
theaters, orchestras, and museums. The optimism of the Gründerzeit gave a
fresh boost to these activities. Wealthy local elites demonstrated their commitment to the community by supporting the arts. An unspoken competition
arose between individual cities as to which of them offered the richest cultural life. The genuine altruism of patrons became mixed with economic interests that called for a continuation of the traditional state support of local
and regional economies. Given the class character of German society, it
comes as no surprise that there were limits to this civic pride, when it came,
for instance, to the provision of better housing for economically weak groups
in these communities. The town of Harburg south of Hamburg is a case in
point. Here, the local government began to take note of the poor housing conditions of its workers only after much prodding from Berlin.87
B. Infrastructural and Social Policies; Repression (Police, Judiciary, Army)
After 1871, with the expansion of commerce and industry, improving the infrastructure became one of the main tasks of authorities at all levels. The pres228

The Executive Branch

sure to act was greatest in the rapidly growing industrial cities, whose administrators were faced with completely new problems of planning and organization. Even in the higher echelons of the Reich bureaucracy, modernizers
frequently found themselves locked in conflict with colleagues for whom industrialization and urbanization were great evils. Public health concerns and
the need to attract industry required the expansion or construction of waterworks, waste disposal systems, street cleaning services, markets, slaughterhouses, transportation systems, and savings institutes. Gas, electricity, sewers,
and streets had to be provided, as well as schools, hospitals, and public baths.
The above-mentioned statistics on cities’ phenomenal growth give an impression of the magnitude of the projects needing to be tackled.88 In 1861, the town
budget of Düsseldorf on the Rhine amounted to 540,000 thalers; by 1913 it
had swollen to 62.7 million marks. Since there were no fundamental legal obstacles to the towns running their own public utilities, many of them jumped
at the opportunity to establish power stations, gasworks, and water purification plants that could be shown off by local politicians and would raise
money to relieve the town budget. This at least was the hope, even if time and
again it was dashed by the realities of the marketplace (Table 74). At the beginning of the 1860s as many as 75 percent of the gasworks were still privately
owned. In the new age of “municipal socialism”89 by 1914 some 66 percent
were public utilities producing 82 percent of Germany’s domestic and industrial gas. By 1906 as many as 94 percent of the waterworks were publicly
owned. Electricity, though it came somewhat later, underwent a similarly
dramatic development.
Private electricity companies quickly discovered that it was unprofitable
to supply many rural areas with their product. Again the state was called upon
to step into the breach. Utility cooperatives were established, and as late as
May 1914 the Prussian Ministry of the Interior, together with the Ministry for
Public Works, Commerce and Trade, expressly instructed the regional administrators (Regierungspräsidenten) to support the supply of electricity to
“economically weaker areas.”90 As rural laborers migrated to industrial centers, large-scale agriculture in particular became dependent on electricity to
run the machinery that replaced these workers. Close cooperation between
regional and local authorities inevitably also developed with regard to road
building. Postal services, and later telegraph and telephone networks, had to
be coordinated.
Like road building, canal construction had enjoyed public support since
well before the founding of the German Empire. At the end of 1877, the
Prussian government published a major report concerning “the waterways
existing in the Prussian state, their improvement and expansion.” But in the
face of the “Great Depression” and the structural crisis of agriculture, Prussia experienced growing political tensions over canal construction. Industry
229

Politics

and commerce were keen to have more waterways for the cheap transport of
raw materials and heavy goods. Some regional authorities saw them as part
of an industrial development policy that aimed at preventing the emergence
of large conurbations with their concomitant social problems. Agrarians, by
contrast, regarded canals as a direct threat to their survival, since waterways
were also conveyor belts for cheap imported grain. They partially undermined the effect of carefully erected tariff walls against foreign agricultural
competition. Accordingly the construction of the Mittellandkanal (which was
supposed to run from the river Ems in the west, via Hanover and Magdeburg,
all the way into central Germany, at a cost to the public purse of 260 million
marks) unleashed a major and prolonged rebellion by the agrarian Conservatives in the Prussian Diet, delaying completion of the project for years. In
the end a watered-down version was ratified in 1904, extending the system
as far as Hanover.
There was no such massive resistance to the construction of railroads. The
bankruptcy of many private companies in the “Great Depression” and their
fragmentation into a multitude of separate entities had strengthened the hand
of the advocates of centralization. Bismarck, it is true, could not realize his
goal of a unified Reichsbahn, but from the late 1870s onward the state began
to take over the railroad system on a regional basis. By 1903 most railroads
were under state control. Thenceforth, authorities could directly intervene in
the economic development of individual regions by building new lines. Although he had to consider the military-strategic interests of the army, Bismarck was motivated by political and economic calculations when he
decided to link his tariff policy to the government’s takeover of the railroads.
Only by gaining control of freight tariffs was it possible to reverse the discounting practices of private companies and to impose higher rates on imported goods than on exports. State authorities also found it easier than
private companies to disregard questions of profitability and to extend lines
into economically weaker regions.
Up until World War I, both objectives were pursued by the federal states,
albeit with varying degrees of energy. The Bavarian bureaucracy, for example, found it more difficult than the Prussian one to abandon its economic liberalism in designing its infrastructural policies. Nevertheless, it had certainly
become easier to open up remote areas by building connecting railway lines
and introducing special rates. Some authorities even believed that they could
control, with the help of their railroad policies, the regional concentration of
industry if they came to the conclusion that it attracted too many potentially
restive industrial workers. In this way, weaker enterprises might find themselves favored by the state’s infrastructural policy, while booming industries
had their applications for special tariffs turned down.

230

The Executive Branch

Although the primary targets of such policies were medium-sized enterprises, agriculture also benefited from them. The federal governments also
supported “ailing landowners” by providing direct subsidies and tax breaks.
Finally, as the Reich Treasury Office discovered in 1907, the regional administrators (Landräte) in East Elbia became accessories to extensive tax fraud
by Junkers in their districts.91 As in urban areas, the basic principle continued to hold in agriculture: the politically most powerful groups were also the
first and biggest beneficiaries of governmental policy making in the area of
infrastructural development.
The mirror image of this principle is found in the treatment of the poor,
who had no political power. Traditionally, the execution of laws regarding the
poor was in the hands of the federal states and communities. They defined
the extent of support and the conditions under which it was given. The founding of the Reich in 1871 had brought no major changes to this system, except
that it became more bureaucratized. The bureaucratic trend was accompanied
by the rise of the social policy expert, who, as time went by, interpreted his
role less and less as purely charitable, and increasingly from a eugenic viewpoint.92 Doctors as a professional group moved in the same direction. With
the development of genetics, biologistic ideas about human society began to
take root that classified ethnic minorities as either inferior or superior. But
these ideas also appeared in a eugenic variant that categorized the indigenous
population by socioeconomic status. The demographic explosion, and the
concomitant increase in the number of poor people, triggered fears of a degeneration of the nation’s health and of popular morals and also confronted
authorities with the additional question of who was to pay for welfare provisions.93 By a long-standing rule, the poor could expect support only at their
place of domicile.
The introduction of unrestricted movement in 1867 promoted mass migrations. A Reich law tried to deal with the implications of this a few years later.
According to this law, the welfare applicant qualified only if he or she had
lived in the locality without interruption during the previous two years. In
this case the local or regional agency had to offer sufficient welfare, including accommodation and medical services, even if the person concerned had
meanwhile left. In other words, in addition to the obligation of supporting the
poor in the community, above all widows and orphans, the authorities were
also expected to pay for migrants at their new place of domicile. The agrarians were the first to rebel against this system by proposing to restrict the free
movement of people once again. For them this was, of course, also a way of
trying to solve the problem of a diminishing supply of rural labor that the
mass migrations had caused. When this move failed, rural communities were
offered relief by a new rule under which their obligation to support impover-

231

Politics

ished former residents elsewhere terminated after two years. In the 1880s,
Bismarck made another attempt to impose an immediate welfare obligation
on the new place of domicile. But cities were vigorously opposed to this
change, and they also refused to budge when it was pointed out to them that
the new social insurance system would reduce the burdens on the local communities. As before the poor found themselves between a rock and a hard
place, without the political muscle that landowners could deploy when it
came to obtaining public subsidies for themselves.
The reference to social insurance leads us to an aspect of state interventionism that many have seen as the beginning of the modern welfare state in
Germany.94 From its modest beginnings, the system expanded considerably
up to World War I, employing some 13,000 civil servants in 1913. The first
beginnings were taken in three steps: the health insurance law of 1883, followed a year later by the accident insurance law, and finally in 1889 by legislation relating to old-age pensions and invalidity (Tables 75–77). The
coverage was initially rudimentary, benefiting only industrial workers and lowranking employees. The 1889 law also included land and forestry laborers.
Family members were excluded, and so they, as well as the non-working poor,
continued to depend on public or private charity. This system’s beginning and
subsequent expansion point to the modern elements of German industrial society. But this should not lead us to overlook that it also preserved existing
hierarchies and provided a measure of social control.
All three insurance laws had precursors that served as models or were
drafted on the basis of older laws that had proved unsatisfactory. The latter was
true of the accident insurance law, whose ratification must be seen against the
background of the Reich Liability Insurance Law of 1871. The weaknesses
of this earlier law, which tried to regulate the growing number of industrial
accidents, had resulted in numerous conflicts between employers and workers. After this, industry and commerce came to prefer a national insurance
scheme that covered all employees, even if it meant that employers had to
pay the premiums themselves. By contrast, workers were expected to cover
two-thirds of their health insurance premiums. But, considering that before
1883 a mere 5 percent of the population had health care coverage, it certainly
brought tangible protection to some working-class people in case of illness.
The concept of health insurance, which from 1892 also included the family members of insured workers, had been inspired by an earlier system that
had been established in the mining industry and that, apart from providing
coverage against accidents, included medical aid and a pension in case of invalidity.95 Similar plans had also emerged in other branches of industry and
were subsequently incorporated in the law of 1889. Taking as their model the
security in old age that civil servants enjoyed, employees began to push for
their own pension scheme from the mid-1880s. If insurance coverage became
232

The Executive Branch

successively extended from the 1890s, it was also to relieve the provision of
welfare to the poor. And there was also the wheeling and dealing with the
parties in the Reichstag. Thus the introduction of insurance for surviving
family members became possible because the Catholic Center linked it to its
support of the renewed increase in agricultural tariffs in 1902. In the years
leading up to 1914, the Reich’s escalating financial crisis put the brakes on
the rapid growth of the system. Nevertheless, the number of health insurance
members rose from 4.2 million in 1895 to 13.4 million in 1911. The costs of
medical services increased from 47 million marks at the start to 358 million
in 1911. By 1914, more than half of the working population had been included
in health care plans, and 51.4 percent of those between the ages of fifty-five
and sixty-nine received modest pensions. A separate pension plan was promulgated for employees in 1911. Public service workers also saw their benefits improve, with the telling justification that the choice was “between a
strengthening of Social Democracy and an extension of the civil service status” to these workers.96 Of course, the former was to be avoided at all costs.
Although Bismarck’s role in the promulgation of these insurance laws has
been played down by some scholars who have seen them as products of various earlier welfare programs, Gerhard A. Ritter subsequently provided convincing evidence of the Reich chancellor’s decisive contribution.97 In light of
powerful resistance from industry, the laws would not have come about without him. There has been less debate on Bismarck’s motives. It was not the
widespread poverty and the clamor of social reformers that moved him to
consider a social insurance system, but political calculations, above all his
growing worries about the working-class movement. Ultimately, the Reich
chancellor aimed at the destruction of Social Democracy and the trade unions
with the help of social policy. This plan was designed to complement his policy of violent repression with the aid of his antisocialist laws. In the end he
convinced even employers that the idea of undermining the SPD by making
social concessions to all workers might work. Volker Hentschel is therefore
correct when he argued that the country’s social policy, as proclaimed by the
Kaiser in November 1881, had another important “birth certificate”—the socalled Law to Combat the Criminal Aims of Social Democracy of 1878.98
There can be little doubt that Bismarck’s policies of government subsidies
and social insurance had an integrating effect. But one must also consider the
repressive apparatus of the Prusso-German constitutional state. It is true that
all European nations modernized and expanded the institutions charged with
the maintenance of law and order. Faced after 1871 with the additional task of
building a nation, Bismarck, as we have seen, had unleashed a struggle against
alleged “enemies of the Reich.” At first it was the Catholics who found themselves persecuted by the authorities. Later it was the Social Democrats. If the
police organs and the judiciary expanded on Bismarck’s watch, it was not
233

Politics

merely because of the more general trend toward centralization and bureaucratization, but also because of the growing tasks of surveillance and prosecution of activities that became part of the criminal justice system.
Well before 1871, the federal states and communities had established considerable policing powers. The extent of criminality in Imperial Germany is
not easily estimated, because of variations and uncertainties in the rates of
detection and prosecution. In any case, the crime rate rose by a little over 14
percent between 1885 and 1900, to 1,143 crimes per 100,000 inhabitants, and
it subsequently hovered around this mark up to World War I. There was a
steep increase in reported homicide deaths in Prussia from a yearly average
of 356 in the period 1886–1990 to 847 in 1911–1913. But there were great
regional variations, and cities were not necessarily at the top of the league
table. It must also be remembered that the line between genuine criminal behavior and breaches of the law for reasons of economic desperation was often fluid.99 After the introduction of the antisocialist laws, authorities were
fully occupied with, and probably also more interested in, using their powers
widely against suspected Social Democrats and leftist intellectuals. In the
context of the 1878 antisocialist laws, censorship codes were formulated for
the whole of Germany. These allowed authorities to deal with alleged breaches
of cultural and political norms. A press law required publishers to submit a
copy of their publications to the local police, who would then check whether
they contained blasphemous, indecent, or otherwise incriminating passages.
Munich, with its reputation for greater liberalism, offers a good example
of how the intellectual and artistic avant-garde was treated by law enforcement agencies. Bavaria may have been liberal in comparison with Prussia,
but this did not prevent the Bavarian authorities from harassing representatives of modernism. They prosecuted the modernists for alleged blasphemy,
lèse-majesté, and depiction of obscenities. Often under pressure from Catholic politicians and the local clergy, the authorities frequently used their powers, even though only the theater was subject to pre-censorship requirements.
As mentioned earlier, in 1903 they shut down the “Eleven Executioners,” the
city’s successful political cabaret.
In 1899, Wilhelm II insisted that the “Lex Heinze” be sent to the Reichstag. It made punishable depictions or writings that “crudely offended the
sense of decency.” Similarly, a censorship advisory council, which was instituted in Munich in 1908, should probably be seen in connection with increased
police surveillance of the local artistic community. Initially Max Halbe and
Thomas Mann agreed to be members of this council; but they soon found that
they were surrounded by conservative teachers and academics and withdrew.
With the help of Mann and Halbe, Wedekind’s Frühlingserwachen was deemed
acceptable by the council, albeit only after considerable cuts. His play Lulu,
like the plays of other authors, encountered sharp opposition. It was banned
234

The Executive Branch

in 1913, while some of his poetry got him a seven-month prison term, which
he served in the Saxon fortress of Königstein. Censorship became increasingly
politicized. Demands for a stricter prosecution of violations came from the
Catholic Center Party and from an organization, founded in 1906, that—significantly—called itself the Munich Men’s Association for Combating Public Indecency. Together with the clergy, who were increasingly alarmed by the
erosion of the Catholic faith and the church’s authority, they fought to intensify the prosecution of the avant-garde in the suburb of Schwabing and of the
proliferating business of low-cost entertainment in the Bavarian capital. At
the other end of the spectrum, we find the moderate Social Democrat Georg
von Vollmar defending artistic freedom and mocking the “Nuditätenjagd.”100
Such differences of opinion indicate that the whole matter involved questions not merely of taste and morality, but also of divergent ideologies and
political positions. Similar considerations apply to film censorship, which
also increased before 1914, and the search for erotic under-the-counter literature.101 The changing ideological climate is also reflected in the authorities’
adoption of police and judicial practices that openly violated the principles
of justice and Rechtsstaatlichkeit (rule of law). In short, Munich was not a
haven of cultural liberalism, and reading about the never-ending prosecutions
in the Bavarian capital is not a pleasant assignment.
However, these policies paled when we consider the treatment of the “criminal” Social Democrats. Following the promulgation of the antisocialist laws,
over 600 newspapers and some 318 associations were banned. Hundreds of
members of working-class organizations and other suspects were arrested,
sentenced, and put in prison. A “minor state of siege” was imposed in cities
with strong Social Democratic organizations, such as Frankfurt, Berlin, Leipzig, Altona, and Stettin. This empowered the local police authorities to send
known local activists into exile. In Berlin, some 300 men suffered this fate,
and their families had to rely on the support of their neighbors. The city-state
of Hamburg provides an example that pressure from the higher authorities
could be very strong. Urged by the Prussian police president of neighboring
Altona, the Berlin government pushed the city fathers to impose a “minor
state of siege” and to exile some 75 local Hamburgian Social Democrats.
However, there was also resistance and support. In Hamburg a number of
well-known merchants expressed their displeasure by lining the streets as exiles were escorted to the city gates and handing them small presents. In the
cities of Wiesbaden, Erfurt, and Breslau, police noted as early as 1878 the
organizing of collections that frequently led to the founding of a local aid association. Around 1885 some 30 of these had come into existence with close
to 264,000 members. Another 1,020 Fachvereine, with approximately 58,000
members, attempted to represent workers’ economic interests while trade
unions were proscribed. Such activities made authorities suspicious, and with
235

Politics

the renewal of the antisocialist laws in 1886 a fresh wave of repression set in.
In April of that year, the Prussian minister of the interior published an antistrike decree. This was followed one month later by another decree stipulating that all assemblies in the Berlin region required an advance notification
of forty-eight hours. In the meantime, the arrests and trials of prominent Social Democrats continued.
The lapse of the antisocialist laws in 1890 reduced the legal grounds upon
which the police could persecute Social Democrats, but it did not put a damper
on the dogged enthusiasm for searching for “subversive elements.” The case
of Hamburg demonstrates that this enthusiasm was not confined to Prussia.
Dominated by an oligarchy of patrician families, the city was deemed cosmopolitan and urbanely liberal. But, on orders from the local government, the
police continued their surveillance of the indigenous workers. As the chief
of the Political Police Department reported, between January and April 1892
alone, twice as many meetings were attended by undercover agents and informers than in the same period during 1891.102 The number of dutifully
collected newspaper clippings rose from 3,948 to 12,722. Dressed up as ordinary workers, policemen sat in the pubs of the harbor quarters, eavesdropping on the conversations of dockers and other workers. By 1914 they had
produced some 20,000 reports. However, none of these measures prevented
major scandals. When in the middle of January 1906 Hamburg’s workers
staged massive demonstrations against a planned further restriction of the local class-based right to vote, the police were poorly prepared and humiliated
in the chaos that ensued. Trying to make good, they staged a bloody counterattack on the harbor quarters on the following day. Searching for and arresting the alleged ringleaders of the earlier demonstrations, they inflicted many
injuries on innocent people. After this, fears of “revolution” never subsided
among parts of the Hamburgian bourgeoisie. Slowly the legal barriers against
a persecution of the working class were also lowered in other parts of the
country.
The repercussions of such scandals and of the presence of policemen at
rallies upon the country’s political culture is not difficult to gauge. Historians, who have emphasized the lack of political uniformity and the rule of law
in the Kaiserreich, are no doubt correct in calling the powers of the federal
states and the communities vis-à-vis the Reich capital “enormous.”103 However, the salient point is that, in the years before 1914, these powers were deployed everywhere in ways that brought about an even greater polarization
of politics. The rate at which the political climate deteriorated may have been
slower in the southwest than in the north and in Prussia; but one is hard put
to detect major currents in any of the federal states that effectively counteracted this general trend. However multifaceted German society had become,
it is wise to differentiate between the situation in the 1890s and that of circa
236

The Executive Branch

1913/14, when the polarization in the fields of culture and politics could no
longer be overlooked.
Given this atmosphere and the widespread perception of a growing socialist threat, it is not surprising that the renewed introduction of special legislation was repeatedly considered. In December 1894 the Reichstag debated an
amendment to the Criminal Code that extended the criteria for a number of
political offenses and also increased the available penalties. Two months earlier, the Kaiser had made a typically tactless statement regarding the bill, after which it became nicknamed the Umsturzvorlage (Sedition Bill). No doubt
this helped to defeat the measure. Four years later, the Reich government
made another attempt with a piece of legislation that—following another
swashbuckling speech by Wilhelm II—came to be known as the Penitentiary
Bill. At the core of this bill, which likewise failed, was a clause banning picketing and imposing severe penalties on strikers who prevented fellow workers from crossing picket lines. After the success of the Social Democrats in
the 1903 Reichstag elections, industry and agriculture pressured the government once more to reintroduce antisocialist laws. However, prospects of a
bill getting through parliament were now bleaker than in the 1890s. Recognizing this, the Reich leadership concentrated on a revision of the Criminal
Code of 1871, into which it promised to incorporate stricter sanctions that
could be used against the Left. Although completion of the comprehensive
review of this code was not expected until 1917, the government was able to
refute the rightist charge that it was passive in the face of the “Red threat,”
while declaring at the same time that there was no realistic hope of getting
special legislation through the Reichstag. It was an early version of government by procrastination that soon became the hallmark of the Reich executive in the face of the monarchy’s growing political paralysis in the last years
before 1914.
At the same time, the depth of antisocialist fears and hatred in government
circles and among those social groups that strongly supported the existing
order may be gauged from the revival of the Staatsstreich idea and support
for a radical revision of the Constitution. In January 1897, General Alfred von
Waldersee, the commander of the Ninth Army Corps, submitted a written proposal to the Kaiser to smash the Social Democrats without delay, before it
was too late. After a further rise in the SPD vote in the 1903 elections, unilateral changes of the Constitution and the abolition of universal suffrage
were once again being considered. At one point, Wilhelm II talked himself
into a frenzy about “the coming revolution and its repression” before exclaiming: “I have to take revenge for [18]48—revenge!”104 Three years later he
bragged again about an impending “bloodbath” among the Social Democrats, to be followed by a successful foreign war. Finally, in 1913 the monarch
forwarded a memorandum by a retired general and prominent Pan-Germanist,
237

Politics

Konstantin von Gebsattel, to the Reich chancellor. The document called for
a violent coup against the working-class movement and the Jewish minority.105
Since the Reich chancellor regarded such solutions to the constitutional and
growing political dilemma of the Prusso-German monarchy too risky from both
a domestic and foreign policy standpoint (and given the Reichstag majority’s
opposition to renewing antisocialist laws), the executive had to rely on existing decrees and statutes. These continued to provide the police and courts with
extensive powers, particularly if they were prepared to interpret “creatively”
not only the relevant paragraphs of the Criminal Code, but also those relating
to association, press, and trading laws. Finally, it was always possible to resort to bureaucratic chicanery. In this climate of hostility, many a worker who
had made a joke or critical remark about the Kaiser at the local alehouse found
himself denounced to the police for lèse-majesté by some informant. Legal
scholars even raised the question of whether it constituted a violation of this
paragraph in the Criminal Code if someone did not join in the royal cheer
during celebrations. The courts frequently sentenced workers to prison terms
that bore no relation to their “crimes.” Between 1890 and 1914 the number
of convictions rose from 508 to 622 per annum. The authorities also liked to
invoke the code’s blasphemy section. Paragraphs 130 (incitement to sedition)
and 360 (causing a serious nuisance) of the Criminal Code were deployed no
less extensively, and the latter was also used to curb the socialist press.
The treatment of strikers and strikebreakers became a major preoccupation for the police and the judiciary. The starting point was Paragraph 152 of
the Trade Code (Gewerbeordnung), which guaranteed the right of coalition.
Much of this was undermined, however, by the following paragraph, which
stipulated that it was illegal to oblige “others through the use of force, through
threats, through violations of their honor, or by damaging their reputation” to
participate in a coalition (or a strike) or to deny them the right to leave that
coalition. Attempts to participate in these acts were punishable under the
Trade Code, if it did not prove possible to invoke the Criminal Code, with its
higher penalties. Frequently used clauses of this latter code were Paragraphs
185 (violation of honor), 240 (blackmail), and 241 (announcing a crime). Thus
striking workers might be prosecuted because they had shouted the word
“strikebreaker” or had spat at the feet of fellow workers whom the police had
been escorting through the picket line. When employers threatened a lockout
in advance of a labor dispute, the authorities regularly conceded that they were
merely trying to uphold their justifiable interests and hence desisted from
prosecuting them. When announcing a strike, the unions, in contrast, had to
word their statements very carefully to avoid charges of blackmail. Like the
employers, policemen and strikebreakers found much sympathy in court,
even if they had actually violated existing codes. Justice was blindfolded on
just one eye.
238

The Executive Branch

With the passage of time the police network became denser, and local authorities received ever more insistent instructions “from above” to use their
powers and, if necessary, a strong arm. In this atmosphere the police were
less and less prepared to look away or to withdraw a prosecution. The state
prosecutors, who were likewise bound to follow higher orders, tended to respond with alacrity, knowing that the courts would give more credence to a
vague statement by a police witness than to the politically suspect defendant.
Verdicts that the prosecution deemed unsatisfactory were appealed without
delay. The Court Constitution Law formally protected judges from outside
interference. But just as the Kaiser surprised other civil servants, including
the director of the Prussian Art Gallery, he occasionally also surprised the
courts. In 1898 he removed a judge who had acquitted the well-known journalist Maximilian Harden of lèse-majesté. No doubt this acted as a reminder
for other judges, most of whom were ideologically conservative in the first
place and had been socialized into a profession whose outlook was monarchist. They also sensed, or even knew, that their superiors expected certain
verdicts, and so opinions were handed down that were often based on very
questionable evidence, legal constructions, and lines of reasoning. Furthermore, many judges held the view that defendants from the lower classes were
accustomed to minor penalties and had been hardened by them. Harsher sentences were thus thought to be justified in order for the punishment to have
an effect.
And yet policemen, prosecutors, and their superiors could never be certain
that trials would have the outcome they believed to be desirable from the
point of view of a tight judicial policy. A less experienced or younger judge
might issue a mild sentence that grossly diverged from the general norm. In
Prussia it was fairly certain that juries would be packed with notables who
took a hard line without much prodding. In the south this was not always the
case, however, so that the prosecution had to brace itself for the occasional
surprise. Such experiences with juries resulted in cases being heard, if at all
possible, before a bench of professional judges. Another way of influencing
jury selection was to refuse to pay daily allowances. This immediately restricted the circle of potential jurors. It was only in the summer of 1913 that
the Reichstag ratified a bill that provided for a payment of five marks per day
of jury service. But before we celebrate this as a major improvement of the
justice system, we should not forget that judges continued to pass down verdicts designed to please the authorities.
In the meantime, the police had developed a variety of alternatives to public prosecution where their experiences with the courts seemed to make this
necessary. A number of authorities successfully used local traffic regulations
against peaceful picketing. Picketing was declared a traffic obstruction—an
interpretation that the courts were prepared to support. When the unions
239

Politics

objected that this violated the freedom of coalition provided under Paragraph
152 of the Trade Code, the police retorted that this freedom was in no way
being touched. What was at stake was the free flow of traffic. Consequently
it continued to be up to the discretion of the local policeman whether or not
a picket line was an obstruction, and in many cases he ruled that it was, even
if the traffic was not at all impeded. Time and again there were clashes between the police and the population, which Thomas Lindenberger has analyzed as an aspect of a proliferating “street politics.”106 He counted no fewer
than 400 such clashes in Berlin alone between 1904 and 1914; thus, the street
became a “place for class action.” If we view the problem from the workers’
perspective, one cannot but admire their courage. But in view of their experiences with the authorities, this was but one reaction to the realities of Wilhelmine Germany. Otherwise there was bitterness and even greater poverty
for those who got caught up in this machinery.
Yet, however much policemen were urged by their superiors to contain
and intimidate the working-class movement without the broad powers of antisocialist laws, and however unashamedly the courts practiced “class justice,”
ultimately there was always the army to back up the police saber or arbitrary
judges. The army was not merely an instrument against Germany’s external
enemies, but the ultima ratio regum in a civil war against the working class
that many officers believed imminent. It was no accident that shortly after the
lapse of the antisocialist laws in the spring of 1890 the Prussian war minister
reminded the commanding generals of the powers they had under the State
of Siege Law of 1851. The Reich Constitution stipulated that this ancient law
be replaced after 1871 by a Reich Defense Law. But for all too transparent
reasons the Reich government never introduced such a bill. With the 1851
law therefore still in place, the commanding generals were free to proclaim
a provisional state of siege if they judged such a measure necessary for the
maintenance of order. Outside Prussia, it is true, the Kaiser’s consent was
also required; but neither the friends nor critics of the officer corps were in
any doubt about the military’s far-reaching powers, including the right to suspend basic liberties. And to make certain that there were no misunderstandings about who was seen as the main enemy of the monarchical state, all
officers down to the commanders of local garrisons received a further directive in 1890 to keep themselves “constantly” informed about the “organization, the leaders, and the agitators” on the Left.107
Further ministerial instructions that followed in subsequent years were designed to keep the army in a state of readiness for civil war. After the turn of
the century, the General Staff began work on a study whose final version was
submitted in 1907 under the title of “Fighting in Insurgent Cities.” In April
1907 this study triggered an order by the Seventh Army Corps at Münster,
northeast of the Ruhr area, that provided, inter alia, for the arrest of Reichs240

The Executive Branch

tag deputies. It was withdrawn in a storm of protest after it had been leaked
to the press. The civil war measures that General Paul von Hindenburg drew
up in February 1908 for his Fourth Army Corps at Magdeburg met with so
much approval in Berlin that they were held up as a model to the other military districts. A decree by the Prussian war minister on 8 December 1912 reminded the commanding generals once more that they should be prepared for
an immediate response. Reactions to a number of strikes showed that the officers had no qualms about calling out the troops. As of late December 1896,
even the hardliner Waldersee had taken the view on the occasion of the Hamburg dockers’ strike that he would be happy if the police proved sufficient to
deal with it. “To use armed force against hungry workers,” he added, “is certainly no pleasure.”108 But by 1914 the military’s willingness to take a hard
line during domestic crises had become noticeably greater. In 1910 a decree,
apparently issued by the civilian administrator of the Düsseldorf district, had
urged subordinate authorities to rely on troops only “in the most extreme
emergency.”109 No such restraint was shown in Halle during the same year,
with bloody results. When Ruhr miners went on strike in the spring of 1912,
police were used on a massive scale, and the authorities drew on additional
units from as far as Berlin, Frankfurt, Wiesbaden, Hanover, Kassel, and
Cologne. These forces were complemented by some 5,000 soldiers, including two machine gun detachments. Finally, in the July Crisis of 1914, the
generals thought of moving against the domestic opposition and arresting the
Social Democratic leadership before declaring the start of a foreign war.110
The army’s growing importance in the political struggle at home had, during the 1890s, raised the question of whether recruits would be reliable enough
to fight in a civil war. Industrialization and urbanization had inevitably increased the percentage of young factory workers in the army. There were growing suspicions that Social Democratic “agitators” might be among them. The
military authorities tried to counter the influence that these men were believed
to exert on gullible recruits from the country’s rural areas. Consequently, they
resorted to searches of soldiers’ lockers, spying, and bans on frequenting certain pubs in the vicinity of the garrison; they also introduced lessons to foster patriotism. Even reserve officers, most of whom were of middle-class
background, came under a cloud of suspicion when “reliable” and absolutely
loyal cadets of noble background were no longer available in sufficient numbers. Faced with this recruitment dilemma, the Prussian war minister abandoned the further expansion of the army. As late as 1910, he wrote to the
Reich chancellor that he had “at the present time no intention” of enlarging
the army’s size beyond the twenty-three corps that had been fixed as far back
as March 1899.111 He added that, apart from military considerations, the reasons for this restraint were to be found in “the political arena” and were too
obvious to require repetition: at stake was the army’s reliability in the event
241

Politics

of civil unrest. It was only from 1911 onward that the earlier domestic calculations that had been made in the face of the presumed Social Democratic
threat became secondary. As international tensions rose, Germany resumed
her rearmament on land. The naval buildup, which until then had enjoyed priority status, came to a virtual standstill. The system of patriotic instruction
that had been designed to produce “reliable” recruits was substituted by older
methods of harsh discipline and drill.
While the Army as the ultima ratio regum thus prepared itself for civil as
well as foreign war, the civilian government attempted to expand and sharpen
its instruments of propaganda. Once the financial crisis made the expansion
of the social insurance system more difficult, the leadership worked hard to
stimulate monarchist loyalties in the population through emotional appeals.
Bismarck had used the press to influence public opinion in matters of foreign
policy and, in pursuing this objective, had skillfully drawn on his slush fund.
Bülow’s press chief, Otto Hammann, later worked hard to systematize the
flow of official information. Meanwhile the Social Democrats remained the
principal domestic enemy against whom Hammann’s office campaigned relentlessly. Reich Chancellor Caprivi had proclaimed as early as 1890 that all
legislative projects and government actions were to be constantly scrutinized
in terms of their impact on the “Social Democratic question.” For the same
reason, the authorities extended their youth work after the turn of the century.
The legal requirement that this work be nonpolitical was conveniently overlooked in the case of right-wing associations but applied to leftist youth
groups. Within the educational system it was above all the primary school
teachers who came under increasing pressure when the Left Liberals among
them were suspected of being closet socialists. In 1898 the so-called Lex
Arons made certain that holding a teaching position anywhere in the educational system was treated as incompatible with membership in the SPD.
While some teachers’ associations courageously resisted political interference with what they saw as their professional task as educators, from 1906
onward Prussia tried to push back what little influence parents had gained in
schools by establishing school commissions subject to official supervision.
The veterans’ associations and works’ committees (Werkvereine), founded by
employers to combat Social Democratic trade unions, enjoyed the special favor of the authorities. When the financial crisis forced the government to reduce its subsidies to these organizations, the authorities stepped up the
dispatch of prominent politicians to address their annual rallies. Private benefactors who gave money to “patriotic” associations were recommended for
the award of decorations or the coveted title of “councilor.” In this way private donations also became increasingly politicized, as all measures came to
be justified in the fight against the perceived leftist threat.

242

The Executive Branch

In retrospect, it may be said that, paradoxically perhaps, the system of
subsidies and state insurance had a polarizing effect. It favored the producers and was so reluctant to offer tangible welfare and participatory benefits
that might have appeased the workers that many of them felt held back in
their social aspirations by a class system that discriminated against them in
thousands of small ways. The question of fairness became a major bone of
contention. This is even more true of workers’ frequent encounters with state
authorities. Police chicanery, the injustices of the court system, and the policies of the army greatly embittered workers. Even after the lapse of the antisocialist laws, unfair and unequal treatment by the authorities was part of the
daily experience in working-class quarters. Faced with outrageous verdicts
on the right to form coalitions and go on strike, even the Christian and HirschDuncker unions found themselves pushed to the side of the “free” unions. To
be sure, some reformers among the liberal bourgeoisie sought the middle
road and hoped to build bridges between the entrenched camps on the Right
and Left. Reich Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg, even more than his predecessor, labored to forge a “policy of the diagonal.” However, it was unthinkable for a monarchist chancellor to seek cooperation with the allegedly
revolutionary SPD. At the same time, the conservative forces lapsed more
and more into a fortress mentality. Given this situation, and the peculiarities
of the Prusso-German constitutional system, the executive was left with little choice but to postpone the resolution of serious and conflict-laden political problems.
The trouble was that no complex society and economy can be governed
by an executive branch that sits on its hands and refuses to address fundamental problems. Paralysis threatened, made worse by the fact that powerful
organizations in the political sphere had begun to checkmate each other.
However far the expansion of the executive may have progressed by 1914,
and however much it had changed its functions, by the outbreak of World
War I the most striking feature of Prusso-German constitutionalism was its
failure to produce at least some tangible results. There was little parliamentarization to speak of, and even in the Center Party polarization had now set
in “between the majority dominated by the bourgeoisie and the workers’
movement.”112 The Reich government did not dare to place vital questions of
financial reform on the agenda. The capacity of political forces to forge compromises had become severely limited, as divergent ideologies and interests
struggled ever more vigorously for an outright victory of their side. How this
impasse was reached by the eve of World War I will be discussed in the next
two sections. They will provide a more strictly chronological account of the
most important events between 1871 and 1914, before we finally move to
Part V, World War I itself.

243

Politics

17. The Evolution of Domestic Politics, 1871–1914
A. The Early Years Up to Bismarck’s Fall
After the swift victory over the French in 1870 and the official founding of
the German Empire in the following spring, Wilhelm I, his government, and
the political forces that had unified Germany were faced with a major task of
nation-building and of consolidating a highly dynamic process that had begun ten years earlier and that was by no means completed in 1871. Historians once debated whether the country was united by “blood and iron” or by
“coal and steel.” In the end, it was both Bismarck’s wars and rapid industrial
and demographic change during the 1860s that had produced this success.
We shall examine in a moment how the Empire’s stabilization was connected with the country’s foreign policy. The first task here is to focus on the
policies employed by the Reich chancellor, as the key person in the new government, to try to rally divergent forces and to keep them on the side of a conservative monarchy that was not prepared to make any major concessions to
parliamentarism or a more general democratization of the Prusso-German
constitutional system. The chancellor’s struggle against the Catholic church,
the Kulturkampf, provides the first piece of evidence that his strategy of nationbuilding and consolidation was not merely based on the principle of cooperation with the Liberals and Conservatives, as discussed earlier. Rather he used
methods of discrimination and ostracism against groups that were deemed to
be and turned into “Reich enemies.” Fighting these enemies was designed to
provide the glue that brought other political forces together on the basis of
what had been created in 1871.
Accordingly, the Reich government and the Reichstag, dominated as it
was then by the Liberals, introduced a number of measures to impede the
work of the Catholic church and its political arm, the Center Party. The campaign began in the summer of 1871 with the dissolution of the Catholic department in the Prussian Ministry of Culture, which, according to Bismarck’s
later verdict, had become a group that “represented Roman[-Catholic] and
Polish interests in the midst of the Prussian bureaucracy.”113 December saw
the introduction of the “pulpit paragraph,” which was added to the Criminal
Code and directed against clergy members who tried to influence the flock at
election time. Violators faced incarceration. In the spring of 1872 a law was
introduced that secured ministerial supervision over all schools, public and
private, including Catholic institutions. The Jesuits were banned in July 1872.
Another set of laws, ratified in May 1873, gave authorities the right to supervise the training of priests and the disciplinary policies of the church hierarchy. This was followed in May 1874 by the Expatriation Law, under whose
terms priests could be expelled from the country and their citizenship revoked.

244

The Evolution of Domestic Policies, 1871–1914

The Monastery Law, adopted a year later, ousted, with a few exceptions, the
remaining religious orders from Prussia.114
The effect of these measures on the Catholic clergy and population was
predictable. The hierarchy resisted discrimination wherever possible, while
the faithful stood by them. They became more conscious of the minority position into which they had been cast in the new Reich. The loyalty to their
church also showed in their voting behavior. As we have seen, the Center
Party could henceforth count on a solid bloc of voters for whom religious affiliation rather than social class was the crucial determinant at the polls.
Thanks to Bismarck and the Liberals, the number of Reichstag seats won by
Catholics hovered around the 100 mark, and it took a long time for the memories of the Kulturkampf to fade. If for Bismarck the struggle and the “ultramontane question” was primarily an instrument for promoting the consolidation
of the founding of the Reich on a conservative basis, for the Liberals the repression of Catholicism was more than a nation-building device. It also reflected their more deep-rooted ideological commitment to the advancement
of a modern and secular industrial society. For several decades the Catholic
church had been a large boulder blocking the path toward this type of society. By embodying everything that the Liberals loathed, Catholicism became
the negative foil against which the Liberals could define more clearly what
they themselves stood for. For this vision they were prepared to accept the
ouster of a sizeable section of the population from the national consensus.
In the long-run, Bismarck proved to be the more pragmatic party in this
conflict. He had not merely to consider the overall stability of the PrussoGerman monarchy but also to secure parliamentary majorities that would
pass the legislation he and his ministries never tired of drafting. From the first
national elections of 1871 to those of 1874, the Catholics had increased their
number of seats from 63 to 91. While the Liberals slightly increased their
representation, the Conservatives dropped from 57 seats to 22. To the chancellor, it was therefore not inconceivable that someday he might have to rely
on the Center Party for support. Since the church was not weakened by the
Kulturkampf but, on the contrary, emerged from it strengthened, it became
clear that the conflict had to be abandoned sooner or later. However, this did
not mean that Bismarck was thenceforth exclusively focused on the question
of how to integrate all Germans into the new Reich. Being able to pinpoint
an internal enemy had the advantage of providing a rallying point for the majority of voters, and it was therefore no doubt fortuitous that a new “Reich
enemy,” the still embryonic working-class movement with its radical critique
of the existing order and of capitalism, was readily available. From the mid1870s onward the appearance of this “threat” to the consolidation of the Reich
enabled Bismarck to wind down the struggle against Catholicism.

245

Politics

The ratification of the antisocialist laws in 1878 was the first step in the
formal instrumentalization of this new “danger.” It is also telling of the chancellor’s by then changing relationship with the Liberals (and of the mistrust
with which the latter had begun to eye his policies) that he failed to find sufficient support in the Reichstag for special legislation against the SPD after
a first attempt on the Kaiser’s life on 1 May 1878. However, a week later Wilhelm I was seriously injured in another assassination attempt, and this time
Bismarck succeeded, with the help of a vigorous press campaign, in getting
the public to accept that the “subversive” Social Democrats were responsible
for this outrage, even if there was no real evidence for this. Yet even then, the
Liberals refused to give the chancellor all the repressive powers that he
wanted and insisted that some rights, such as the right to run for legislative
office, remain untouched. Nor was the parliamentary immunity of the twelve
Social Democratic Reichstag deputies who had been returned in the 1877
elections lifted. Finally, the Liberal majority imposed a time-limit on the antisocialist laws so that they had to come up for renewal at regular intervals.115
The turmoil in domestic politics during 1878 was followed a year later by
a major debate on the introduction of higher external tariffs that would abandon the policies of free trade of the previous decades. Industry and agriculture,
to be sure, had been clamoring for protection against foreign competition for
some time, after the boom of the early 1870s had turned into a period of retarded growth (which was perceived by contemporaries as the “Great Depression”). If industry and agriculture now got their way, the new tariff laws
would benefit Bismarck politically. After the antisocialist laws had given him
powers to repress the fledgling working-class movement, the tariffs gave him
the opportunity to put an end to the period of Liberal dominance in the Reichstag (Table 79). Thanks not least to the better protection against agricultural
imports from North America and Russia, the agrarian Conservatives were
now prepared to forgive the “sins” Bismarck had committed at the time of
Germany’s unification. They came out of their oppositional corners to cooperate with him. Domestic politics was now set on a new and more right-wing
course. The Reich, as has been argued, was at this point founded for the second time and on a different coalitional basis.116
However, subsequent elections in the 1880s and the “irresponsibility” of
the political parties in their dealings with the Reich government repeatedly
threatened the durability of Bismarck’s new and more conservative parliamentary majority. In these circumstances Bismarck in both 1884 and 1887
tried to overcome his domestic difficulties of getting legislation passed with
the help of foreign policy initiatives. In particular, it explains his willingness
to embark upon the acquisition of colonies for which he had never shown
much interest before. He knew, as he once put it in connection with the 1884
election campaign, that the colonial business was “a hoax” that he needed for
246

The Evolution of Domestic Policies, 1871–1914

election purposes. But there was a flipside to his quest for the renewed stabilization of internal affairs: he found that the genie of imperialism that he
had released could not be put back into the bottle. As we shall see, it began
to affect his foreign policy design and his relations with Britain in particular.117
Three years later, in 1887, Bismarck again exploited the Reich’s deteriorating international position to counter the Reichstag’s demand for a greater
voice in budgetary matters. At this point, many deputies were prepared to vote
for higher military expenditures, but only if the septennial cycle of appropriations was replaced by a triennial review. The Reich chancellor responded to
this attempt to intrude into the sphere of the monarchical prerogative over the
armed forces by dissolving the national parliament, hoping that fresh elections would result in a strengthening of the Right. In this situation it proved
useful to highlight mounting international tensions and in particular the “Russian menace.” As a result, the Free Conservatives, as the Bismarckian party
par excellence, were able to increase the number of their seats from 28 to 41.
The National Liberals rose from 51 to 99 seats, while the Left Liberals dropped
back from 74 seats to 32. The chancellor now had the support of a so-called
cartel majority, which helped him to weather the storms of 1888, the year
when both Wilhelm I and his son Friedrich III died in quick succession, ultimately bringing Wilhelm II to the throne. With this “generational leap,” an
immature 29-year-old assumed the powerful reins of German Kaiser and
King of Prussia.118
Although the “cartel majority” of 1887 did ratify a number of bills that
Bismarck put before it, fresh conflicts arose in the fall of 1889 when the antisocialist laws came up for renewal. This time Bismarck aimed at an indefinite extension, and when resistance to this plan did not subside, he once
again resorted to a dissolution of parliament and national elections. This time
his calculation of obtaining another right-wing shift badly misfired. Instead
the Left Liberals augmented their seats from 32 in 1887 to 76. No less alarming, the Social Democrats (whom the antisocialist laws had not banned from
participating in elections and whose deputies had used the Reichstag freely,
though cautiously, as a platform to advance their programs) tripled their
seats, from 11 to 35. This meant that the “cartel majority” was finished. Finding himself at the end of the road, Bismarck apparently considered resorting
to a Staatsstreich, a violent coup against the obstinate deputies. There has
been some debate on whether the plan ever assumed more concrete shape or
merely remained a vague possibility. However, what is more decisive for the
subsequent course of events is that the Kaiser and his advisors seem to have
taken rumors about a coup seriously. Since Wilhelm II not only intended to
rule by himself but also hoped to introduce himself to the nation as a Kaiser
of all Germans and of peace, he decided to dismiss the powerful chancellor,
as was his privilege under the Constitution. Not wanting to start his reign
247

Politics

with a dangerous domestic conflict, he appointed Leo von Caprivi, who was
quite agreeable not only to take the position but also to help Wilhelm II dismantle the executive powers that his predecessor had built up since 1871.119
No less important, there was no escalation of the conflict with the Reichstag,
and the antisocialist laws were allowed to lapse altogether.
B. Stabilization and Crisis, 1890–1914
After the upheavals surrounding Bismarck’s dismissal, Wilhelm II had been
hoping to steer a “new course” and to center the Reich government around
the powers he enjoyed under the Constitution. At first this strategy seemed to
work. In 1891, the Reichstag accepted a number of improvements to existing
labor laws, raising the monarch’s hopes that after the Konfliktkanzler he might
become a Kaiser of peace and of Germany’s workers, beloved by all. However, the debate on another army bill in 1892 caused so many difficulties that
Caprivi felt compelled to resort to the well-worn Bismarckian ploy of calling
early elections and of using foreign policy issues to move voters in a more
conservative, progovernment direction. The election became another boomerang in that it strengthened both the extreme Right and Left (Table 79). Worsening the situation, at about the same time, the Reich’s commercial treaties
with a number of foreign countries came up for renewal, kindling a bitter argument about whether Bismarck’s high tariff policies should be continued.
The agrarians were all in favor of a continuation and in 1893 created the
mighty Agrarian League to put this point across to Caprivi and the public.
Meanwhile larger sections of industry, keen to exploit the upswing in the
world economy and no less well-organized than the agrarians, called for an
across-the-board reduction of protective tariffs. With the end of the period of
retarded growth, many entrepreneurs had regained enough self-confidence to
want to plunge into the international market to sell their goods. The demand
for colonies and for an empire “commensurate” to the Reich’s size and economic importance now grew even stronger than it had been in the 1880s. The
conflict between agriculture and industry thus shifted to the fundamental
question of Germany’s future development. The commercial and industrial
bourgeoisie extolled the advantages and virtues of modern capitalism for the
country’s standing at home and abroad. At the other end of the spectrum, Otto
von Völderndorff aptly voiced the uneasiness that many conservatives felt
about industrial and urban society when he wrote: “We must leave dabbling
in world politics to others; we must limit ourselves to securing the country
against the two neighbors [France and Russia]. We must pursue utmost parsimony in all matters (except for the army) and a refounding of the Reich
upon the only stand that provides a firm base, [i.e.,] the rural population. Our
industry is not worth much anyway. It is in the hands of Jews; it produces
‘cheaply and poorly;’ it is the seedbed of socialism.”120 Small wonder that
248

The Evolution of Domestic Policies, 1871–1914

agrarians developed a visceral hatred of Caprivi, the modernizer and advocate of a reversal in commercial and tariff policies. When, on top of it all, he
refused to give his consent to renewed plans for a violent strike against the
Social Democrats and the Reichstag, the Kaiser was persuaded that he was
intolerable and dismissed him.
However, his successor, the aging Prince Clodwig zu Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst, had no appetite, either, for an era of conflict that court circles rumored
to be imminent. The future direction of domestic politics was also fueled by
a program of naval expansion that Naval Secretary Friedrich Hollmann had
drawn up at the Kaiser’s prompting. Tailored to give naval cover to Germany’s future overseas expansion through the construction of battle cruisers,
the Reichstag majority was quick to criticize the “limitlessness” of these plans,
adding that they lacked a systematic approach. Wilhelm II, who became very
agitated by the deputies’ refusal to support his program, was finally won over
by a group of advisors around Hohenlohe against a faction of hard-liners who
were calling for a Staatsstreich. This group succeeded in reassuring a concerned public that no unconstitutional moves were in the offing. Instead, Hohenlohe and his supporters promised to rally the middle-classes and agrarians
on a basis of conservative moderation. The inauguration of Weltpolitik, the
building of a huge fleet of battleships to be deployed in the North Sea, and
the idea of a grandiose economic and political future for the Kaiserreich were
key elements in their grand design.121
If the policy of violence against the Left had, at least for the moment, receded into the background, the political battles that Hohenlohe and his successor Bernhard von Bülow had to wage were tough enough. By the same
token, the outcome of these battles demonstrated that key political forces inside and outside the Reichstag still had the capacity to forge compromises
rather than unilaterally resorting to force. Without this capacity, which was
lost by 1914, it would be difficult to explain the passage of the navy laws of
1898 and 1900, on the one hand, and the majority agreement on agricultural
tariffs in 1902, on the other. What greatly helped the ratification of Tirpitz’s
navy bills was that they appeared to offer the systematic program that Hollmann had failed to develop and that, at least on paper, they looked modest
and fiscally responsible. A temporary calm in the international situation and
optimism about the Reich’s finances helped to ratify these two major pieces
of legislation. The increase in agricultural (though not industrial) tariffs was
passed two years later and similarly raised hopes for a stable domestic future.
The more radical economic demands of the Agrarian League were defeated,
and Bülow negotiated a middle way on the tariff issue that was ultimately
quite acceptable to industry and the middle-class parties on whose votes he
depended. But it was equally clear, as the experience of very effective agrarian opposition to the building the Mittellandkanal had indicated a few years
249

Politics

earlier, that industry and commerce could not have the prosperity all to themselves. Given the power structure, concessions to agriculture were unavoidable. This also applied to the Catholics and the Center Party, whose loyal
voters regularly secured a solid number of around 100 deputies. Since the end
of the Kulturkampf, the party had slowly been drawn into coalitions needed
by the government to form legislative majorities. In return the discriminatory
legislation of the 1870s was gradually dismantled.122
The navy laws and the tariffs were of fundamental importance to the future development of the country and provided the grounds for further political conflict and compromise. Certainly, the ratification of the three pieces of
legislation mentioned above must be regarded as a remarkable political feat.
The question of whether the compromises that were struck went beyond the
actual accords has caused some controversy among historians. Eckart Kehr
was the first to establish a direct link between the two navy laws and the 1902
tariff legislation. To him it enshrined a historic compromise that rallied the
middle-classes and agriculture against the working class and its movement.123
Others have concurred.124 Geoff Eley, on the other hand, has challenged this
hypothesis, asserting that concrete documentary evidence is lacking to sustain it.125 Indeed, beyond some circumstantial evidence, there is, for the time
being, only the statement that Reich Treasury Secretary Max von Thielmann
made on 1 May 1900 during the Reichstag debate on the second navy bill.
Pressured by the Center Party and the Conservatives, he assured them that the
Federal Council—formally the government of the Reich—supported an increase in agricultural tariffs that would soon be submitted. The Reich executive therefore did see the larger context, even if that context often disappeared
behind vague slogans about the need to rally in support of Weltpolitik and
against the Social Democrats—slogans that Bülow was a master at inventing
when he spoke on these subjects and yet did not want to reveal too much.126
There was another link between the navy laws of 1898 and 1900 and the
tariffs of 1902: in 1900 Thielmann predicted that the naval armaments—so
heartily welcomed by commerce and industry—could be paid without difficulty from the additional income that would accrue to the Reich from raised
agricultural tariffs and the anticipated further growth of the national economy, which would automatically yield higher tax revenues (Tables 72–73).
After 1902 this prediction turned out to be badly wrong and soon triggered
another major domestic conflict over the escalating crisis of the Reich’s finances. It was above all the navy’s expansion that proved more costly after it
triggered an unanticipated quantitative as well as qualitative arms race with
Britain. This arms race undercut all of Thielmann’s and Tirpitz’s elaborate
fiscal calculations and threw into disarray the Reich budget and the system
of federal “matricular contributions” (examined above).127 Meanwhile the federal states and local communities also accumulated uncontrollable deficits. It
250

The Evolution of Domestic Policies, 1871–1914

soon became clear that the holes in the Reich budget could only be plugged by
new taxes. Yet the mere mention of this topic alerted a welter of well-organized
interest groups and parties, all of which tried to protect their constituencies
from the tax reform proposal that Bülow, recognizing the looming fiscal crisis, had been working on since 1904.
When the tax bill was finally introduced in 1906, the Reichstag chopped
and changed it so much that it became no more than a temporary band-aid.
Only one innovation survived the legislative tax battles that was to rattle the
National Liberals and the Conservatives and to have lasting consequences:
the Catholics insisted on the adoption of a direct tax on legacies. While most
funds were raised, as before, by increases in indirect taxes, thus hitting the
mass of the population hardest, to the propertied classes the inheritance tax
was the thin end of the wedge and a harbinger of the “confiscatory” taxes that
the Reichstag, elected on the basis of universal suffrage for men, might well
introduce in the future.
However, for the moment a shift in the balance of political forces in the
national parliament that would have made further expansion of direct taxes
possible was prevented by the outcome of the 1907 elections. Campaigning
against Social Democrats and in part on a colonialist platform (which is why
they became known as “Hottentot elections”), the Liberals and Conservatives
succeeded in gaining enough additional seats to form the “Bülow Bloc.” The
SPD, which, together with the Catholics, had been highly critical of the government’s brutal policies in southwestern Africa, had its number of seats
slashed from 81 to 43 as a result of a number of second-ballot agreements
among Liberals and Conservatives. While the Catholics were able to increase
their seats slightly from 100 to 105, the other nonsocialist parties had enough
seats to oust the Center Party from the legislative position it had held in the
coalition of the previous years. Despite his triumph, Bülow knew that he
could not sit back and gloat over the defeat of the Social Democrats. Following the meager finance reform of 1906, another bill had to be put before the
Reichstag to deal with the growing deficit. Worsening things, in the meantime the hole in the Reich budget widened after the Royal Navy had begun
to build the Dreadnought class of battleships, which were much bigger and
faster than what Tirpitz had launched and planned under his program. His decision to follow the British lead steeply increased the costs of the German
naval buildup, and the money for this could only be generated through higher
taxes.128
Fully aware of these problems, Bülow initiated a major publicity campaign
to put pressure on the Bülow Bloc parties to vote for his finance bill. He presented it as absolutely vital for the entire domestic and international future of
the Kaiserreich. His bill had one flaw: along with the usual increases in indirect taxes, it contained a further modest direct tax proposal. Ultimately it
251

Politics

was because of this proposal that he failed. The Conservatives presented an
alternative proposal that put the new tax burdens primarily on the shoulders
of the mass of the population and of commerce and then found just about
enough votes in the Reichstag to pass it. The defeat of Bülow’s bill and the
agitation for and against its Conservative substitute demonstrated how polarized the situation had become by 1908/9. Bülow had to go, and the capacity
to forge compromises on central issues such as taxation that would not lead
to a backlash had begun to evaporate to a point that deeply worried Bülow’s
successor, Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg. Sooner or later elections would
have to be held, giving voters an opportunity to take revenge for the escalating injustices of the tax system. This opportunity came in 1912, and in the
meantime the SPD made certain in its propaganda that the “little man” would
not forget how he had been hit in the pocket by the 1909 finance bill.
Embittered by the injustices of the tax system, the mounting costs of armaments, the restrictive franchises in the federal states, and the illogicalities
of Prusso-German constitutionalism in general, over 4.2 million voters gave
their vote to the Social Democrats in January 1912 (Table 79). The SPD became the largest party in the Reichstag, holding 34.8 percent of the total vote
and 110 seats (27.7 percent). The Conservatives and the Reich Party (Free
Conservatives) gained a little over 12 percent, with the Center Party (16.4
percent) and the National Liberals (13.6 percent) garnering less support than
in 1907. The Progressives increased their vote to 12.3 percent. When the
April 1913 elections were held for the Prussian Diet, the Conservatives suffered further losses despite the special protection that they enjoyed under the
three-class voting system in this federal state. The massive demonstrations
that had taken place in 1910 against the inequalities of the Prussian suffrage
system had been harbingers of these developments. After 1912, then, it was
not only the finances that were coming apart at the seams, but the political
system more generally.129 The difficulties facing the Reich government were
thrown into sharp relief during the Zabern Affair and the debates surrounding the 1913 army bill and its astronomical costs.
In November 1913, the local military provoked a confrontation between
the army and the population in the small Alsatian town of Zabern, which resulted in the maltreatment of civilians by officers and the proclamation of a
state of siege by the local commander. The incident revealed that behind the
façade of civilian government, the Prussian military state still stood ready to
assert its power. Indeed, the events in Zabern represented more than a regrettable local incident that could be blamed on the inflexibility and stupidity of
a few officers on the ground. The affair grew into a national scandal when it
became clear that the Kaiser, as commander-in-chief, was not prepared to accept the slightest criticism of “his” military. It was as if a flashlight had lit up
for a moment to reveal the deep and ever deepening divisions within German
252

The Evolution of Domestic Policies, 1871–1914

politics. The incident separated those Germans who were inflexibly hostile
to any change in the status quo from those who called ever more insistently
for fundamental reforms of existing political conditions. As Marie Countess
Radziwill observed at the time, there existed a “latent antagonism between
two very different Germanies.”130
Although the military had committed clear breaches of the law, Wilhelm
II, under the influence of his maison militaire, refused to admit that any mistakes had been made. As the monarch’s loyal servant, the Reich chancellor
was forced, against his better judgment, to defend before the Reichstag the
bad decisions that the Kaiser’s generals had made. Amid the deputies’ noisy
protests, he tried his best to stop the erosion of the crown’s constitutional
privileges. The Reichstag majority in turn expressed its displeasure by passing a vote of no-confidence in the chancellor. To be sure, this vote could not
directly touch his position, as the monarch alone had the constitutional right
to dismiss him. Accordingly, the Kaiser remarked with glee that he could
simply ignore the vote of no-confidence. In the face of so much myopia it is
not surprising that many quite moderate people were deeply depressed by
these political developments in a country that, as they saw it, had many impressive cultural and economic achievements to its credit, but was shaken by
scandals that could only polarize society.
These growing tensions and the gradual disappearance of the capacity to
make compromises also surfaced in the debates on the army and finance bills
of 1913. The enlargement of the army was—as we have seen—131 reluctantly
adopted by the War Ministry after years of stagnation related to the desire to
preserve the homogeneity and reliability of the armed forces should, with the
rise of Social Democracy, civil unrest break out. All this changed when, with
Tirpitz’s virtual defeat in the Anglo-German naval arms race and rising international tensions between the great powers, the military began to worry
about the Reich’s relative strength in comparison to Russia and France, Germany’s main antagonists on the European continent. Suddenly, these two
countries were deemed to pose a lethal threat to the monarchy’s future. The
nationalist associations and rightist press made an important contribution to
securing the passage of a smaller bill in 1912, which was to be followed by
a bigger one in 1913.
The trouble was that the parliamentary majority that had ratified the army
bills quickly evaporated when, in a separate finance bill, the taxes had to be
found to pay for it all. It was clear from the start that the enormous costs
could not be covered by additional indirect taxes that would affect the mass
of the population. Nor were matricular contributions from the federal states
available to plug the deficit. Direct taxes imposed by the Reich seemed the
only way out. Bethmann hoped that, in the face of the perceived threat from
Russia and France, even the Conservatives would swallow the bitter tax pill
253

Politics

if he offered them a compromise: the money was to be levied via a one-shot
“military contribution” that could be presented as a patriotic deed. The Wehrbeitrag would not be a permanent direct tax.
As the Reich chancellor soon learned, the Conservatives were not prepared to make this kind of relatively minor sacrifice. No matter whether the
financial crisis and the deficits slowly paralyzed all orderly government activity, direct taxes were in their view out of the question. Such taxes, they argued, would open the door to the progressive expropriation of the wealthy by
a Reichstag that was, after all, elected on the basis of universal suffrage for
men and in which the “dangerous” Social Democrats were now the largest
party. In the end, the “military contribution” was accepted by a large majority
against the votes of the Conservatives. Among those voting for the bill were
some seventy Center Party deputies and, for the first time ever, many Social
Democrats, who on this occasion gave up their long-standing opposition to
support the financing of an army that might be used against them and into
which the party’s rank-and-file might be drafted in the case of a foreign war.
However, no Reich chancellor appointed by the monarch could afford to
rely on such a left-wing coalition for a second time if he wanted to keep his
job. Accordingly, Bethmann thenceforth confined himself to administering
the country. No major bill was introduced before the outbreak of war in August 1914. Overall, the 1913 debates on Zabern and financing the army law
threw a cold light on the desperate predicament into which the monarchy had
maneuvered itself at home and abroad.

18. Foreign Policy
A. Bismarck’s Diplomatic Balancing Acts, 1871–1890
As the discussion of domestic politics has shown, the first task after 1871
was to consolidate the founding of the German constitutional system and to
complete the nation-building process. In the face of this task, the responsible
politicians had a vital interest in avoiding major foreign crises, and this is
what Bismarck’s diplomacy was initially geared to.
The first major international challenge with which the new German Empire and Bismarck as its prime political strategist were confronted in 1871
was the question of peacemaking with a defeated France and of integrating
the new power in the heart of Europe into the existing community of nations.
Germany’s neighbors watched with interest, but also with suspicion, to see
which “path out of war”132 the Reich chancellor would take. His reputation
from the 1860s was, after all, that of a politician of military force who had
worked to overthrow the international status quo. Britain and Russia, it is
true, had tolerated his work of national unification, but in London decision
254

Foreign Policy

makers realized very well that the European state system had undergone something akin to a revolutionary change. Nor did it go unnoticed that the generals and some members of the general public had been prepared to escalate
the conflict in order to win a total victory over France. Given these problems,
it was remarkable that Bismarck achieved a moderate peace. If any serious
misjudgments occurred, it was in the failure to resist widespread calls to annex Alsace-Lorraine. This decision, which some historians have argued may
have been unavoidable, created an irreparable rift with France and in later
years contributed to the deterioration of the German position within the international system.
After 1871 German diplomacy was faced with two tasks: to keep the French
“archenemy” as isolated as it had been at the outbreak of war in 1870 and,
second, to fit the Kaiserreich into the group of the major powers of the day
in such a way as to make it impossible for other countries to exert political
pressure upon it or to pose a direct military threat. With these objectives in
mind, Bismarck tried to convince neighboring countries that Germany had no
further territorial ambitions in Europe. To this end, he attempted to reach an
understanding with Russia, Austria-Hungary, and Britain. The first successes
of this policy came in October 1873, when Wilhelm I acceded to a treaty that
Russia and Austria-Hungary had signed in June of that year. However, as became quickly evident, the three emperors had concluded a precarious alliance. Meanwhile Britain was not interested in any such arrangements. She
was preoccupied with her overseas empire and merely saw herself as a “balancer” outside the continental European state system. London appeared on the
scene only when, in 1875, the threat of another Franco-German war loomed
on the horizon. This ephemeral crisis was rooted in the rapid military and
economic recovery that France had been making in the early 1870s. German
military leaders were greatly alarmed by this and began to consider a preventive war. This situation and the ratification of a French military bill in March
1875 triggered the so-called War in Sight crisis. Russia and Britain immediately launched a diplomatic counteroffensive that made Bismarck realize the
limits of Germany’s ability to conduct power politics. It was a major diplomatic setback for the new empire.133
Determined not to find himself ever again in an isolated position like the
one he faced in 1875, the Reich chancellor henceforth tried to strengthen the
Three Emperors’ League. Perhaps this maneuver would have been more successful if the decline of the Ottoman Empire had not produced fresh tensions
between the Tsarist Empire and Austria-Hungary. The immediate trigger was
a Russian victory over the Sultan’s armies and the forced Peace of San Stephano in March 1878, which, among other things, created a pro-Russian Greater
Bulgarian state in the Balkans. In Vienna, and also London, these shifts in the
balance of power unleashed anxieties about the future. As late as January
255

Politics

1877, Russia and Austria-Hungary were in agreement with regard to their interests in southeastern Europe. On this occasion the Tsar had promised the
Dual Monarchy that he had no intention of building up a larger Slavic state.
Now a Greater Bulgaria had been established, and Vienna felt betrayed. In
this tense situation, which even threatened to escalate into a war, Bismarck
decided to act as the “honest broker.” At the 1878 Berlin Congress he tried to
pave the way for a solution to the Oriental question that would give the Russians, Austrians, British, and even the French chunks of the Ottoman Empire,
which had begun to fall apart.134
In this process the Tsar was forced to forego the gains made at San Stephano, which, in turn, soured relations between St. Petersburg and Berlin. Bismarck responded to these unwelcome developments by reaffirming his ties
with Austria-Hungary. This cooperation finally culminated in the formation of
the Dual Alliance in October 1879. However, in order to explain more fully
the tensions between Berlin and St. Petersburg, domestic factors must also be
taken into consideration. This was, after all, the period when Bismarck, under
pressure from the ailing agricultural sector, increased protective tariffs, which
hit Russian grain exporters hard. He also introduced a number of bureaucratic
obstacles against the Russians, such as more rigorous inspections of meat imports. Thenceforth, a contradiction developed in the Russo-German relationship between a sense of ideological and political solidarity, on the one hand,
and of a sense of animosity, on the other. The latter was rooted in the survival
instincts of the Russian and Prussian landowning classes, as they faced the
threat of decline. It was a contradiction that was never resolved and, in fact,
ultimately became a factor in the origins of World War I.
At the beginning of the 1880s, Bismarck once again succeeded in reducing Russo-German tensions through a foreign policy geared toward international stability and the preservation of peace. In May 1882, vexed by the
nightmare of hostile foreign coalitions, he expanded the Dual Alliance into a
trilateral accord by including Italy. Following the collapse in 1885 of the
Three Emperors’ League, only one year after its renewal, he pulled off a coup
that, given the prevailing international climate, no one would have thought
possible: in June 1887 he secretly secured the Reinsurance Treaty with Russia, the rival of Germany’s other ally, Austria-Hungary. Thus at least the two
German sides of the St. Petersburg-Berlin-Vienna triangle had been restored.
The precariousness of Bismarck’s tightrope act emerges if we look at the
continuing problems in the Balkans, which probably defied a permanent solution. These problems, exacerbated by a rising Pan-Slav nationalism, time
and again brought the Dual Monarchy and the Tsarist Empire into conflict.
It also proved impossible to buttress the Reinsurance Treaty with closer economic cooperation, although the Russians were very interested in this. Instead, the Prussian agrarians continued to wage their silent economic war
256

Foreign Policy

against their Russian counterparts, and Bismarck’s successive tariff increases
of 1885 and 1887 only made the situation worse. St. Petersburg responded by
putting very high tariffs on German manufactured goods. During the 1880s,
tariffs on pig iron went up by 500 percent, on steel by 20–33 percent, on
pharmaceuticals by 20 percent, on locomotives by 42 percent, and on electrical equipment by 21 percent. Overall the increases averaged from 11.7 to
20.5 percent for semi-finished goods and from 16.6 to 30.1 percent for finished goods. We have already established that the question of Polish land
laborers from the western Russian provinces also did much to corrode RussoGerman relations. Faced with mass migration of the German rural population
to the industrial centers, the Junker were happy to import cheap labor from
the Tsarist Empire during harvest time, but they regularly sent them back
across the border in the winter, where the Russians were left to care for them.
Nor was it forgotten that in 1885, the Prussians, in connection with their Germanization policy in the eastern provinces, had unceremoniously expelled
some 32,000 aliens, many of whom were Russian citizens.135
It might have been possible to control the damage caused by all of this if
Prussia’s policies had not had military repercussions as well. As early as
1885/86, St. Petersburg had attempted to show its military strength along
Germany’s eastern frontier by staging elaborate maneuvers and troop movements. At the same time the Russian government labored hard to develop the
country’s western provinces economically through railroad construction. It
sought to attract foreign capital to realize this ambitious project. The building of a railroad network, however, alarmed the General Staff in Berlin. They
focused on its strategic implications for a German war against both Russia
and France. With the French expanding their armed forces, the General Staff
had been handed a further argument for the introduction of a German army
bill. When, in the spring of 1887, the Tsar finally banned foreigners (primarily Germans) from holding and using landed property along the country’s
western border, military and economic rivalries became hopelessly entangled. Indignation over Russian policies reached a peak in the German press,
and the army introduced a major bill in 1887. At the same time Bismarck tried
to impede the economic (and military) development of western Russia by blocking German capital exports. In November 1887—a mere five months after
the signing of the Reinsurance Treaty—the Reichsbank was ordered to issue
a Lombardverbot, which barred Russians from gaining access to the German
capital market. It may be that Bismarck, even after all these setbacks, continued to believe that the Reich’s diplomatic, military-strategic, and commercial
interests could be hermetically compartmentalized. The tough realities of the
Russo-German relationship in the 1880s and the divergent interests behind it
should have taught him a different lesson. They demanded a resolution of
existing contradictions and a synchronization of policies in all three spheres.
257

Politics

When this could not be achieved, St. Petersburg set out to find other friends,
first in the field of trade and finance. The capital that they needed for the development of their infrastructure was subsequently advanced by Dutch investors and later by the French. The contacts that these loans promoted facilitated
a diplomatic rapprochement between the Tsarist Empire and France. The
Reinsurance Treaty was not renewed, and in January 1893 the formal alliance
between St. Petersburg and Paris was finally signed and sealed. Thereafter, it
was not just Reich Chancellor Caprivi who openly braced himself for a war
on two fronts.136
Within the new system of alliances that unfolded from the 1890s onward,
Britain remained the main missing link. However, by the outbreak of World
War I, she stood on the side of France and Russia. If the emergence of the two
blocs, the Triple Alliance (Germany, Austria-Hungary, Italy) and the Triple
Entente (Russia, France, Britain) is to be plausibly explained, serious attention
has to be given to the anti-British foreign policy adopted by the Wilhelmine
Reich at the turn of the century.137 However, the deeper roots of the AngloGerman antagonism, which became encapsulated in the naval arms race between the two powers, extended back to the Bismarckian period. They surfaced
for the first time when Germany turned toward colonialism in the mid-1880s.
Up to that point the Reich chancellor had firmly rejected the demand,
advanced by interested circles, to acquire overseas territories. The consolidation of Germany’s position in the heart of Europe continued to be his exclusive concern. This—as he once put it—was where his map of Africa lay. For
a long time historians therefore puzzled over why the Reich chancellor suddenly in 1884/85 declared Germany the “protector” of larger stretches of territory in Southwest and East Africa, in Togoland, in the Cameroons, and in
the Pacific Islands. Today it is fairly certain that Bismarck did not embrace
this expansion overseas with enthusiasm, but was guided by soberly pragmatic reasons. To begin with, it was not a propitious moment from the point
of view of foreign policy and trade. On the other hand, there was some pressure to act because he did not want Germany to be left behind the other colonial powers. Moreover, there were domestic and electoral calculations.138 It
also seems that his moves were part of an attempted reorientation of German
diplomacy, by which Bismarck was hoping to augment France’s weight visà-vis Britain. The successful cooperation between Berlin and Paris during the
Congo Conference at Berlin in the winter of 1884/85 appeared to have improved chances of resolving Germany’s dilemma as a continental power between Russia and Britain in a rather different way, that is, with the help of
the French. Just as the Reich chancellor tried to gain greater freedom of action against the Tsarist Empire by using Austria-Hungary as a counterweight,
he thought it possible to escape the towering shadow of Britain by propping
up Paris. These hopes soon turned out to be illusory.
258

Foreign Policy

The fact that Britain was the intended target of Bismarck’s moves was not
lost on London. And just as relations with St. Petersburg deteriorated from
the mid-1880s onward, the German attempt to play the French card henceforth had an equally deleterious effect on Anglo-German relations. When,
having lost his gamble with Paris, Bismarck did another U-turn in 1889 and
introduced the idea of an alliance with London, he found the door across the
Channel closed.
A few years earlier, Bismarck had still been the masterful juggler of five
balls in his game of strengthening the new Germany’s position among the
great powers. If three of those five balls now slipped from his hands, this setback with respect to Britain was also due to a number of problems he was
having with London. First, there was the above-mentioned, belated German
decision to acquire colonies. For London it was bound to be irritating that the
Kaiserreich had become yet another player in the scramble for overseas territories. After the victory of the Liberals under Gladstone, if not before, differences in the political culture and basic ideological outlook of the two
countries had also become more marked. In the age of mass mobilization
such differences could no longer simply be ignored by the makers of foreign
policy, however much they preferred to be guided by a coolly calculated raison d’état. In Britain the Liberals took a progressively dimmer view of PrussoGerman constitutionalism and Bismarck’s authoritarianism, while hoping
that Germany would experience a parliamentary evolution similar to that of
their own country, possibly once Crown Prince Friedrich succeeded Wilhelm
I, seconded by his wife Victoria, the daughter of the Queen. Meanwhile, the
Reich chancellor did his best to erect dams against precisely such a development by resorting to various political maneuvers, including the threat of a
Staatstreich to shield the constitutional order of 1871 against any kind of liberalization and reform along the lines of the British political system.
Nor should the impact of Bismarck’s protectionism on London be underestimated. The tariffs hampered the export of British goods to Germany,
while raising suspicions that German industry resorted to dumping practices
in the British Empire. The year 1887, which brought major crises in German
foreign policy, also saw the ratification of the Merchandise Stamp Act (better known as the “Made in Germany” Act). Britain’s requirement that all
goods imported into the country be identified by their country of origin was
yet another expression of growing tensions in the field of trade policy. As in
the case of Russo-German relations, economic, domestic, and foreign policy
could no longer be kept apart as neatly as the Reich chancellor had expected.
B. The Wilhelmine Period, 1890–1914
By the late 1880s, Bismarck had lost both the support of Wilhelm II, who had
ascended to the throne in 1888, and his legislative majority in the Reichstag.
259

Politics

His foreign policy had similarly fallen apart, and in 1890 he was unceremoniously dismissed by the young monarch. How far Germany’s international
situation had changed became unmistakably clear with the conclusion of the
Franco-Russian Military Convention on 17 August 1892, which was followed
five months later by a formal alliance between the two countries. Germany
now faced a scenario that the first Reich chancellor had always sought to avoid:
a war on two fronts, to which Caprivi’s first response was to introduce a large
army bill. In another respect Caprivi, having to cope with further Russian tariff increases in 1891, did learn a lesson from his predecessor’s mistakes. He
abandoned the notion that commercial policy could be kept detached from
traditional diplomacy. With the trade treaties with Austria-Hungary and Russia coming up for renewal, he tried to end the Russo-German trade war of the
previous years by proposing reductions in German agricultural tariffs in return for a lowering of Russian trade barriers against German industrial goods.
He succeeded in getting the new treaty signed in 1894; but agrarian wrath
ultimately cost him his job, and in 1902 agricultural tariffs were increased
again, complicating relations with the Tsarist Empire.139
Despite the successful signing of the Heligoland-Zanzibar Treaty of July
1890, relations with Britain also never fundamentally improved. It was a
complete misunderstanding of the principles of British foreign policy to believe that German-British cooperation in Europe could be achieved with concessions in the colonial field. The war between China and Japan in 1894/95
occasioned renewed frictions between Berlin and London. These exploded
into open conflict after the Kaiser, in a telegram to “Ohm” Krueger, had encouraged the Boers of South Africa in their rebellion against the British. Between 1898 and 1901 Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain raised the
question of closer Anglo-German cooperation. His approach ended in failure,
largely because those around the Kaiser, who were now in charge of German
foreign policy, fatally underestimated the precariousness of the Reich’s international position; they had concluded that in light of Anglo-Russian and
Anglo-French conflicts in the colonial field, Germany did not require new
friendships beyond the 1882 Triple Alliance with Austria-Hungary and Italy.
Bülow and Tirpitz became eloquent advocates of a “free hand” policy by
which they hoped to escape from the grip of British hegemony.140
The slogan of the “free hand” also tacitly acknowledged that it was illogical to have an alliance with Britain, when at the same time the Reich government had begun to build up a fleet that, if necessary, would be able to defeat
the Royal Navy in a major battle in the North Sea. Nothing less than such a
victory was the ambitious objective behind the Tirpitz Plan to expand the
navy in several stages to a total of sixty large battleships. A fleet of this size,
the navy secretary believed, would be strong enough to respond to a British
attack and thus shift the international balance of power virtually in one after260

Foreign Policy

noon. If, however, the British decided to hold back, the Kaiser and his advisors
hoped to deploy the completed navy as a lever for a “great overseas policy.”
It would help Germany to obtain its “fair” share, once the redistribution of
the globe and the construction of large power blocs had started in the twentieth century.141 Backed by the naval power provided by sixty battleships, the
Reich government expected to be in a good position to carve up disintegrating older empires, like that of Portugal.
These ambitions amounted to nothing less than a “revolutionizing” of the
international system.142 Recently, the motives underlying the Kaiser’s decision
have again become a matter of controversy, when Klaus Hildebrand, Michael
Stürmer, and Gregor Schöllgen rediscovered Ludwig Dehio’s writings from
the 1950s.143 To explain this prewar development, they invoked geopolitical
factors and collective psychology. Faced with an international system whose
anarchic state raised both hopes and fears for Germany’s future, the Kaiser
and his advisors developed, in this view, no more than airy dreams about an
overseas empire. Subsequently, these historians have added, the inability and
unwillingness of the other established powers to accommodate these dreams
inexorably increased international tensions. According to proponents of this
theory, this is where the origins of World War I must be located. Against this
interpretation lies a conception of international relations that was first advanced by Kehr. According to Kehr, Wilhelmine naval and world policy remain the decisive cause of what happened in July 1914, inseparably linked
to the unresolved and unresolvable dilemmas of the Prusso-German political
system and to the rallying, in the late 1890s, of agrarians and the commercial
and industrial middle classes against the industrial proletariat.144
By contrast, there is little dispute today over the response that the unilateral rearmament of the Kaiser’s navy provoked abroad. Although it took the
British some time to become aware of the full extent of the Tirpitz Plan with
its sixty battleships, they did react quickly once their suspicions had been
confirmed. On the one hand, the British Empire engaged the Kaiserreich in
a naval arms race whose costs, as we have seen, exceeded the monarchy’s
ability to raise the necessary taxes and greatly exacerbated domestic conflict.
On the other hand, the German challenge accelerated the abandonment of
Britain’s “splendid isolation.” London took the first step in this direction in
January 1902, shortly after the collapse of the Anglo-German alliance parleys,
when it signed an agreement with Japan. The Entente Cordiale with France
followed in April 1904. The significance of this latter agreement can be fully
appreciated only if we remember that the two countries had almost gone to
war with each other in the autumn of 1898 during the Fashoda Crisis.145
What was missing from the evolving British-Russian-French triangle was
the link between London and St. Petersburg, which was finally forged in August
1907. The Kaiser and an alarmed German public perceived the new interna261

Politics

tional constellation as an “encirclement” of the Reich aimed at throttling an
up-and-coming nation. With the benefit of hindsight it seems more accurate
to say that the foreign and armaments policies begun by Wilhelm II in the
late 1890s had isolated the Reich from the community of nations. Meanwhile
the small colonial empire of the 1880s, which had later been expanded by a
few islands in the South Pacific and the leasing of Kiaochow, became a source
of trouble. Above all, the uprisings in East Africa and the genocidal methods
used against the Herero people in Southwest Africa ran into much criticism
at home. Such setbacks had one advantage, though: they were well-suited for
mobilizing conservative and nationalist sentiment, and this proved most useful
at election time, as the hastily called “Hottentot” elections of 1907 demonstrated.
By now Germany’s main international support came from a fragile multinational Austro-Hungarian Empire and an unreliable and relatively weak
Italy. Confronted with these realities, the Reich government made several attempts to destroy the iron ring that the other great powers had begun to put
around the dynamic and politically unpredictable Kaiserreich. The panic over
the Entente Cordiale led to the resumption of contacts with Russia. These
contacts quickly collapsed for the first time in November 1904. The Bjoerkoe
Accord, which the Kaiser thought he had personally clinched with the Tsar
in July 1905, was revoked by St. Petersburg as soon as Nicholas II was back
home. The fate of the accord made clear that tensions that had been building
up since the days of Bismarck could not simply be swept aside by a meeting
between two monarchs. Meanwhile the Reich attempted to put pressure on
France. In March 1905, Wilhelm II was sent to Tangiers, where he triggered
an international crisis designed by Germany to test the strength of the Entente Cordiale and, if possible, to tear Britain and France apart.146
Berlin achieved the opposite. Germany emerged as the loser from the Algeciras Conference, which had been called for January 1906 and which ended
in the signing of an international agreement. Thanks to British support at the
conference table, France emerged strengthened from the conflict. Similarly
the Second Moroccan Crisis of 1911 was deliberately unleashed by the German government in the hope of weakening the Entente Cordiale. Moreover,
State Secretary Alfred von Kiderlen-Waechter had his eye on the acquisition
of some African colonies. In a memorandum to Bethmann on 3 May 1911 he
justified this demand as follows: “With the sole exception of the Social Democratic Party, our public opinion would seriously reproach the Imperial
government for simply allowing things to happen in the Sherif Empire; on
the other hand, it can be assumed with certainty that practical results would
change the mind of many a dissatisfied voter and would not insignificantly
influence the outcome of the impending Reichstag elections.”147 The affair
ended very differently. The dispatch of the gunboat “Panther” to Agadir on 1
July 1911 and the subsequent German demands were countered three weeks
262

Foreign Policy

later by the British Treasury Secretary David Lloyd George in his famous Mansion House speech. His warnings so frightened Berlin that Bethmann beat a
hasty retreat.
Hoping for a deceleration of the ruinous naval arms race, the new Reich
chancellor had initiated conversations with Britain soon after Bülow’s dismissal. But he did not get very far in this climate of mounting tensions, not
all of which had been caused by Berlin. It was particularly difficult to find a
mutually agreeable formula for the relative size of the fleets that the two
countries would keep in service. Mandated by the British Cabinet, War Minister Lord Haldane made a final attempt at reconciliation in January 1912.
However, as he discovered soon after his arrival in Berlin, the Kaiser and Tirpitz were not prepared to cut their naval building program by even one ship.
Bethmann was too weak to assert himself. Thereafter, the Anglo-German relationship quickly approached a “point of no return,” if this juncture had not
already been reached.148 Nor were the negotiations that the Reich chancellor
later conducted with London with regard to the Near East and certain Portuguese colonies able to change this. In the meantime Germany’s move away
from her overseas ambitions and toward the European continent had been
effected. It was a shift that relied for its support not on the navy, but on the
army. Thenceforth the arms race continued on land against the two continental powers, Russia and France.
At the beginning of 1914, German foreign policy therefore found itself in
a state that can only be termed as desolate and extremely dangerous. Contained
by the diplomatic countermoves and the rearmament programs of the Triple
Entente, Wilhelm II and his advisors were tied to a multinational AustroHungarian Empire that was less and less able to cope with its own ethnic minorities and with the pressure exerted on its frontiers by Slav nationalism. The
results of the two Balkan wars of 1912 and 1913 worsened the position of the
Dual Monarchy. In this situation, Berlin began to consider cutting the Gordian knot with the help of a liberating war against the Reich’s external enemies. In 1914, the generals believed, such a conflict could still be won by the
Reich, whereas such a victory was less likely after the Russian and French
military programs, which had promptly followed the German Army bill of
1913, had been completed. The year 1914 therefore offered a “window of opportunity” for freeing the Kaiserreich from its diplomatic dilemma and its
domestic gridlock in one stroke. But the following analysis of the Crisis of
July 1914 also provides an opportunity to draw some broader conclusions
about why Germany ended up in this catastrophic world war.

263

Part V: World War I

19. The July Crisis of 1914
On the afternoon of 1 August 1914, the German ultimatum to Russia to revoke
the Tsarist mobilization order of the previous day had expired. Wilhelm II
telephoned Moltke, Bethmann Hollweg, Tirpitz, and Prussian War Minister
Erich von Falkenhayn to come without delay to the Imperial Palace to witness the Kaiser’s signing of the German mobilization order that was to activate the Schlieffen Plan and the German invasion of Luxemburg, Belgium,
and France. It was a decision that made a world war inevitable.
The meeting took place at five PM. When the monarch had signed the
fateful document, he shook Falkenhayn’s hand, and tears came to both men’s
eyes. However, the group had barely dispersed when it was unexpectedly recalled. According to the later report of the Prussian war minister,1 “a strange
telegram had just been received from Ambassador Lichnowsky” in London,
announcing that he had been mandated by the British government “to ask
whether we would pledge not to enter French territory if England guaranteed
France’s neutrality in our conflict with Russia.” A bitter dispute apparently
ensued between Bethmann, who wanted to explore this offer, and Moltke,
whose only concern by then was not to upset the meticulously prepared
timetable for mobilization. The chief of the General Staff lost the argument
for the moment. The Kaiser ordered Foreign Secretary Gottlieb von Jagow to
draft a reply to Lichnowsky, while Moltke telephoned the Army Command
at Trier ordering the Sixteenth Division to stop its advance into Luxemburg.
As Falkenhayn recorded the scene, Moltke was by now “a broken man” because to him the Kaiser’s decision offered yet another confirmation that the
monarch “continued to hope for peace.” Moltke was so distraught that Falkenhayn had to comfort him, while the latter did not believe for one moment
“that the telegram [would] change anything about the horrendous drama that
began at 5 p.m.” Lichnowsky’s reply arrived shortly before midnight, detailing the British condition that Belgium’s border must remain untouched by
the Germans. Knowing that German strategic planning made this impossible,
Moltke now pressed Wilhelm II to order the occupation of Luxemburg as a

The July Crisis of 1914

first step to the German invasion of Belgium and France. This time he won;
World War I had definitely begun.
After many years of dispute among historians about who was responsible
for the outbreak of war in August 1914, in which German scholars either
blamed the Triple Entente for what had happened or argued that all powers
simultaneously slid into the abyss, the previously mentioned Fischer controversy produced a result that is now widely accepted in the international community of experts on the immediate origins of the war2—it was the men
gathered at the Imperial Palace in Berlin who pushed Europe over the brink.
These men during the week prior to 1 August had, together with the “hawks”
in Vienna, deliberately exacerbated the crisis, although they were in the best
position to deescalate and defuse it. There is also a broad consensus that, during this crucial week, major conflicts occurred between the civilian leadership in Berlin around Bethmann Hollweg, who was still looking for diplomatic
ways out of the impasse, and the military leadership around Moltke, who now
pushed for a violent settling of accounts with the Triple Entente. In the end
Bethmann lost, and his defeat opened the door to the issuing of the German
mobilization order on 1 August.
In pursuing this course, German decision makers knew that the earlier Russian mobilization order did not have the same significance as the German one.
Thus the Reich chancellor informed the Prussian War Ministry on 30 July that
“although the Russian mobilization has been declared, her mobilization
measures cannot be compared with those of the states of Western Europe.”3
He added that St. Petersburg did not “intend to wage war, but has only been
forced to take these measures because of Austria” and her mobilization. These
insights did not prevent the German leadership from using the Russian moves
for their purposes by creating a defensive mood in the German public without which the proposed mobilization of the German armed forces might well
have come to grief. The population was in no mood to support an aggressive
war. On the contrary, there had been peace demonstrations in various cities
when, following the Austrian ultimatum to Serbia on 23 July, suspicions arose
that Berlin and Vienna were preparing for a war on the Balkans.4 The Reich
government responded to this threat by calling on several leaders on the right
wing of the SPD executive and confidentially apprising them of Russia’s allegedly aggressive intentions. Convinced of the entirely defensive nature of
Germany’s policy, the leaders of the working-class movement quickly reversed their line: the demonstrations stopped and the socialist press began to
write about the Russian danger.
It is against the background of these domestic factors that a remark by Bethmann may be better understood. “I need,” the Reich chancellor is reported to
have said to Albert Ballin, the Hamburg shipping magnate, “my declaration
of war for reasons of internal politics.”5 What he meant by this is further elu265

World War I

cidated by other surviving comments. Thus Admiral von Müller, the chief of the
Naval Cabinet, noted in his diary as early as 27 July that “the tenor of our policy [is] to remain calm to allow Russia to put herself in the wrong, but then not
to shrink from war if it [is] inevitable.”6 On the same day, the Reich chancellor
told the Kaiser that “at all events Russia must ruthlessly be put in the wrong.”7
Moltke explained the meaning of this statement to his Austro-Hungarian
counterpart, Franz Conrad von Hötzendorf, on 30 July:8 “War [must] not be
declared on Russia, but [we must] wait for Russia to attack.” And when a day
later this turned out to be the sequence of events, Müller was full of praise. “The
morning papers,” he recorded in his diary on 1 August, “reprint the speeches
made by the Kaiser and the Reich chancellor to an enthusiastic crowd in front
of the Schloss and the chancellor’s palace. Brilliant mood. The government
has succeeded very well in making us appear as the attacked.”9
While there is little doubt about the last days of peace and who ended them,
scholarly debate has continued over the motives of the Kaiser and his advisors. In order to clarify these, we have to move back in time to the beginning
of July 1914. Fritz Fischer has argued in his Griff nach der Weltmacht and in
War of Illusions that the Reich government seized the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand and his wife at Sarajevo on 28 June as the opportunity to
bring about a major war.10 He asserted that Bethmann, in unison with the military leadership, hoped to achieve by force the breakthrough to world power
status that German diplomacy had failed to obtain by peaceful means in previous years. However, today most experts would accept another interpretation that was put forward by Konrad Jarausch and others and captured by a
chapter heading in Jarausch’s biography of Bethmann: “The Illusion of Limited War.”11 In this interpretation, Berlin was originally motivated by more
modest objectives than those inferred by Fischer. Worried by the volatile situation in the Balkans and anxious to stabilize the deteriorating position of the
multinational Austro-Hungarian Empire (Germany’s only reliable ally, then
under the strong centrifugal pressure of Slav independence movements), Berlin pushed for a strategy of local war in order to help the Habsburgs in the
southeast. Initially, Vienna was not even sure whether to exploit, in order to
stabilize its position in power politics, the assassination crisis and the sympathies that the death of the heir to the throne had generated internationally.
Emperor Franz Joseph and his civilian advisors wanted to wait for the outcome of a government investigation to see how far Serbia was behind the
Sarajevo murders before deciding on a possible punitive move against Belgrade.12 At this point, only the Chief of the General Staff Conrad advocated
an immediate strike against the Serbs. Uncertain of Berlin’s response, Franz
Joseph sent Count Alexander von Hoyos to see the German Kaiser, who then
issued his notorious “blank check.”13 With it the Reich government gave its

266

The July Crisis of 1914

unconditional support to whatever action Vienna would decide to take against
Belgrade.
What did Wilhelm II and his advisors expect to be the consequences of such
an action? Was it merely the pretext for starting a major war? Or did Berlin
hope that the conflict between Austria-Hungary and Serbia would remain
limited? The trouble with answering this question is that we do not possess a
first-hand account of the Kaiser’s “blank check” meeting with Hoyos and of
the monarch’s words and assumptions on that occasion. Jarausch and others
have developed the view that Bethmann persuaded Wilhelm II and the German military to adopt a limited war strategy, which later turned out to be illusory. They have based their argument to a considerable extent on the diaries
of Kurt Riezler, Bethmann’s private secretary, who was in close contact with
his superior during the crucial July days.14 As he recorded on 11 July, it was
the Reich chancellor’s plan to obtain “a quick fait accompli” in the Balkans.
Thereafter he proposed to make “friendly overtures toward the Entente Powers” in the hope that in this way “the shock” to the international system could
be absorbed. Two days earlier, Bethmann had expressed the view that “in case
of warlike complications between Austria and Serbia, he and Jagow believed
that it would be possible to localize the conflagration.”15 But according to Riezler the Reich chancellor also realized that “an action against Serbia [could]
result in a world war.”16 To this extent, his strategy was a “leap into the dark”
that he nevertheless considered his “gravest duty” to undertake in light of the
desperate situation of the two Central European monarchies.
A localization of the conflict, since the risks of a major war seemed remote—this is how Bethmann Hollweg appears to have approached the postSarajevo situation. It was only in subsequent weeks, when Vienna took much
longer than anticipated to mobilize against Serbia—and above all when it became clear that the other great powers and Russia in particular would not
condone a humiliation of Belgrade—that the Reich chancellor and his advisors became quite frantic and unsure of their ability to manage the unfolding
conflict. In its panic, the German Foreign Ministry proposed all sorts of hopelessly unrealistic moves and otherwise tried to cling to its original design.
Thus on 16 July, Bethmann wrote to Count Siegfried von Roedern that “in
case of an Austro-Serbian conflict the main question is to isolate this dispute.”17
On the following day the Saxon chargé d’affaires to Berlin was informed that
“one expects a localization of the conflict since England is absolutely peaceable and France as well as Russia likewise do not feel inclined toward war.”18
On 18 July, Jagow reiterated that “we wish to localize [a] potential conflict
between Austria and Serbia.”19 And another three days later the Reich chancellor instructed his ambassadors in St. Petersburg, Paris, and London that
“we urgently desire a localization of the conflict; any intervention by another

267

World War I

power will, in view of the divergent alliance commitments, lead to incalculable consequences.”20
The problem with Bethmann’s limited war concept was that by this time
it had become more doubtful than ever that it could be sustained. Another
problem is that Jarausch’s main source, the Riezler diaries, have come under
a cloud since the Berlin historian Bernd Sösemann discovered that, for the
July days, they were written on different paper and attached to the diary as a
loose-leaf collection.21 This has led Sösemann to believe that Riezler “reworked” his original notes after World War I. Without going into the details
of these charges and the defense and explanations that Karl Dietrich Erdmann,
the editor of the diaries, has provided,22 their doubtful authenticity would
seem to preclude continued reliance on this source unless other documents
from early July corroborate the localization hypothesis. This would seem to
indicate at the same time that the strategy was not just discussed and adopted
in the Bethmann circle, but by the entire German leadership, including the
Kaiser and the military. Several such sources have survived. Thus on 5 July,
the Kaiser’s adjutant general, Hans von Plessen, entered in his diary that he
had been ordered to come to the New Palace at Potsdam in the late afternoon
of that day to be told about the Hoyos mission and Francis Joseph’s letter to
Wilhelm II.23 Falkenhayn, Bethmann, and the Chief of the Military Cabinet
Moritz von Lyncker were also present. According to Plessen, the view predominated that “the sooner the Austrians move against Serbia the better and
that the Russians—though Serbia’s friends—would not come in. H.M.’s departure on his Norwegian cruise is supposed to go ahead undisturbed.”
Falkenhayn’s report about the same meeting to Moltke, who was on vacation, had a similar tone.24 Neither of the two letters that the Kaiser had received from Vienna, both of which painted “a very gloomy picture of the
general situation of a Dual Monarchy as a result of Pan-Slav agitations,” spoke
“of the need for war”; “rather both expound ‘energetic’ political action such
as conclusion of a treaty with Bulgaria, for which they would like to be certain of the support of the German Reich.” Falkenhayn added that Bethmann
“appears to have as little faith as I do that the Austrian government is really
in earnest, even though the language is undeniably more resolute than in the
past.” Consequently he expected it to be “a long time before the treaty with
Bulgaria is concluded.” Moltke’s “stay at Spa will therefore scarcely need to
be curtailed,” although Falkenhayn thought it “advisable to inform you of the
gravity of the situation so that anything untoward which could, after all, occur at any time, should not find you wholly unprepared.”
Another account of the “blank check” meeting on 5 July comes from Captain Albert Hopman of the Reich Navy Office.25 On the following day he reported to Tirpitz, who was vacationing in Switzerland, that Admiral Eduard
von Capelle, Tirpitz’s deputy, was “ordered this morning to go to the New
268

The July Crisis of 1914

Palace at Potsdam,” where Wilhelm II briefed him on the previous day’s
events. Again the Kaiser said that he had backed Vienna in its demand “for
the most far-reaching satisfaction” and, should this not be granted, for military action against Serbia. Hopman’s report continued: “H.M. does not consider an intervention by Russia to back up Serbia likely, because the Tsar
would not wish to support the regicides and because Russia is at the moment
totally unprepared militarily and financially. The same applied to France, especially with respect to finance. H.M. did not mention Britain.” Accordingly,
he had “let Emperor Franz Joseph know that he could rely on him.” The
Kaiser believed “that the situation would clear up again after a week owing
to Serbia’s backing down, but he nevertheless considers it necessary to be
prepared for a different outcome.” With this in mind, Wilhelm II “had a word
yesterday with the Reich chancellor, the chief of the General Staff, the war
minister, and the deputy chief of the Admiralty Staff,” although “measures
which are likely to arouse political attention or to cause special expenditures
are to be avoided for the time being.” Hopman concluded by saying that
“H.M., who, as Excellency von Capelle says, made a perfectly calm, determined impression on him, has left for Kiel this morning to go aboard his
yacht for his Scandinavian cruise.” That Moltke, clearly a key player in any
German planning, had also correctly understood the message that he received
from Berlin and approved of the localization strategy is evidenced by his
comment:26 “Austria must beat the Serbs and then make peace quickly, demanding an Austro-Serbian alliance as the sole condition. Just as Prussia did
with Austria in 1866.”
If, in the face of this evidence, we accept that Berlin adopted a limited war
strategy at the beginning of July, which later turned out to have been badly
miscalculated, the next question to be answered is: Why did the Kaiser and
his advisors fall for “the illusion of limited war”? To understand this and the
pressures on them to take action, we must consider the deep pessimism by
which they had become affected, which also pervades the Riezler diaries.
In his account of the origins of World War I, James Joll, after a comprehensive survey of various interpretations, ultimately identified “the mood of
1914” as the crucial factor behind Europe’s descent into catastrophe.27 Although he admits that this mood can “only be assessed approximately and
impressionistically” and that it “differed from country to country or from
class to class,” he nevertheless comes to the conclusion that “at each level
there was a willingness to risk or to accept war as a solution to a whole range
of problems, political, social, international, to say nothing of war as apparently
the only way of resisting a direct physical threat.” In his view, it is therefore
“in an investigation of the mentalities of the rulers of Europe and their subjects that the explanation of the causes of the war will ultimately lie.” There
is much substance in this perspective on the war’s origins, but it may require
269

World War I

further sociological differentiation with regard to the supposedly pervasive
pessimistic sense that a cataclysm was inevitable. As in other countries, there
were many groups in German society that were not affected by the gloomsters and, indeed, had hopes and expectations of a better future. They adhered
to the view that things could be transformed and improved. After all, during
the previous two decades the country had seen a period of unprecedented
growth and prosperity. German technology, science, and education, as well
as the welfare and health care systems, were studied and copied in other parts
of the world. There was a vibrant cultural life at all levels, and even large
parts of the working-class movement, notwithstanding the hardships and inequalities to which its members were exposed, shared a sense of achievement
that spurred many of its members to do even better. As the urbanization, industrialization, and secularization of society unfolded, German society, according to the optimists, had become more diverse, modern, colorful, complex,
and sophisticated.
However, these attitudes were not universally held. There were other groups
that had meanwhile been overcome by a growing feeling that the Kaiserreich
was on a slippery downhill slope. Some intellectuals, as we have seen, spoke
of the fragmentation and disintegration of the well-ordered bourgeois world
of the nineteenth century. Their artistic productions reflected a deep cultural
pessimism, a mood that was distinctly postmodern. Some of them even went
so far as to view war as the only way out of the malaise into which modern
civilization was said to have maneuvered itself. Only a “bath of steel,” they
believed, would produce the necessary and comprehensive rejuvenation. If
these views had been those of no more than a few fringe groups, their diagnoses of decadence and decline would have remained of little significance.
The point is that they were shared, albeit with different arguments, by influential elite groups who were active in the realm of politics. The latter may
have had no more than an inkling of the artistic discourse that was pushing
beyond modernism, but they, too, assumed that things were on the verge of
collapse, especially in the sphere of politics. Here nothing seemed to be working anymore.
The sense of crisis in the final years was most tangible in the field of foreign policy. The monarch and his civilian and military advisors, along with
many others, felt encircled by the Triple Entente. Over the years, and certainly
after the conclusion of the 1904 Franco-British Entente Cordiale and the 1907
Anglo-Russian accord, they had convinced themselves that Britain, France,
and Russia were bent on throttling the two Central Powers. While the AngloGerman naval arms race had gone into reverse due to Tirpitz’s inability to
sustain it financially, the military competition on land reached new heights in
1913, after the ratification of massive army bills in Germany, France, and
Russia.
270

The July Crisis of 1914

However, by then tensions on the European continent were fueled by more
than political and military rivalries. As we have seen, in the early 1890s Germany finally abandoned Bismarck’s attempts to separate traditional diplomacy from commercial policy. Reich Chancellor Caprivi had aligned the
two, before Bülow then expanded the use of trade as an instrument of German foreign policy, following the Tsarist defeat in the Far East at the hands
of the Japanese in 1904 and the subsequent revolution of 1905. By 1913 a
dramatic change of fortunes had taken place. Russian agriculture had been
hit hard by Bülow’s protectionism after 1902, and now it looked as if St. Petersburg was about to turn the tables on Berlin. As the correspondent of the
Kölnische Zeitung reported from Russia on 2 March 1914, by the fall of 1917
the country’s economic difficulties would be overcome, thanks in no small
degree to further French loans.28 With Germany’s commercial treaties coming up for renewal in 1916, the Tsar was expected to do to the Reich what
Bülow had done to the Romanov Empire in earlier years. Accordingly, an article published in April 1914 in the Deutscher Aussenhandel warned that “it
hardly requires any mention that in view of the high-grade political tension
between the two countries any conflict in the field of commercial policy implies a serious test of peace.”29
What, in the eyes of Germany’s leadership, made the specter of a RussoGerman trade war around 1916 so terrifying was that this was also the time
when the French and Russian rearmament programs would be completed.
Not surprisingly, this realization added the powerful army leadership to the
ranks of German pessimists. Given the precarious strategic position of the
two Central European monarchies, the thought that the Tsarist army was to
reach its greatest strength in 1916 triggered bouts of depression, especially
in Moltke, the chief of the General Staff, and Conrad, his Austro-Hungarian
counterpart. By March 1914 the latter’s worries had become so great that he
wondered aloud to the head of his Operations Department, Colonel Joseph
Metzger, “if one should wait until France and Russia [are] prepared to invade
us jointly or if it [is] more desirable to settle the inevitable conflict at an earlier date. Moreover, the Slav question [is] becoming more and more difficult
and dangerous for us.”30
A few weeks later Conrad met with Moltke at Karlsbad, where they shared
their general sense of despair and confirmed each other in the view that time
was running out. Moltke added that “to wait any longer [means] a diminishing of our chances; [for] as far as manpower is concerned, one cannot enter
into a competition with Russia.”31 Back in Berlin, Moltke spoke to Jagow
about his meeting at Karlsbad, with the latter recording that the chief of the
General Staff was “seriously worried” about “the prospects of the future.”32
Russia would have “completed her armaments in two or three years time,” and
“the military superiority of our enemies would be so great then that he did
271

World War I

not know how we might cope with them.” Accordingly, Moltke felt that “there
was no alternative to waging a preventive war in order to defeat the enemy
as long as we could still more or less pass the test.” He left it to Jagow “to
gear our policy to an early unleashing of war.” That Russia had become something of an obsession not just for the generals, but also for the civilian leadership, can be gauged from a remark by Bethmann, as he cast his eyes across
his estate northeast of Berlin. It would not be worth it, he is reported to have
said, to plant trees there when in a few years’ time the Russians would be
coming.
However serious Germany’s international situation may have been, the
Reich chancellor and his colleagues were no less aware of the simultaneous
difficulties on the domestic front. Surveying the state of the Prusso-German
political system in early 1914, it was impossible to avoid the impression that
it was out of joint. The Kaiser’s prestige was rapidly evaporating. The Zabern
Affair had further disillusioned many Germans about the military and the
monarchy in general. The government was unable to forge lasting alliances
and compromises with the parties of the Right and the center—the only political forces that a monarchical Reich chancellor could contemplate as potential partners for the passage of legislation. Meanwhile the “revolutionary”
Social Democrats were on the rise and had become the largest party in the
Reichstag. The next statutory elections were to be held in 1916/17, and no
one knew how large the leftist parties would then become. Faced with these
problems, and fearful of a repetition of the 1913 tax compromise between the
parties of the center and the SPD, Bethmann had virtually given up governing.
The state machinery was kept going by executive decrees that did not require
legislative approval. At the same time the debt crisis continued. Worsening
the situation, there had been massive strike movements since 1910, first against
the Prussian three-class voting system and later for better wages and working conditions. While the integration of minorities ran into growing trouble,
reflecting problems of alienation among larger sections of the population
who felt left behind and were now looking for convenient scapegoats, the
working class became increasingly critical of the monarchy’s incapacity to
reform itself. Even parts of the women’s movement had begun to refuse the
place they had been assigned in the traditional order. So the situation appeared
to be one of increasing polarization, and the major compromises that were
needed to resolve accumulating problems at home and abroad were nowhere
in sight. Even increased police repression and censorship was no longer viable.
Even if it is argued, with the benefit of hindsight, that all this did not in
effect amount to a serious crisis, in the minds of many loyal monarchists and
their leaders it certainly had begun to look like one. Perceptions are important here because they shaped the determination for future action and compelled those who held the levers of power to act “before it was too late.” With
272

The War “From Above”

the possibilities for compromise seemingly exhausted and the Kaiser and his
advisors running out of options that had not been checkmated by other political forces, there was merely one arena left in which they still had unrestricted
freedom of action. It is also the arena in which the broad structural picture
offered in previous chapters links up with the more finely textured analysis
put forward in the present one. As we have seen, the Reich Constitution gave
the monarch and his advisors the exclusive right to decide whether the country would go to war or stay at peace. It was this prerogative that was now to
be used in the expectation that a war would result in a restabilization of Germany’s and Austria-Hungary’s international and domestic situation. The question was, what kind of war would achieve this objective? From all we know
and have said about the early response to the assassinations at Sarajevo, this
was not the moment to unleash a world war with its incalculable risks. The
conservatives in Berlin and Vienna were not that extremist. They expected
that war would lead to a major breakthrough in the Balkans and would stabilize
the Austria-Hungarian Empire against Serb nationalism. If Moltke’s abovementioned reference to Prussia’s victory over Austria in 1866 is any guide,
memories of that war may indeed have played a role in German calculations.
After all, the Prusso-Austrian conflict had been a limited war in Central Europe, and it had the added benefit of solving the stalemate in Prussian domestic politics, in the wake of the constitutional conflict.33 Bismarck’s “splendid”
victory not only produced, after a snap election, a conservative majority in
the Prussian Diet that enabled him to overcome the legislative deadlock that
had existed since 1862, but it also “proved” that such “shocks” to the international system could be absorbed without further crisis.
And so the Kaiser and his advisors encouraged Vienna to launch a limited
war in the Balkans. Their expectations that the war would remain limited
turned out to be completely wrong. The Kaiser and his entourage, who under
the Reich Constitution at that brief moment held the fate of millions in their
hands, were not prepared to beat a retreat and avoid a world war. The consequences of that total war and the turmoil it caused in all spheres of life would
prove enormous. Because of it, the world would be turned upside down.

20. Strategy, Diplomacy, and War Aims As Seen “From Above”
A. The Military
World War I had been unleashed by a small circle of decision makers, based
primarily in Berlin and Vienna. After mismanaging the Sarajevo Crisis, they
had determined that there was only one way forward, that is, to go for an allout confrontation with Britain, France, and Russia. To be sure, they were hoping to win this conflict, although it seems that at least for Moltke victory was
273

World War I

never certain and that the invasion of Luxemburg, Belgium, and France was no
more than an opening gambit of which he did not know where it would end.34
This section of Part V will focus on the military leadership, enlarged later
by other key elite groups and their organizations: bureaucrats, party politicians,
agricultural and industrial entrepreneurs, trade unionists, and academics who
were in different ways included in some of the decision-making processes
and rulings from the top. Only in a later section will we examine how the conflict was experienced “from below,” that is, by the soldiers at the front and
those who had stayed behind at the home front.
Wars invariably place particularly great responsibilities on the shoulders
of military leaders. The lives of countless soldiers are in their care. Their strategic and tactical moves determine the outcome of a battle or the conflict as
a whole. At stake are splendid victories or humiliating defeats. What made
this war (which in an age of mass mobilization and industrialized warfare became ever more total) different from earlier conflicts was that it confronted
the generals and field marshals with completely unprecedented problems and
pressures that they were basically unprepared to deal with. This made serious mistakes and misjudgments virtually inevitable. Anticipating this, some
officers had begun to wonder well before 1914 whether wars between the great
powers were still conceivable in the twentieth century because they could no
longer be won. The elder Helmuth von Moltke, who as chief of the General
Staff had led German armies to victory over Napoleon III in 1870, had come
to this conclusion toward the end of his life. He therefore felt that the greatest task of those at the top responsible for the fate of Europe was to preserve
peace. What he called a “peoples’ war” could in his view no longer be fought
and won in the future.35
At the same time, the entire training of the German officer corps remained
geared to the preparation and conduct of a future war. If this training was not
to become an absurdity, there was only one way out of the dilemma resulting
from Moltke’s insights: a war had to be fought as a lightning war. It had to
be won quickly and by deploying all national resources and using the most
brutal means. If the decisive breakthrough could not be achieved very early
and the war instead degenerated into a war of attrition, all would be lost. There
would be no more victors.
Accordingly, the idea of a lightning war became the doctrine for those
officers who were not prepared to go along with Moltke’s concept of peace
preservation. The enemy was to be destroyed militarily with one bold stroke
that would also so weaken its economic power that the victor’s predominance
would be secured for a long time to come. This was the idea of the Schlieffen
Plan, which the chief of the General Staff Alfred von Schlieffen had developed long before World War I and which his successor, the younger Helmuth
von Moltke, had taken over and refined in the years before 1914.36 It envis274

The War “From Above”

aged a swift defeat of France by invading neutral Belgium, thereby avoiding
the heavily fortified and difficult terrain to the west of Lorraine. Expecting an
early capitulation of the small Belgian army, the German forces, once they had
reached the country’s western regions, were then to swing south toward Paris.
The French capital was to be taken within thirty-nine days, and war was expected to be won with the capitulation of the city. Afterwards, Moltke wanted
to move eastward to confront Russia, France’s ally, which he expected to enter the war but only with a considerable delay due to the slow and lumbering
mobilization of the Tsarist armies. So reliant had the German military become on the Schlieffen Plan that they shelved an operations plan for a possible war against Russia alone. The plan was also Moltke’s escape from the
dilemma of having to fight a war simultaneously on two fronts with considerably fewer soldiers than Russia and France could muster—a dilemma that
had existed since 1893 when Paris and St. Petersburg became allies.
It is not difficult to see that Germany’s strategy contained enormous risks.
Not only was the overall plan of winning a war first in the west and of then
throwing the troops against Russia based on many vagaries. There were also
the smaller things that could go wrong and then have a huge snowball effect
on the rest of the campaign. This became clear in Belgium during the first two
weeks in August 1914. From early August some 180,000 German troops
marched into Belgium hoping for the immediate collapse of the Belgian
army. But Liège in the east of the country was heavily fortified with some
400 heavy guns and a string of fortresses. The Belgians fought valiantly and
succeeded in slowing the German advance. The regular fighters were supported by franc-tireurs, forcing the Germans to escalate the brutality of their
onslaught. Hostages were taken and summarily executed. The small towns of
Andenne and Dinant near Liège witnessed the killing of some 800 inhabitants, including women and children.37 Meanwhile large German contingents
were drawn to the western frontiers of Alsace-Lorraine, where the French General Joseph Joffre launched an offensive, vitally threatening southwest Germany. Suffering many casualties, Joffre was stopped in his tracks. The French
withdrew, but only to prepare for a major unanticipated upset of Moltke’s plan.
For, by the time the German troops had reached western Belgium and began
to swing south toward Paris, the French contingents from the failed Alsatian
campaign had been combined with fresh troops to form a strong ring north
of Paris.
The first encounter between the French and Germans began on 29 August
near Guise to the east of St. Quentin. Four days later, the latter had advanced
to the Marne, where the decisive battle began on 4 September. What happened then was later called by the French the “miracle of the Marne.” After
Moltke had been forced to dispatch troops from the western front to the east,
where the Russians had mobilized more rapidly than anticipated, the concen275

World War I

tration of French forces north of Paris seemed to Moltke so great in comparison to his own troops’ strength after five weeks of exhausting battle in Belgium that he stopped and ordered his army to retreat to the Aisne river with
its more favorable terrain.38
This meant that the German lightning war in the west had for all practical
purposes come to an end. The frontline now became consolidated after a French
counterattack along the Aisne had been rebuffed and attempts to achieve a
breakthrough by the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) further north near the
Belgian town of Ypres had also failed. Both sides had suffered some 3.5 million casualties in the first two months of the war and now settled into their ever
more elaborate system of trenches, which were built with the ultimate aim of
annihilating the enemy, but not through a short hammer blow, but by trying
to exhaust the other side to the point of capitulation.
The type of warfare that now began is best illustrated by the Battle of the
Somme, which started at the end of June 1916 with a weeklong British artillery barrage, during the course of which some 3 million shells rained on German trenches and dugouts along a twenty-mile stretch. Believing that no
German soldiers had survived this hell, British troops advanced across the
barbed wire of no-man’s land, confident that this was the beginning of the
great rollback of the Germans. But many Germans had survived the bombardment, and they quickly aimed their machine-guns and started to mow down
the advancing Tommies. By the end of the battle’s first day, the BEF had lost
some 60,000 men, wounded or dead. For the rest of the year, Allied and German troops attacked and counterattacked without ever achieving a major territorial gain. When the Battle of the Somme finally stopped, some 1.3 million
men had either lost their lives or had been badly maimed.39
For years military historians have written about the war in the west, describing in great detail the planning and execution of various battles. They
also turned their attention to the eastern front, where the conflict between Russia, on the one hand, and Germany and Austria-Hungary, on the other, remained
more of a war of movement. Overall the number of casualties was probably
higher there than in the west.40 What greatly increased the number of dead
and wounded was the incompetence of military leaders. Issuing contradictory and confused orders, they repeatedly caused chaos. Nor did it help that
they had under their command hundreds of thousands of often inexperienced
and ill-equipped young recruits whose chances of surviving serious injuries
were diminished by poorly equipped and run military hospitals.
All in all, the military on all sides, but Moltke and his successors in particular, bear a heavy responsibility for the great slaughter that began in August
1914. At times, the burden became too great, and both he and Erich Ludendorff
suffered temporary nervous breakdowns. Their greatest weakness, however,

276

The War “From Above”

was that they were too self-confident and tended, initially at least, to overestimate their ability to deal with problems they faced. Later some of them became more humble, while other lapsed into doggedness and refused to admit
failure even when it was patently obvious. They began to blame others for their
own defeats and after the war do not appear to have spent many sleepless nights
remembering their battles and the countless young men whom they had sent
“over the top” to their deaths.
B. Neutrality and Alliance Politics
The failure of the lightning war, which the two Central European monarchies
had started in August 1914 and had hoped to win by year’s end, as well as the
inability of both sides to achieve a decisive breakthrough until 1918, did not
merely turn military thought and action toward the use of even more brutal
force. The longer a stalemate lasted, the more nonmilitary elites also came
under pressure to make a tangible contribution to the war effort. This was
certainly true of the German diplomatic service. Overall, the outbreak of war
was no doubt extremely disruptive to Germany’s manifold connections with
the rest of the world. Embassies and consular offices in Allied countries were
closed. The Royal Navy imposed a tight blockade, and the war spread to Germany’s colonies in various parts of the world. German companies had to cut
back on agencies abroad. Cultural contacts ground to a virtual halt.
Nevertheless, diplomacy did continue. During the early years of the conflict there was the task of persuading neutral states to join the Central European camp. The Turks did not require a major effort to get them to side with
Germany. On 18 July 1914 Enver Pascha had been negotiating a loan with
the French that the ramshackle Osman Empire desperately needed, but he
was turned town. On 1 August London confiscated two Turkish battleships
that were about to be delivered from British shipyards. After this, the German
foreign office found it relatively easy to entice the Porte. The sultan fought
the war mainly in the Black Sea against Russia, but also succeeded in inflicting a major defeat on the British when in March 1915 they tried to land on
the Gallipoli Peninsula. Bulgaria entered into prolonged negotiations with
both sides. It was only in October 1915 that German diplomacy finally succeeded in winning over the country. They failed with respect to Romania,
which in August 1915 concluded a secret treaty with the Allies. However, the
latter were of little help once hostilities began, and by December of that year
Turks and Bulgars had conquered Bucharest.41
Italy, officially a formal ally of the Central Powers, proved to be the greatest disappointment for Berlin. The first setback came on 3 August 1914 when
Rome declared that it would remain neutral. Thenceforth German diplomacy’s
main goal was to prevent Italy from joining the Allied camp. But in April 1915

277

World War I

Rome signed a secret treaty in which the Allies made generous territorial promises in the event of victory. Subsequently, the Italians opened a southern front
in the Alps and engaged Vienna in a number of very bloody battles, which contributed to the erosion of morale of the Habsburg armies toward the war’s end.42
The greatest diplomatic prize to be won was the United States. Until 1917
Washington remained neutral, wooed by both sides. If the Allies could bring
the Americans to their side, it was quite clear that the Central Powers would
lose the war. Consequently, Berlin, knowing that the United States could not
be won over to the German cause, tried hard to keep America neutral.43 What
caused the German foreign office many headaches in pursuing this goal was
the attitude of its own navy leadership and the escalation of submarine warfare. As early as the May 1915, German-American relations came under great
strain after a German submarine had torpedoed and sunk a British steamer,
the Lusitania. Of the 1,200 passengers who drowned, some 124 were American citizens. Loud American protests reminded Berlin of the rules of international law, which Reich Chancellor Bethmann was anxious to uphold. But the
navy did not stop this practice, and in March and May of 1916 more American civilians had drowned in the Atlantic. When US President Woodrow Wilson threatened to cut diplomatic ties, the Reich government again persuaded
the navy leadership to conduct its war in the Atlantic within the bounds of international law. Given that the war was not going well for Germany at the
time, his hope also seems to have been to use the Americans as brokers of a
possible compromise peace.
By early 1917 Bethmann had made sufficient progress with his peace feelers to be involved, through Wilson, in secret contacts with the British. But his
initiative foundered when the navy decided to resume its unrestricted submarine warfare. The hardliners in Berlin had been pressing for a resumption since
the summer of 1916. They had calculated that the sinking of all Allied ships
without warning and care for the passengers would be so damaging to British
supplies that London would have to sue for peace to avoid starvation. In February they finally got their way, knowing that this would bring Washington
into the war on the Allied side. However, the assumption was that by the time
American troops were ready to go to Europe, France and Britain would have
been brought to their knees. Wilson’s response to the resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare was to sever diplomatic relations with Germany
that same month. On 1 March the US Congress approved the arming of
American commercial ships. What finally tipped the scales and led to America’s entry into the war on 6 April 1917 was yet another German blunder: the
interception and publication in the United States of the so-called Zimmermann Telegram, in which the German foreign office instructed its envoy to
Mexico to lure the Mexicans into an alliance with Germany and to attack their
neighbors to the north. When on top of this, further American commercial
278

The War “From Above”

ships were being sunk, an enraged public was ready to support Wilson’s declaration of war on Berlin.44
C. Economic Elites, War Aims, and Domestic Politics
Just as the German generals conducted their relentless and costly campaigns in
a desperate attempt to bring the world conflict to a victorious conclusion, and
diplomats and politicians tried to influence the outcome by negotiating with
allies and neutral countries, economic and professional elites also played an
important role in a war effort that became increasingly total. Thanks to the
army bills of 1912 and 1913, the military preparations were, though not perfect
and hampered by the usual bureaucratic snags and rivalries found in all large
organizations, satisfactory and certainly more advanced than those of AustriaHungary, leading the Canadian historian Holger Herwig to the conclusion that
Vienna was barely capable of conducting a campaign against little Serbia.45
However, Berlin was quite unprepared when it came to the country’s economic
and financial provisions for war.
Thus very little thought had gone into the provision of raw materials when,
as was quite certain, the Royal Navy would impose a naval blockade from
day one of the conflict.46 This was a war that would be fought not only with
millions of men but also with sophisticated military hardware that German
industry would have to manufacture. It may not have been difficult to effect
the conversion from the production of civilian goods to that of weapons. But
factories required raw materials that had hitherto been imported from overseas. The manufacture of explosives is a good example to show the precariousness of the German position. Before 1914 Germany had covered its saltpeter
needs (for the production of dynamite) through imports from Chile. This
source was no longer available after the beginning of hostilities. By the winter of 1914/15 the country began to face a munitions crisis as saltpeter stockpiles were about to run out. Had it not been for two chemists, Fritz Haber and
Carl Bosch, Berlin might have had to capitulate in the spring of 1915 for lack
of ammunition. However, in the meantime the two scientists had invented a
process by which nitrogen could be fixed from the air, and this enabled Germany to avoid immediate disaster on the munitions front.47
The problem of the early depletion of raw materials was, of course, evident
as soon as the war had begun and quickly mobilized Germany’s businessmen.
Among them, Walther Rathenau, director of the Allgemeine ElektrizitätsGesellschaft (AEG) and a man of many connections in the world of industry,
emerged as a key figure. He urged that stock be taken of existing raw material holdings as a first step and, as early as the middle of August 1914, set up
the Kriegsrohstoffabteilung to acquire, control, and distribute stockpiles to factories whose production was essential to the war effort.48 By 1918, the new
department, operating under the auspices of the Prussian War Ministry, was
279

World War I

in charge of some two dozen raw materials companies. Over time, commerce
and agriculture also became drawn into a close cooperation between the private sector and the government in the allocation and distribution of resources.
A first culmination point in this process was reached in August 1916 with the
adoption of the Hindenburg Program, which decreed even higher production
targets and was a further step in the progressive militarization of the German
economy. Nor did labor escape increasing regimentation once the enormous
losses at the front led to a shortage of manpower. The Patriotic Auxiliary Law
of December 1916 was supposed to overcome those shortages by mobilizing
for labor service all men between the ages of 17 and 60. As the bloodletting
continued, German industry also came to rely even more heavily on women,
especially after a drive to recruit foreign workers from Belgium and the Polishspeaking east, which degenerated into something more akin to a forced labor
program, was abandoned in February 1917.
Next to economic mobilization, the war also posed huge problems for the
country’s treasuries and financial sector. First of all, there were rising inflationary pressures. Since no war chest was available to cover the massively increased demand for military goods, the war immediately fueled price rises.
Industry, agriculture, and commerce knew how profitable it was to deal with
the state as a customer who urgently required military supplies. Although over
time the Reich government had some success in containing price gouging,
the wartime realities of supply and demand in a capitalist economy made
creeping inflation inevitable.49 This also applied to the provision of food, the
more so since the Allied blockade drastically reduced imports that could not
be made up by increased domestic agricultural production. On the contrary,
domestic agricultural production declined by one third in absolute figures.
Potato yields declined from 45 million tons in 1914 to 29 million at the end
of the war. Grain production dropped from 27 million tons to 17 million during the same period. Both 1916 and 1917 were years of bad harvests, and we
shall analyze below in the section on the home front how the shortages affected
the civilian population.
Finally, there was the question of how the government would raise the
funds to pay for its orders. In principle, the Kaiser and his advisors had three
means of obtaining money for military expenditure: higher taxes, which took
resources straight out of the pockets of taxpaying citizens; war bonds, which
increased the public debt and shifted the burden of repayment onto the shoulders of future generations; and dipping into the country’s gold reserves.
As to higher taxes, we have seen how this question triggered bitter conflicts well before 1914. The balance between indirect and direct taxes became
a major issue, and the resistance of the wealthy classes to contemplating even
a very small tax on incomes and legacies could never be overcome. Even the
one-time Wehrbeitrag of 1913 was unacceptable to the Conservatives and rat280

The War “From Above”

ified only in exceptional circumstances with the votes of the Social Democrats. Accordingly, the government was careful not to raise the idea of higher
direct taxes once the war had started. Nor did it dare to increase indirect taxes
on items of general consumption, in the past a lucrative but controversial source
of state income.50 The street protests against food shortages and high prices
that began straightaway in 1914/15 would have been even more vociferous
had higher indirect taxes been imposed.
In these circumstances it is not surprising that war loans became the major device of financing Germany’s war effort. The early public response to the
issue of war bonds was favorable. In 1915 and 1916 many patriotic citizens
exchanged their savings and gold marks for a piece of paper that promised
repayment of the face value together with an attractive interest rate. And it
was not just the well-to-do who signed bond issues. Thus, the bond issue of
March 1916 was taken up by almost 5 million people. Overall the Germans
signed bonds totaling over 99 billion marks. Their purchases were, of course,
based on the assumption that the war would be won by Germany and that,
with the help of reparations to be extracted for the vanquished Allies, repayment would be in full and without a loss through inflation. But by 1916 it was
obvious to all that the war was not going well and that victory might indeed
never come. It was also increasingly clear that rising inflation was eating into
the value of war bonds that, in a fit of patriotic fervor, had been acquired in
1915. As early as 1916 bonds were undersubscribed by −2.1 million marks.
By 1918 bond issues that were not taken up amounted to 39 million marks.51
Many of those who subscribed to war bonds at the beginning of the war
and then showed increasing reluctance to buy more came from the professional and academic middle classes. Indeed, next to the mobilization of the
armed forces and the economy, the conflict increasingly also became a war
for the hearts and minds of the mass of the population. In this war academics,
journalists, and intellectuals assumed an important role.52 On the one hand,
there was the task of propping up, with the help of patriotic speeches and
newspaper articles, the morale of domestic populations. The authors tended
to paint a rosy picture of the prospect of victory that would make all sacrifices ultimately worthwhile. Speakers and writers also lent their voices to
identifying the nation’s enemies.
At first these enemies were spotted primarily abroad, and the appeals that
leading academics and artists signed, praising German Kultur and damning
the utilitarianism and materialism of the Anglo-Saxons, are an embarrassment.
Hatred of the British, strong already before the war, reached new heights and
was expressed and recited in prose and rhyme of incredible crudity that portrayed the war as a conflict of ideas and values, as a clash of civilizations. It
is interesting that the army leadership was much less keen on psychological
warfare. Although the conflict was now total, they still tried to adhere to older
281

World War I

notions of chivalry and honorable combat between armies. In their perception, psychological warfare relied on lies and a corruption of traditional values. Consequently, for a long time there was a reluctance to engage in blatant
agitation. Many generals, higher civil servants, and aristocratic courtiers harbored a deep suspicion of the democratic potential of mass mobilization, and
the High Command—which, with the arrival of Hindenburg and Ludendorff
as supreme commanders in 1916, came to dominate decision making and
politics—moved relatively late in the war to constitute a propaganda arm.53
However, as the war wore on and victory proved elusive, expressions of
hatred directed at Germany’s “external enemy,” and “Perfidious Albion” in
particular, became complemented by the search for an “internal enemy” who
was allegedly undermining popular morale and the war effort with defeatist
and subversive slogans. As will be seen below, among the alleged enemies
were, not surprisingly, the Social Democrats, stigmatized as “unpatriotic fellows” and “traitors of the fatherland” long before 1914. But with the search
for scapegoats in full swing by 1916, there was another minority group on
which the blame for the growing crisis could be conveniently pinned: the
Jews. Although anti-Semitism had been on the rise before 1914, the lies that
were spread about this group and its role in Germany during the war (and especially toward the end of it) had never been more vicious.54
The search for “Reich enemies” cannot be separated from another debate
in which intellectual elites, but increasingly also politicians and the military,
engaged: war aims, the territorial fruits to be gained from the war that would
justify it all. This debate must be seen against the background of the Burgfrieden, the sacred peace that all classes, including the industrial working
class and its leaders, had entered into in August 1914. As the Kaiser put it to
the crowds outside the Berlin Schloss on the day that mobilization was proclaimed, from now on there would be only Germans.
Reich chancellor Bethmann, who had made an important contribution to
the forging of this truce when he persuaded the SPD leadership to support
what was said to be a defensive war against the aggressive and autocratic Tsarist empire,55 appreciated from the start that the truce would only hold if the
question of war aims could be kept under wraps until war’s end. The Social
Democrats would never accept a program of annexations and territorial expansion. To prevent a public debate on war aims seemed all the more important since Bethmann was under pressure from influential nationalist and
business circles to subscribe to a program of vast annexations that was summarized in his famous-infamous memorandum of 9 September 1914. In other
words, just one month after the outbreak of war, the German government had
put together a list of territorial claims to be pursued after victory had been won.
The discovery of Bethmann’s September Memorandum led Fritz Fischer
to argue that its basic demands had existed before 1914 and had in fact been
282

The War “From Above”

a major reason for unleashing the war in the first place.56 Although there is
no direct evidence for this hypothesis, a case can certainly be made that prewar hopes and expectations had shifted away from Weltpolitik and overseas
possessions. With Tirpitz’s failure to build a battle-fleet that posed a serious
challenge to the Royal Navy and the British Empire, the army had once more
become the main focus of Germany’s military power, and this return to a reliance on land forces also moved the European and Eurasian continent back
onto the radar screen of those elite groups who strategized about the country’s geographical position in Europe. At this point it was not yet a question
of a direct military and administrative presence in eastern and southeastern
Europe. Rather those regions were seen as part of an informal German Empire that would tie the predominantly agricultural economies to the Central
European industrial hegemon. While these were the Mitteleuropa conceptions of businessmen and academics, Friedrich Naumann prominently among
them, some military and Prussian conservatives had begun to think of the creation of a formal German Empire in the east.57
Their calculations were summarized later by General Wilhelm Groener,
who had been in charge of the General Staff’s Railroad Department prior to
1914, before becoming director of the War Office. A man who was no doubt
in the know, he remarked in 1919: “We have inadvertently striven for world
domination before we had secured our position on the Continent—this I can
of course say only in the most intimate circle, but who views matters more
or less clearly and historically, cannot have any doubts about this.”58 In 1915,
Tirpitz had heard that similar opinions circulated in “numerous circles in the
army and in other rightist forces.”59 According to them, what the Germans
should have done was “to conduct power politics, but continental [power]
politics. First defeat the enemies on the continent; everything to be invested
in the army for this purpose.… [Our] world and naval policy has been ‘premature’. We have ‘overstretched’ ourselves with [the creation of] the navy.”
It was against the background of such criticisms of Wilhelmine Weltpolitik,
first before 1914 and again after the war commenced, that the relatively rapid
collation of continental-European annexationist war aims in the September
Memorandum must be seen that were sent to Bethmann by a welter of agrarian and business groups during August.60 According to the document, Luxemburg and the eastern parts of Belgium were to be incorporated into the Reich.
The rest of Belgium would be reorganized as a kind of vassal state. France
was to lose the heavy-industrial region of Longwy-Briey. Moreover, all Western European states were to become part of a customs union under German
leadership that would eventually also comprise Scandinavia and Poland. Initially Berlin had been planning to leave Poland to the Habsburg empire. But
from 1916 Bethmann began to conceive of the region as another vassal state
complemented in the east by a “frontier strip” and cordon against Russia.
283

World War I

However, it appears that the September Memorandum was not just a digest of numerous submissions that Bethmann kept receiving from economic
pressure groups. On 28 August, the Pan-German League published a declaration on war aims that envisioned huge territorial acquisitions from Russia.
Concerned with keeping the Social Democrats in the fold, the Reich chancellor did not want the ultranationalist Pan-Germans to spearhead a large public discussion of German war aims. Clearly, it was better to let various elite
groups have their say and continue an internal debate on the subject.
The subsequent evolution of this issue offers a good illustration of how
domestic and international affairs became inextricably linked as the war unfolded and became ever more total. At the beginning of the conflict it was no
doubt also wise not to formulate one’s war aims too clearly in order not to tie
one’s hands for the day when peace would be negotiated. Nor is it difficult to
see that the official proclamation of exorbitant territorial annexations would
stir up the internal opposition. After all, such aims could only be achieved after final and total victory. However such a “hard peace” logically precluded
the conclusion of an earlier compromise peace without annexations. As we
shall see in a later section, the long-term effect of the war aims issue was tremendously polarizing in that it divided those Germans who wanted to fight
on in the hope of reaping the rewards of ultimate victory from those who
wanted to stop the slaughter in the trenches and advocated a return to the status quo ante.
There was yet another reason why some people promoted war aims. The
rising costs and sacrifices of the world conflict were bound to reinforce demands for greater social justice that the working-class movement had made
before 1914. Women had also been seeking more equality and suffrage. Once
the war had started, businessmen and other elite groups were quick to recognize that the conflict had a strongly democratizing impact on society. Men
who had made major sacrifices in the trenches in the nation’s defense would
not be happy to return to a political system that upheld restricted suffrage, such
as Prussia’s three-class voting system. After Social Democratic demands for
equality at the polls and the removal of many other forms of discrimination
had been firmly rejected before the war, the fear of increased pressure for reform in the wake of total war was widespread. It was articulated as early as
October 1914 by Alfred Hugenberg, a director of the Krupp trust.61 He argued
that one would have to reckon with an increased sense of power on the part
of soldiers returning from the front. They would insist on improvements in
their positions in the workplace and changes in the law.
There were two ways in which businessmen and politicians could respond
to this pressure: they could enter into negotiations to reach reformist compromises while rejecting more radical demands. Alternatively, they could, apart
from repressing the “increased sense of power” of returning front soldiers,
284

The War “From Below”

adopt what Hugenberg recommended as a remedy. According to him, “it
would therefore be well advised, in order to avoid internal difficulties, to distract the attention of the people and to give fantasies concerning the extension
of German territory room to play.”62 It is worth taking Hugenberg’s words seriously: the proclamation of grandiose war aims was indeed suited to turn the
eyes of the gullible away from the country’s internal problems and the need
for change toward visions of a continental European empire, from which all
Germans were to benefit. Those who fanned the war aims debate did so in the
justified expectation that the annexationist program would mobilize the nationalists and others. The drawback that was consciously accepted was that it
accelerated the division of society into two hostile camps. After all, the more
the Right, increasingly supported by the military leadership after Bethmann’s
ouster from the chancellorship, agitated for the war’s continuation until final
victory and a hard peace, the more those who were working for a peace without annexations and other reformists in the Left would rally against a boundless German nationalism and imperialism.

21. The World War As Experienced “From Below”
A. The Outbreak of War and the German People
While diplomats negotiated with neutrals and allies, bureaucrats, businessmen, and agrarians struggled to organize a total war economy. Professors and
journalists sat in their studies to scribble patriotic pamphlets and poems. And
while generals prepared the next all-out attack on the enemy lines, millions
of ordinary soldiers and civilians experienced the world war in a different
way.
Most of them had attended the massive rallies and demonstrations that had
taken place in towns and villages when the mobilization orders were published. To reconstruct their thoughts and feelings, two factors will have to be
taken into account. To begin with, they all thought that the nation had been
attacked by the Russians. Of course, we know today that they were hoodwinked and that their leaders in Berlin and Vienna were primarily responsible for the escalation of the Sarajevo Crisis into a world war. Still, the fact
remains that most ordinary Germans believed that they rallied in defense of
the fatherland against Tsarist autocracy. The pinpointing of this particular enemy also made the war justifiable for the Social Democrats. However much
they despised the Kaiser and the existing Prusso-German political system,
Tsarism must never be allowed to come to Central Europe.
Second, those who went to the demonstrations and assembly points to
sign up and to listen to the war proclamations had no idea what kind of war
was about to start. There were, as we have seen, a number of voices that had
285

World War I

warned of industrialized warfare between great powers in the twentieth century. But their arguments had not sunken into the public’s perspective in any
general way. Even rank-and-file Social Democrats, imbued with a simplified
version of Marxism, did not think of catastrophe, but rather contemplated the
wonderfully progressive changes that conflicts between colonial powers and
the impending crisis of capitalism would bring to the proletarian masses. Ideas
on how the war at the front and home front would unfold were extremely
vague. On top of it all, those who had read too many of the science fiction
novels popular at the time tended to be more mesmerized by the utopian descriptions of technological gadgets than deterred by the lethality of modern
weapons and mysterious robots.63
The kind of war many Germans therefore saw coming looked more like
the Franco-Prussian War of 1870/71. They expected a clash of two armies
from which the one side would quickly emerge victorious, and there was little doubt that their country had the superior forces. The fact that, at the end
of the war of 1870/71, the conflict had seen the beginnings of a “people’s war”
had been conveniently forgotten, and the elder Moltke’s qualms about a future people’s war were not even heeded by the professionals. Instead, there
was a widespread rumor in August that the soldiers would all be home again
by Christmas 1914.
However, recent research has also shown that the enthusiasm for war among
the masses was not as great as it had traditionally been depicted in the history books of later generations.64 Whoever went to the rallies and listened to
patriotic speeches by more or less prominent politicians was probably pulled
along when the crowds burst into cheers. But quite a few may well have
joined in only because silence and passivity would have provoked frowns and
hostility from those around them. It was only on the way home that one became more pensive again. It appears therefore that a member of the Social
Democratic Youth League in Hamburg gave an accurate description of his experience in those heavy August days of 1914 when he recorded in his diary:
“The excitement of the population, which had already led to a panicky onslaught on savings banks and grocery stores, increased. Most people were depressed as if they were to be beheaded the next day.”65 And an older Social
Democrat from Hamburg remarked in those days: “Day after day many comrades came to the trade union house at Besenbinderhof. We observed the
commotion with incomprehension. Many asked themselves: ‘Am I mad or is
it the others?’”66
Soon the experiences of those who had marched off to the front and those
who stayed at home began to diverge even more radically. To be sure, the soldiers were in frequent touch with their families, and a deliberate effort was
made to keep the military mail flowing. Many soldiers were also given brief
leaves of absence. And yet, increasingly there arose something like a psycho286

The War “From Below”

logical wall between the young fighters at the front and their parents and siblings at home. The world of the trenches and dugouts that they had experienced in the age of industrialized warfare was just too different. How was it
possible to describe to a worried and terrified mother what one had gone
through at Ypres, Verdun, or during the Battle of the Somme? There were just
no words for it. It was only towards war’s end that there was a rapprochement
between front and home front, as the longing for peace rose everywhere.
B. The Totalization of the War at the Front
As we have seen, the war was initially a war of movement in both east and
west. Casualties at this early stage were already staggeringly high, among not
only the troops but also the civilian population. After Moltke’s retreat from
the Battle of the Marne in September 1914, a new type of warfare began in
the west. Both sides built an elaborate system of trenches and dugouts that
ultimately stretched from Ypres in Belgium in a huge arch all the way to Verdun in Lorraine. Behind a frontline stretching some 450 miles long, there existed an extensive maze of trenches and supply-trenches that added up for
both sides to an estimated 25,000 miles.67 Following the Battle of the Marne,
there were repeated attempts to roll back the enemy, but compared to what
was to come the fighting was still relatively moderate. The Christmas period
also revealed that feelings of hatred were not yet as visceral as they would
become in later years. In various sections of the front the fighting stopped on
Christmas Eve. The two sides exchanged best wishes across the no-man’s
land, and there was even fraternization, which was, however, quickly stopped
by the officers. A similar atmosphere existed on the eastern front, where hatred
was also restrained and where both sides tried to observe international law,
even in the POW camps of Siberia. Tens of thousands of Habsburg soldiers
were interned in faraway places following the huge encirclement battles in
the war of movement in the east.68
Still, by the middle of 1915, it was no longer possible to deny that this had
become a long, brutal, and increasingly total war. Here is one example: the
name of the town of Verdun is to this day remembered in both France and Germany as one of the most catastrophic battles in modern history. The battle
was based on a plan hatched by Erich von Falkenhayn, the successor to Moltke,
who had resigned after his failure on the Marne. He calculated, probably correctly, that Verdun would be of such great symbolic value to the French that
they would never abandon the fortifications along that sector of the front. They
would bring in massive reinforcements, and this would give the Germans a
chance to bleed the French army white.69
In preparation for the attack on Verdun, the Germans assembled some 1,300
howitzers, which on 22 February 1916 unleashed an inferno along a small
stretch of the frontline. Poison gas was added to secure success. On 25 Feb287

World War I

ruary the Germans were able to conquer the Fortress Douaumont, whose surroundings had meanwhile been turned into a moon landscape by the artillery
bombardment. On the following day General Philippe Pétain took over as
commander of the Verdun frontline. Fresh French reinforcements were brought
in who—as Falkenhayn had expected—defended their position to the last bullet and sustained huge casualties. By April, the French had lost about 89,000
men when Falkenhayn discovered that German losses were almost as large.
The struggle continued. On 29 May the Germans took another strategic
position that had the telling name “Mort Homme.” The Fortress of Vaux fell
a week later. But the French did not give up, and on 2 July Falkenhayn was
forced to halt the offensive. The breakthrough that the Kaiser had prematurely
announced on 1 April had not been achieved. France did not capitulate, and
the war continued. Indeed, in subsequent months the French reconquered the
Fortresses Vaux and Douaumont. Total human losses on both sides amounted
to 500,000 each. They had fired some 40 million shells. The main reason for
Falkenhayn’s retreat at Verdun was the beginning of the Battle of the Somme,
which the British began on 24 June 1916 as a relief operation. This battle and
its horrendous number of casualties have already been mentioned.
For many years now historians have been trying to explain why soldiers
on both sides, as had happened again in the Battle of the Somme, would be
prepared to rush across no-man’s land into the enemy’s machine-gun fire and
hence into certain death. They have also asked themselves how, during the
long breaks between major battles, men held out in the trenches and dugouts
surrounded by corpses, rats, mud, and lice. The American historian Jay Winter may be right when he put the buddy system, a sense of honor and duty,
and patriotism high on his list. There were also the harsh rules of military discipline. But in comparison to other countries, the number of German soldiers
court-martialed and sentenced to die remained quite small: a mere 150, of
whom some 48 were in fact executed.70
Yet, neither Winter’s list of psychological factors nor the sanctions of martial law were able to prevent discussions among the rank-and-file about the
meaning of the terrible bloodletting. After the costly battles of 1916, disillusionment rose, and soldiers began to long for peace. Similar processes set in
on the eastern front. The outcome of the Battle of the Marne and the beginning of trench warfare in the west meant that the projected massive transfer
of troops after the successful completion of the Schlieffen-Moltke Plan was
never possible. Worse, the Russian armies had mobilized more quickly than
expected. As early as the middle of August 1914 they began to threaten East
Prussia and advanced westward to the north and south of the Masurian Lakes.
General Paul von Hindenburg, brought back from retirement, then succeeded
through a number of bold countermoves to defeat the Russians, who were badly
led and trained, near Tannenberg. A week later the German counteroffensive
288

The War “From Below”

along the Masurian Lakes set in, and the end of the Tsarist armies were again
beaten. Until December, and again in the spring and summer of 1915, the Germans thus made considerable territorial gains up to a line that ran south from
Riga in Latvia eastward of Vilnius, Grodno, and Brest-Litovsk. Further south,
where the Habsburg armies had clashed bloodily with the Russians and where
the frontline had moved back and forth several times in 1915 and 1916, the
losses of military personnel were higher. If the 2 million POWs who had
been captured by both sides along the eastern front posed enormous logistical problems, the fate of the civilian population was possibly even more dire.
Some regions experienced foreign occupation and subsequent “liberation”
several times. Whatever provisions they had were confiscated by troops who
were never properly supplied. People were constantly on the road trying the
escape from the fighting. In the German zone of occupation in the north of
the eastern front, some 4 million people were forced to leave their homes.
Villages were razed to the ground; scorched-earth tactics were widespread.
We still do not have any reliable figures on how many civilians perished during those years of total warfare before the collapse of the Russian front in the
revolutionary upheavals of 1917.71
C. The Totalization of the War at the Home Front
While the German troops experienced the beginnings of total war with its
massive casualties, the civilian population back home did not have to fear losing their lives in battle. And yet the stresses and strains of the conflict reached
the German home front more quickly than in Britain or France. As elsewhere,
notifications of the deaths of fathers, brothers, uncles, or sons that arrived in
the towns and villages with increasing frequency were devastating enough.
But the mourning of a loved one was exacerbated in Germany by a very rapid
deterioration of the material position of the population. In this respect, the
British naval blockade had immediate and catastrophic consequences. As
Germany’s international trade collapsed, causing millions of marks in losses
to finance and commerce, early bread shortages that were never overcome affected the average family most severely. Until 1917, grain production fell by
some 43 percent. Several factors caused this crisis. To begin with, supplying
the armed forces had absolute priority over the civilian population, and the
army alone had a voracious appetite. Just one army corps consumed 660,000
loaves of bread and 500,000 kilos of meat per month. If domestic grain production had been insufficient before 1914 to feed the population, it was difficult to raise it when milk and other agricultural produce also remained in high
demand, even if the feeding of animals withdrew grain from human consumption. Potato production offered an alternative, but this market suffered badly
from the early and harsh winter of 1914/15, which was followed by further bad
harvests in 1916 and 1917.72
289

World War I

These shortages, which in times of peace could have been made up by grain
imports, confronted the authorities with the impossible task of organizing the
fair distribution of very scarce basic foodstuffs. Even if they had been paragons of efficiency, the authorities would have found the grain shortages too
severe to manage equitably, all the more so since shortages in meat and milk
products set in sooner than expected. In these circumstances, it was to be expected that the authorities would become the prime target of complaints and
protests. In the second half of the war this was indeed more and more the
case. But for a longer period, the officials in towns and cities managed to portray themselves as the concerned and caring party that tried ever so hard to look
after their citizens’ wellbeing.73 Consequently, at the beginning of the war,
the population tended to blame other groups for the shortages. In the fall of
1914, there were the so-called Kriegerfrauen, whose husbands had been called
up and who received financial support from the state. It seems that quite a few
of these women came from the better-off middle classes and spent their money
having their afternoon Kaffee und Kuchen in local cafés. Other women who
had to work and did not have the time and money for such treats felt aggrieved
and demanded that flour be used for bread-baking rather than cake-making.
By the fall of 1914 these complaints had become so strong that demonstrations occurred against the Kriegerfrauen.
However, since an increasing number of these women soon appeared in
the streets dressed in black and hence constituted an awkward target for protests, producers and retailers began to appear in the visor of the protesters.
They were accused of hoarding and price gouging. Over time it became increasingly clear that it was general inflation, not price gouging, that devoured
a growing percentage of weekly household budgets. The authorities now developed another redress: soup kitchens, where those who had reached the
starvation line could obtain at least one fairly nutritious meal. Tensions also
arose over the question of whether workers in heavy industry (Schwerarbeiter),
and the vital armaments industries in particular, should be given special rations and hence preference over the needy who were starving. When in the end
rationing was introduced, first for flour as early as February 1915, and soon
thereafter for other food items, fresh conflicts arose over the existence of a
thriving black market, in which those with savings and higher incomes could,
at inflated prices, get whatever they needed, while the population’s poorer segments had to live on turnips and water.
For a long time, the authorities succeeded in appearing on the side of the
popular majority and thus avoided being blamed for the crisis. But given the
worsening food situation, it was perhaps inevitable that sooner or later the
government would end up on the firing line of civilian protest. This meant that
a confrontation that had begun over economic issues increasingly became
politicized into a struggle between the monarchy, which did not seem able to
290

Military Defeat

win or end the war, and the masses in the cities, who were starving. Women
who had stood in the ever-lengthening bread lines at the beginning of the war
were the first to grumble and then explode in frustration and anger. Soon they
would be joined by working women whose families were also starving. Their
male colleagues began to join them. Almost inevitably protests that were triggered by the deteriorating economic conditions slowly turned into demands
to end the war and to introduce fundamental political reforms.74

22. Military Defeat and the Collapse of
the Hohenzollern Monarchy
By early 1917 the predicament of the Kaiserreich was truly desolate. The war
was going badly. The stalemate and the war of attrition on the western front
continued, while casualty figures mounted and doubt about the meaning of
the conflict spread in the trenches. The decision to resume unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic had brought the United States into the war on
the side of the Allies. But once again the calculations that had been made concerning the benefits of sinking merchant ships without warning had proven
wrong, as had so many other calculations made by the German military since
August 1914. Although the number of shipments destroyed in the Atlantic
briefly surpassed the figures that were supposed to be needed to force Britain
to sue for peace, “Perfidious Albion’s” collapse was nowhere in sight. Thanks
to the invention of the convoy system, more ships were still getting through,
and the country had also adopted other means, such as the ploughing of grassland for grain production, that prevented the kind of food shortages under which
Germany was now reeling. Meanwhile, the Americans had put their war machine into high gear, and the arrival of fresh troops in Europe was expected
by the spring of 1918. On the domestic front, economic protests became more
and more politicized and thus reinforced the division of society into a camp
that agitated for a harsh Siegfrieden with exorbitant territorial annexations in
Eastern and Western Europe and the political status quo at home, juxtaposed
by a camp that called for an immediate cessation of hostilities without annexations and the reform of the Hohenzollern monarchy.
However, the developments of 1917 and 1918 that culminated in the defeat of the German army and the abdication of Wilhelm II can only be fully
understood against the background of events in Russia in 1917.
It has already been mentioned that the Russian army suffered terrible losses
during the great battles of 1915/16. Time and again the troops’ inexperience and
the incompetence of the Tsarist officer corps extracted a heavy price. Morale
was declining fast, accelerated by the strict discipline that the military leadership imposed on the rank-and-file in an attempt to cover up its own failures.
Additionally, things could have been better at the home front. Unlike the situ291

World War I

ation in Germany, Russia’s agricultural production capacity was adequate to
feed the population. But again it was bureaucratic muddle that prevented sufficient foodstuffs from reaching the urban centers. The civilian population in
towns and cities therefore had ample reason to be critical. But there was also
ferment in the countryside, driven by the losses of an army that was made up
predominantly of soldiers of peasant background. With increased mourning
in the villages came dissatisfaction with the regime’s handling of the war.75
Meanwhile the Tsar and his advisors were largely isolated from the rest of
society. They had little inkling of the actual mood of the population and came
under the influence of sinister forces, above all that of Rasputin, a monk who
until his assassination in 1916 had the ear of the Tsarina. Inexorably, the prestige of the monarchy headed toward its nadir in the winter of 1916/17. There
were, it is true, forces who wanted to reform the political system and open it
up to greater popular participation. Among them was Prince Georgi Lvov,
who proposed giving more powers to the local semstvo authorities and the
Duma, the national assembly. Mikhail Rodzianko, the president of the Duma,
pursued similar aims. But both men were summarily rebuked by the archconservative court circles and the military at the Tsarist headquarters. Isolated and
unwilling to make any concessions, Tsar Nicholas II had no defenders when,
after the number of smaller strikes had grown to 2,300, involving some 1.8
million participants, massive demonstrations broke out in St. Petersburg and
other cities in February 1917 demanding his abdication.76
Worried that the country might lapse into chaos, moderate politicians inside and outside the Duma forced the monarch to step down. They staged what
might be called a “revolution from above” in order to stave off a threatening
“revolution from below.” The new Provisional Government, first headed by
Prince Lvov and later by Alexander Kerensky, tried its best to stabilize the
situation and to steer a middle course between the reactionary officer corps,
which was considering a coup to establish a military dictatorship, and the
workers’ and soldiers’ councils, which had sprung up spontaneously from the
February demonstrations. The latter came increasingly under the influence of
more radical forces, among them the Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin and
Leon Trotsky. The attempt to establish a military regime under the leadership
of General Lavr Kornilov quickly collapsed, thanks to the resistance of the
naval units stationed in St. Petersburg and of the railway unions, whose members diverted the trains with Kornilov’s contingents away from the capital.
Kerensky’s Provisional Government had been saved, but it had also become
clear that it lacked the military forces to defend itself against any challenge.
Taking advantage of this weakness, Lenin and Trotsky turned their supporters against Kerensky. In November they succeeded in wresting power from
him in a leftist coup.77

292

Military Defeat

Thenceforth the Bolsheviks had a vital interest in safeguarding their new
regime and in fulfilling some of the promises with which they had garnered
support among the masses for their program of “bread, land, and peace.” It
was the latter promise of an immediate peace that presented the German government with a unique opportunity in November 1917. It seemed possible to
end the war in the east, enabling Hindenburg and Ludendorff to throw larger
numbers of troops from the Russian front into France and thus turning the
tide in the west in Germany’s favor. In December 1917 Berlin entered into
peace negotiations with Trotsky. But the latter procrastinated, and by the end
of February 1918 the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was still not in
sight.78 The Germans then issued an ultimatum, and when this was not immediately accepted, troops began to march eastward. On 1 March they occupied Kiev. Two days later, the Bolsheviks signed the peace agreement under
which the Kaiserreich annexed huge territories up to the Caucasus, comprising all of the Ukraine and the Crimea. Ultimately the frontier ran from Narva
on the Baltic Sea, via Mogilev and Kursk along the River Don, to Rostov and
Taganrog. It is no exaggeration to say that the German High Command implemented, through the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, the eastern half of an annexationist program that was reminiscent of the demands put forward by the
Pan-Germans in their memorandum of 28 August 1914. There can also be little doubt that the Germans would have been no less ruthless in the reordering
of Western Europe, had they been able to end the war victoriously in the west.
In March 1918 the prospects for such a victory looked good. The troops
moved into France, including contingents from Serbia and Italy, now numbering forty divisions with 600,000 men. Hindenburg and Ludendorff launched
their spring offensive without delay. But after making early territorial gains, the
attack soon ground to a halt, not least because in the meantime some 300,000
Americans had arrived on the western front who subsequently helped to turn
the tide. By the middle of July the Allies began their counterattack. Four weeks
later the German defenses that had been hastily erected began to crumble. On
29 September the High Command informed the Kaiser that the war was lost.79
What followed was in some ways reminiscent of events in Russia in February 1917. It was to be expected that the public admission of defeat would
come as a terrible blow to millions of Germans who had been told in the
spring that victory was around the corner. The High Command and the Reich
government rightly feared unrest and the beginnings of a “revolution from
below,” spearheaded by the disillusioned workers and soldiers. At this point
it was Paul von Hintze, the state secretary of the German Foreign Office, who
came up with a cunning plan. He proposed to introduce a major constitutional reform. The government would henceforth no longer be formed by the
monarch alone but would emerge from the majority parties in the Reichstag.

293

World War I

In other words, Hintze put forward the idea of parliamentarizing the PrussoGerman political system. The center of decision-making power was to be
moved from the Kaiser to the popular assembly.
Wilhelm II and the High Command approved the plan. Negotiations with
the Reichstag parties began that included the Social Democrats, and the party
leaders responded positively. They felt that, however unfavorable the circumstances under which they were asked to assume governmental responsibility,
they could not stand aside in the country’s hour of extreme crisis. Accordingly, Georg von Hertling, who had been appointed chancellor by the Kaiser
under the old system, stepped down. Prince Max von Baden, who had a reputation as a liberal and enjoyed the confidence of the Reichstag majority, succeeded him as Reich chancellor. The other members who entered his cabinet
did so with the approval of the center-left coalition that had been formed. In
short, something very remarkable and indeed “revolutionary” had happened:
without removing the Kaiser, Germany had become a constitutional monarchy along the lines of the British system.
However, before we praise Hintze’s initiative as a wise and statesmanlike
act, it should be remembered that the constitutional change was made only in
the hour of total military defeat. There were hence ulterior motives that Ludendorff put as follows: “I have asked His Majesty to bring those people [i.e.,
the majority parties] into the government who are largely responsible for things
having turned out as they have. We shall therefore see these gentlemen enter
the ministries, and they must now make the peace that has to be made. They
must now eat the soup that they have served us!”80 By cold-bloodedly placing responsibility for the war and its disastrous result on the shoulders of the
Reichstag deputies, he tried to absolve himself and the army from any blame
for the defeat. The party leaders, with Friedrich Ebert among them, will not
have missed the cynicism that motivated the constitutional change. But by
joining the government they not only hoped to help the German people but
also to stave off a possible “revolution from below.” Russia after all offered
an ominous example of how a volatile situation could end up in a Bolshevik
seizure of power, which they all wanted to avoid in Germany.
The government of Prince Max tried its best to maintain law and order and
to enter into negotiations with the Allies to sign an armistice and eventually
a peace treaty. Initially, their chances of success did not look bad. But the
civilian government’s efforts were undermined by the criminal behavior not,
in this case, of the army but of the admiralty. At the beginning of November,
Admiral Reinhard Scheer secretly ordered the German battle-fleet in Wilhelmshaven to undertake a final sortie against the Royal Navy in the North Sea.81
Given the strategic inferiority of the Germans, this was nothing less than a
suicide mission. It was also clear to the admiralty that the sortie would undermine Prince Max’s armistice negotiations. However, Scheer thought himself
294

Military Defeat

guided by “higher goals.” The army, it could be argued, had fought a heroic
battle and would therefore maintain its prestige in the nation’s eyes after the
war. The fleet, on the other hand, had spent most of the war bottled up in Wilhelmshaven and Kiel. The submarines had valiantly fought the war at sea instead. It was expected that the country would never, after the war, wish to
rebuild a navy that, despite the enormous resources that Tirpitz had put into
it, had proved so useless. A spectacular battle in the North Sea was supposed
to rectify this. When ordering that thousands of sailors be sent to their deaths
in a final do-or-die battle, the admiralty had its own future in mind.
Scheer could not prevent rumors from spreading about his plan in Wilhelmshaven. The sailors wanted to go home rather than die as heroes in the
North Sea. They flatly refused to sail the ships, whereupon the commanding
admiral stopped the operation and sent the fleet through the Kiel Canal to
Kiel on the Baltic Sea, where the sailors immediately fraternized with their
comrades and shipyard workers. Strikes and demonstrations now spread from
Kiel throughout the rest of Germany like wildfire. The “revolution from below” had broken out. Ignorant of the realities on the ground, the Kaiser, who
had retreated to his military headquarters in Spa on the Belgian border, surrounded by his generals, expressed his indignation at the revolutionary upheavals. He announced that he had decided to march back home at the head
of his troops to quell the uprisings. His military advisors thereupon informed
him that there were no more troops that would follow their supreme commander. Rather, the soldiers were all on their way home on their own initiative, and the monarch had become a liability for the army leaders, who, like
Scheer, were also thinking about their postwar future. And so Wilhelm II was
bundled into a car and driven across the border in the middle of the night into
his Dutch exile, where he stayed until his death in 1941. In the capital Prince
Max announced the monarch’s abdication even before it had been agreed. On
9 November 1918 a prominent Social Democrat proclaimed a republic before
a jubilant Berlin crowd.82

295

Conclusion

I will now make a few concluding remarks at the end of what was conceived
as a general textbook history of the German Empire from its founding in 1871
to its demise in 1918. No attempt is being made here to summarize individual chapters.
Rather than providing the chronological narrative found in most other studies of this kind, my approach has been systematic, starting with economic developments, moving on to the structure and evolution of German society and
culture, and ending with an analysis of the political system and the country’s
foreign and domestic policies. Within those major parts, the account has been
organized further around key themes. Again, it would seem unnecessary to
recapitulate those sections here.
However, this would appear to be a good moment to come back to two
major, related issues that have driven my own interest (and the interest of
most other scholars of the period) in the Kaiserreich. The first issue relates
to explaining why the country ended up in a catastrophic world war that, most
historians now agree, was triggered primarily by the decision makers in Berlin and—not to be underestimated—Vienna. Earlier interpretations had related
this decision to the authoritarian character of the Hohenzollern monarchy, arguing that Germany was dominated by powerful conservative elites, led by
an autocratic monarch and his ministers, who were concerned with preserving the socioeconomic and political status quo in the face of a rapidly changing, industrializing and urbanizing society. The criticism of this position in
the 1970s, probably most forcefully articulated by Hans-Ulrich Wehler in his
book The German Empire, 1871–1918, was not long in coming.83 With the
rise of social and cultural history “from below,” scholars pointed to what they
felt the others had failed to deal with: the astonishing extent to which Bismarck’s Germany, and even more so Wilhelmine Germany in general, had
been a multifaceted, rich, and diverse country.84 This book tried to take on
board the rich harvest of research on aspects of life in Germany that simply
could not be found in the early work of the post-Fischer years. Furthermore,
it tried to capture this scholarship through the notion of pluralization. Clearly,
over the decades after 1871, the Kaiserreich became a more pluralistic society in all spheres. Looking at life before 1914, it was more differentiated,

Conclusion

dynamic, and colorful than at the beginning. This book contains plenty of evidence of this.
However—and this became a second analytical category—Germany in
my view also became more polarized. While few people would dispute the
pluralization argument, the question of polarization has remained more controversial because it is also linked to another controversy, that is, whether or
not Wilhelmine Germany was in a state of deepening crisis in the years before World War I. I have tried to demonstrate this crisis in all four parts that
make up the account of the pre-1914 period: (1) the economy, which was no
longer in good shape, not least because of its overburdening with armament
expenditures that augmented already large deficits and resulted in major conflicts over taxation; (2) the society, which not only had increasing difficulties
integrating its ethnic minorities but also above all its largest social class, industrial workers; (3) the culture, which mirrored some of the larger societal
tensions and was propelled by the increasing cultural pessimism of its intellectuals and artists, some of whom predicted, and even welcomed, some kind
of cataclysm to overcome the materialism and stuffiness of a bourgeois world;
(4) the political realm, which began to lose its capacity for compromise between
divergent forces, became hopelessly bifurcated, and lapsed into a state of
stagnation and paralysis.
In the Introduction, and also later in Part IV, I referred to those who do not
share this “pessimistic” view of those years.85 Rauh was, possibly, the scholar
who advanced the most “optimistic” counterargument, postulating that Germany was well on its way toward abandoning its autocratic-monarchical political structures and developing a modern representative system. It was only
the world war that disrupted this evolution. More recently, Margaret Anderson
has added her voice by examining how German men, enjoying the universal
suffrage in national elections, were increasingly “practicing democracy.” What,
she asked, “would have happened had there been no war—the war that Germany’s governors, although not solely responsible, did so much to bring
about?”86 She admits that “some kind of ‘jump’ would surely have been necessary to have moved Germany from dualism to a parliamentary regime.” She
then resorts to a counterfactual: “Perhaps the death of the kaiser at age eightythree would have sped a regime change—in 1941—analogous to Spain’s at the
death of Franco at the same age in 1975.”
Although it is true that the war’s outbreak prevents us from knowing for
certain whether the pessimistic or optimistic view of the Wilhelmine period is
the more plausible one, two considerations make me veer to the side of pessimism. First, there is the very tangible mood of pessimism that seized hold
of the Reich government, the still-powerful Conservatives, and the military,
above all Helmuth von Moltke. Although these circles pushed for war in 1914
primarily in order to break the dangerous international situation of the Kaiser297

Conclusion

reich and to act militarily before it was “too late” and the French and Russian rearmament programs would have shifted the balance by 1915/16, hence
nullifying the chances of a German victory at that point. But, even if direct
documentation is lacking, there also seems to have been the realization in
Berlin that a lightning campaign and a swift German victory over the Allies
would tremendously stabilize a troubled monarchy. This would have been the
situation of 1866 when Bismarck, after his defeat of the Austrians, was able
to settle the constitutional crisis of the previous years and to effect a rightwing shift in the Prussian Diet that defeated the Progressives agitating for the
monarchy’s parliamentarization. No doubt, an external success of the German armed forces in 1914 would have enabled the chancellor to reverse the
electoral trend of the previous years. The leftward drift in the elections would
have been stopped, and the power and prestige of the Kaiser greatly boosted.
But we do not have to rely on this particular hypothesis alone to cast doubt
on the “optimistic” view of the German Empire’s development before 1914.
If the crown and the political establishment fought tooth and nail before the
war to block any constitutional reform, and if change could have been brought
about only through a revolutionary upheaval, what is the indirect evidence
that no one in the government or, even more crucially, in the army would have
tolerated attempts to effect a gradual, silent political transformation that, in
their different ways, Rauh and Anderson identify as gradually moving forward? This evidence emerges from the behavior of those same elites during
World War I when they confronted this same question.
The difference was that the pressure of total war and the mobilization of
millions of ordinary men, many of them workers who were giving their lives
for the fatherland, had greatly increased the pressure for reform. Hugenberg
had seen this connection between democratic war mobilization and the demand for an end to political and other discrimination by the mass of the population as early as October 1914.87 He believed then that the pressure could
be deflected by giving “fantasies concerning the extension of German territory room to play,” that is, by promoting war aims and annexationism. But with
no end to the war in sight, the population growing more and more restive, and
imperialism being a divisive issue, some less cynical and less dogmatic politicians began to consider making constitutional concessions and political
promises that would lead to a more parliamentary system and a broader sense
of participation in decision making than had existed under Wilhelm II’s centralized rule as a way of gaining fresh popular support. One of the possible
concessions was to change the unpopular three-class voting system in Prussia and with it the restrictive suffrage laws in the other federal states. Given the
deterioration of both the front and the home front after the battles and deprivations of 1916, Bethmann and other more farsighted people began to think of
such a concession. Reform of the three-class vote, announced in April 1917,
298

Conclusion

was not to be immediately effective, but would follow the victorious end of
the war.88 But so strong was the opposition to this plan that it had to be withdrawn. It also cost Bethmann his job. He was replaced by Georg Michaelis,
a creature of the High Command, who promised not to tolerate such dangerous concessions.
Worse, the conservatives and the military thenceforth escalated their policy of rallying the hard-line nationalists and annexationists and of denouncing
as “Reich enemies” and traitors those pleading for a compromise peace and domestic reforms. To be sure, it was not altogether easy to make large numbers
of demonstrating women and factory workers responsible for the predicament of the Reich. The anti-peace and anti-reformist propaganda could be expected to succeed only if a smaller and identifiable minority could be blamed
for stirring up the opposition to annexations and the monarchy. Although the
agitation of the Pan-Germans, supported from 1917 by the protofascist Fatherland Party,89 also focused on other minorities and the traditional scapegoat,
the Social Democrats, the Jews of Germany now became a major target. Among
the measures taken to fan anti-Semitic resentments was a so-called Judenzählung (survey of Jews).90 Initiated by the army, it was to prove that Jewish men
were proportionally underrepresented in the army in comparison to their Christian comrades and had therefore shirked their duty to serve the fatherland. The
statistics showed the opposite. But instead of publishing the results, the survey was held back, which allowed anti-Semites to spread their lies with even
greater zeal and impunity. By war’s end the most incredible stories were circulating in Germany about the Jews as war profiteers and international wirepullers, as racially inferior parasites and congenital cowards, who were working
hard to engineer a German defeat.91
Now, the portrait that emerges here is one of a country in which those endowed with the constitutional and political powers to initiate reforms adopted
such polarizing strategies to prevent change even though it would have been
wise to grant concessions in this extreme emergency. Thus, is it really plausible to assert that those same forces would have been willing to introduce
political reforms in a prewar situation that looked much less serious to them
and in which they confidently held absolute command of the army as the ultima ratio regum, should constitutional change by attempted by demonstrations escalating into violent upheaval? Given also the wartime experience, it
is therefore more likely that, had war not broken out in 1914, Wilhelmine
Germany would have seen a Staatsstreich, not a peaceful and gradual slide
toward parliamentarism? Parliamentary government was introduced only after
the military knew that the war had been lost. They would never have granted
it without that defeat. Offering it in the summer of 1918 was a cynical move,
for which Ludendorff in his statement gave a revealing reason. Not surprisingly,
he became one of the many protagonists of the “legend of the stab in the back,”
299

Conclusion

which blamed not the Kaiser and his advisors but the German Left, including Ebert, for the war and its unhappy outcome.92 It was a lie that came to be
widely believed after 1918 and imposed a heavy burden on the parliamentarydemocratic Weimar Republic that emerged from the catastrophe of World
War I and the disappearance of the Kaiserreich that Bismarck had so proudly
founded in 1871.

300

Appendix A

Statistical Tables
Introductory Note
It is hoped that, if used with the appropriate circumspection, these tables will
be helpful as indicators of major trends.
List of Sources Used
H. Aubin and W. Zom, eds., Handbuch zur Deutschen Wirtschafts-und Sozialgeschichte, vol. 2 (Stuttgart 1976)
R. Bölling, Volksschullehrer und Politik (Göttingen 1978)
F. Boll, Massenbewegungen in Niedersachsen, 1906–1920 (Bonn 1981)
R. Chickering, We Men Who Feel Most German (London 1984)
W. Conze and U. Engelhardt, eds., Arbeiterexistenz im 19. Jahrhundert (Stuttgart 1981)
D. Crew, Bochum (Frankfurt 1980)
H. de Buhr and M. Regenbrecht, eds., Industrielle Revolution und Industriegesellschaft (Frankfurt 1987)
J. Ehmer, Sozialgeschichte des Alters (Frankfurt 1990)
G. Eley, Reshaping the German Right (New Haven, Conn. 1980)
U. Frevert, Women in German History (Oxford 1988)
D. Groh, Negative Integration und revolutionärer Attentismus (Frankfurt
1973)
W. Grütter and G. Lottes, Die Industrielle Revolution (Paderborn 1982)
W.L. Guttsman, The German Social Democratic Party, 1875–1933 (London
1981)
W.G. Hoffmann, Das Wachstum der Deutschen Wirtschaft seit der Mitte des
19. Jahrhunderts (Berlin 1965)
G. Hohorst et al., eds., Sozialgeschichtliches Arbeitsbuch, 1870–1914 (Munich 1975)
K.H. Jarausch, Students, Society, and Politics in Imperial Germany (Princeton 1982)

Statistical Tables

K.H. Jarausch, Quantifizierung in der Geschichtswissenschaft (Düsseldorf
1976)
H. Kaelble, Industrialisierung und soziale Ungleichheit (Göttingen 1983)
P. Marschalck, Bevölkerungsgeschichte Deutschlands im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert (Frankfurt 1984)
M. Mitterauer, Ledige Mütter (Munich 1983)
W. Müller et al., Strukturwandel der Frauenarbeit, 1880–1980 (Frankfurt
1983)
F.R. Pfetsch, Zur Entwicklung der Wissenschaftspolitik in Deutschland,
1750–1914 (Berlin 1974)
J. Reulecke, Geschichte der Urhanisierung in Deutschland (Frankfurt 1985)
G.A. Ritter, Social Welfare in Germany and Britain (Leamington Spa 1986)
J. Sandweg and M. Stürmer, eds., Industrialisierung und soziale Frage (Munich 1979)
K. Schönhoven, Expansion und Konzentration (Stuttgart 1980)
W. Sombart, Die deutsche Volkswirtschaft im 19. Jahrhundert und im Anfang
des 20. Jahrhunderts (Berlin 1927)
R. Spree, Health and Social Class in Imperial Germany (Oxford 1988)
M. Stürmer, Das ruhelose Reich (Berlin 1983)
W. Tormin, Geschichte der deutschen Parteien seit 1848 (Stuttgart 1967)
P.-C. Witt, Die Finanzpolitik des Deutschen Reiches von 1903 bis 1913
(Lübeck 1970)

302

Statistical Tables

303

Statistical Tables

304

Statistical Tables

305

Statistical Tables

306

Statistical Tables

3,480

3,626

—

307

Statistical Tables

308

Statistical Tables

309

Statistical Tables

310

Statistical Tables

311

Statistical Tables

312

Statistical Tables

313

Statistical Tables

314

Statistical Tables

315

Statistical Tables

316

Statistical Tables

317

Statistical Tables

318

Statistical Tables

319

Statistical Tables

320

Statistical Tables

321

Statistical Tables

322

Statistical Tables

323

Statistical Tables

324

Statistical Tables

325

Statistical Tables

326

Statistical Tables

327

Statistical Tables

328

Statistical Tables

329

Statistical Tables

330

Statistical Tables

331

Statistical Tables

332

Statistical Tables

333

Statistical Tables

334

Statistical Tables

335

Statistical Tables

336

Statistical Tables

337

Statistical Tables

338

Statistical Tables

339

Statistical Tables

340

Statistical Tables

341

Statistical Tables

342

Statistical Tables

343

Statistical Tables

344

Statistical Tables

345

Statistical Tables

346

Notes

Introduction
1. F. Fischer, Germany’s War Aims in the First World War (London 1969);
idem, War of Illusions (London 1973); J.C.G. Röhl, ed., From Bismarck
to Hitler (London 1970). On the Fischer Debate: J.A. Moses, The Politics
of Illusion (London 1975); J. W. Langdon, July 1914: The Long Debate,
1918–1990 (New York 1991).
2. T. Nipperdey, Deutsche Geschichte, 1866–1918, Vol. II (Munich 1992),
638.
3. H. Boockmann, ed., Mitten in Europa (Berlin 1984). See also L. Dehio,
Deutschland und die Weltpolitik im 20. Jahrhundert (Munich 1955); D.
Calleo, The German Problem Reconsidered (Cambridge 1978).
4. E. Kehr, Battleship Building and Party Politics in Germany (Chicago
1975); idem, Economic Interest, Militarism, and Foreign Policy (Berkeley
1977); V.R. Berghahn, Der Tirpitz-Plan (Düsseldorf 1971).
5. H.-U. Wehler, Bismarck und der Imperialismus (Cologne 1969); idem, The
German Empire, 1871–1918 (Leamington Spa 1985).
6. Term of W.J. Mommsen, “Domestic Factors in German Foreign Policy before 1914,” Central European History (1973): 3–43. See also H.-J. Puhle,
“Zur Legende der Kehrschen Schule,” Geschichte und Gesellschaft (1978):
108–19.
7. A. Hillgruber, “Politische Geschichte in moderner Sicht,” Historische Zeitschrift (1973): 529–52; K. Hildebrand, “Geschichte oder Gesellschaftsgeschichte?” ibid. (1976): 329–57; idem, “Staatskunst oder Systemzwang?”
ibid. (1979): 624–44.
8. K. Hildebrand, Deutsche Aussenpolitik, 1871–1914 (Munich 1990); G.
Schöllgen, ed., Escape into War? (Oxford 1990).
9. N. Ferguson, The Pity of War (New York 1999), 462. First published in the
U.K. in 1998.
10. F. Fischer, War (note 1), 23ff., J.C.G. Röhl, “An der Schwelle zum Weltkrieg,” Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen (1977): 77–134.
11. See V.R. Berghahn, “Das Kaiserreich in der Sackgasse,” Neue Politische
Literatur (1971): 494–506.

Notes

12. H.-U. Wehler, Empire (note 5), 192.
13. See, e.g., E. Eyck, Das persönliche Regiment (Zurich 1948); E. Fehrenbach, Die Wandlungen des deutschen Kaisergedankens (Munich 1969);
E.R. Huber, Deutsche Verfasssungsgeschichte seit 1789, Vol. III (Stuttgart
1963); J.C.G. Röhl, Germany without Bismarck (London 1967).
14. See H.-U. Wehler, Empire (note 5); M. Stürmer, ed., Das kaiserliche
Deutschland (Düsseldorf 1970).
15. M. Rauh, Föderalismus und Parlamentarismus (Düsseldorf 1972); idem,
Die Parlamentarisierung des Deutschen Reiches (Düsseldorf 1977).
16. See R.J. Evans, ed., Society and Politics in Wilhelmine Germany (London
1978); G. Eley, Reshaping the German Right (New Haven 1980); D.
Blackbourn, Class, Religion and Local Politics in Wilhelmine Germany
(New Haven 1980).
17. E.P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class (London 1963).
18. G. Eley and D. Blackbourn, The Peculiarities of German History (Oxford
1984).
19. See H.-U. Wehler, “Deutscher Sonderweg oder allgemeine Probleme des
westlichen Kapitalismus?” Merkur (1981): 478–87; J. Kocka, “Der deutsche
‘Sonderweg’ in der Diskussion,” German Studies Review (1982): 365–79.
For summaries of the debate see R.G. Moeller, “The Kaiserreich Recast?”, Journal of Social History (1984): 655–83; R. Fletcher, “Recent
Developments in West German Historiography: The Bielefeld School and
its Critics,” German Studies Review (1984): 423–50; J. Retallack, “Social
History with a Vengeance? Some Reactions to Hans-Ulrich Wehler’s ‘Das
deutsche Kaiserreich’,” ibid., 451–80. See also S. Berger, The Search for
Normality (New York 1997).
20. G. Eley, From Unification to Nazism (Cambridge, Mass., 1986); idem,
ed., Society, Culture, and the State (Ann Arbor 1996); H.-U. Wehler, “A
Guide to Future Research on the Kaiserreich?” Central European History
(1996): 541–72, and Eley’s reply, “Theory and the Kaiserreich,” ibid.
(1998): 197–227.
21. T. Nipperdey, “1933 und die Kontinuität der deutschen Geschichte,” Historische Zeitschrift (1978): 86–111; J. Kocka, “Nach dem Ende des Sonderwegs. Zur Tragfähigkeit eines Konzepts,” in A. Bauerkämper et al.,
eds., Doppelte Zeitgeschichte, (Göttingen 1998), 364–75, quote, 370. He
has repeated his argument in “Asymmetrical Historical Comparison: The
Case of the German Sonderweg,” History and Theory (1999): 40–50,
quote, 45.
22. For a good digest of this research see J. Retallack, Germany in the Age
of Kaiser Wilhelm II. (New York 1996).
23. See below, pp. 121ff. For a conceptualization of the approach see C. Applegate, “A Europe of Regions. Reflections on the Historiography of Sub348

Notes

National Places in Modern Times,” American Historical Review (1999):
1157–82.
24. See, e.g., J. Retallack, ed., Saxony in German History. Culture, Society,
and Politics, 1830–1933 (Ann Arbor 2000).
25. B. Fairbairn, Democracy in the Undemocratic State. The Reichstag Elections of 1898 and 1903 (Toronto 1997); M.L. Anderson, Practicing Democracy (Princeton 2000).
26. See the summary by J. Kocka, Das lange 19. Jahrhundert (Stuttgart
2001).
27. See J. Kocka and A. Mitchell, eds., Bourgeois Society in NineteenthCentury Europe (Oxford 1993).

Economy
1. K. Borchardt, “The Industrial Revolution in Germany, 1700–1914,” in
C.M. Cipolla, ed., Fontana History of Europe, Vol.IV/1 (London 1973),
78.
2. See below, pp. 40f.
3. K. J. Bade, “Transnationale Migration und Arbeitsmarkt im Kaiserreich:
Vom Agrarstaat mit starker Industrie zum Industriestaat mit starker agrarischer Basis,” in T. Pierenkemper and R. Tilly, eds., Historische Arbeitsmarktforschung (Göttingen 1982), 182–211.
4. R. Wagenführ, Die Industriewirtschaft. Entwicklungstendenzen der deutschen und internationalen Industrieproduktion, 1860–1933 (Berlin 1933),
13.
5. See below, pp. 11f. See also H. Neuburger, German Banks and German
Economic Growth, 1871–1914 (New York 1977).
6. See below, pp. 212ff.
7. Quoted in P.-C. Witt, Die Finanzpolitik des deutschen Reiches von 1903
bis 1913 (Lübeck 1970), 60n.
8. F. Stern, Gold and Iron (London 1977), 478.
9. See below, pp. 58ff.
10. A.V. Desai, Real Wages in Germany, 1871–1913 (Oxford 1968). See also
T. Pierenkemper, “The Standard of Living and Employment in Germany,”
Journal of European Economic History (1987): 68
11. See below, pp. 228ff.
12. See below, pp. 51ff.
13. See H. Rosenberg, Grosse Depression und Bismarckzeit (Berlin 1967),
1ff.
14. See above, pp. 3ff.
15. H.-U. Wehler, Bismarck und der Imperialismus (Cologne 1969), 57.
16. See below, pp. 25ff.
349

Notes

17. R. Spree, Wachstumszyklen der deutschen Wirtschaft von 1840 bis 1880
(Göttingen 1978), 352ff.
18. See below, pp. 257ff.
19. H.-U. Wehler, Deutsche Gesellschaftsgeschichte, 1849–1914 (Munich
1995), 595ff.
20. R. Kroboth, Die Finanzpolitik des Deutschen Reiches während der Reichskanzlerschaft Bethmann Hollwegs und die Geld- und Kapitalmärkte
(Frankfurt 1986), 82.
21. Quoted ibid., 85.
22. See above, pp. 4f.
23. See F. Tipton, Regional Variations in the Economic Development of Germany during the Nineteenth Century (Middletown 1976); idem, “The Regional Dimension: Economic Geography, Economic Development, and
National Integration in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries,” in S.
Ogilvie and R. Overy, eds., Germany. A New Social and Economic History (London 2003), 1–34.
24. See below, pp. 116ff.
25. R. Heberle, Landbevölkerung und Nationalsozialismus (Stuttgart 1963),
93.
26. W. Schivelbusch, Railway Journey (Oxford 1987).
27. See below, pp. 116ff., 212ff.
28. See below, pp. 38ff. See also K.J. Bade, Population, Labour and Migration in 19th- and 20th-Century Germany (Oxford 1987).
29. See below, pp. 58ff.
30. See below, pp. 198ff.
31. See below, pp. 101ff. See also R. W. Tims, Germanizing Prussian Poland. The H-K-T Society and the Struggle for the Eastern Marches in the
German Empire (New York 1941); R. Blanke, Prussian Poland in the German Empire (Boulder 1981).
32. See, e.g., W. Hagen, Germans, Poles, and Jews. The Nationality Conflict
in the Prussian East, 1772–1914 (Chicago 1980). See also below, pp.
101ff.
33. See K. Saul, Staat, Industrie, Arbeiterbewegung im Kaiserreich (Düsseldorf 1974), 51ff.
34. See below, pp. 228ff.
35. See below, pp. 97ff.
36. See R. Kroboth (note 20), 49ff., and below, pp. 185ff.
37. See below, pp. 208ff.
38. J. Kocka, Unternehmensverwaltung und Angestelltenschaft (Stuttgart 1969).
39. See below, pp. 65ff.
40. See below, pp. 58ff.
41. J. Kocka (note 38), 275.
350

Notes

42. See below, pp. 158ff.
43. Quoted in F.R. Petsch, Zur Entwicklung der Wissenschaftspolitik in
Deutschland (Berlin 1974), 140f.
44. See ibid.
45. R. Vierhaus and B. vom Brocke, eds., Forschung im Spannungsfeld von
Politik und Gesellschaft (Stuttgart 1988); J.A. Johnson, The Kaiser’s
Chemists (Chapel Hill 1990).
46. G. Hollenberg, Englisches Interesse am Kaiserreich (Wiesbaden 1974).

Society
1. K. J. Bade, Population, Labour and Migration in 19th- and 20th-Century
Germany (Oxford 1987).
2. See below, pp. 256ff.
3. See below, pp. 113ff.
4. M. Stürmer, Das ruhelose Reich (Berlin 1983), 68.
5. A. Berger-Thimme, Wohnungsfrage und Sozialstaat (Frankfurt 1976).
6. K. Bergmann, Agrarromantik und Grosstadtfeindschaft (Meisenheim 1970).
7. See below, pp. 240ff.
8. See above, pp. 5ff.
9. J. Kocka, Die Angestellten in der deutschen Geschichte (Göttingen 1981).
10. Quoted in L. Cecil, Albert Ballin (Princeton 1967), 123.
11. D. Bald, Vom Kaiserheer zur Bundeswehr (Frankfurt 1981), 21.
12. D. L. Augustine-Perez, “Very Wealthy Businessmen in Imperial Germany,” Journal of Social History (1988): 299–321. See also idem, Patricians and Parvenus (Oxford 1994).
13. D. Crew, Bochum (Frankfurt 1980), 87ff.
14. J. Mooser, Arbeiterleben in Deutschland (Frankfurt 1984), 118.
15. See below, pp. 113ff.
16. H. Gollwitzer, Die Standesherren (Göttingen 1964), 263.
17. J. Kocka, “Bürgertum und bürgerliche Gesellschaft im 19. Jahrhundert,”
in idem, ed., Bürgertum und bürgerliche Gesellschaft im 19. Jahrhundert,
Vol. I (Munich 1988), 65.
18. W.E. Mosse, “Adel und Bürgertum im Europa des 19. Jahrhunderts,” in
J. Kocka, ed., Bürgertum (note 17), Vol II., 289.
19. R. Spree, Health and Social Class in Imperial Germany (Oxford 1988), 39.
20. According to R.A. Dickler quoted in ibid., 147.
21. W.G. Hoffmann, Das Wachstum der deutschen Wirtschaft seit der Mitte
des 19. Jahrhunderts (Berlin 1965), 659.
22. J.S. Roberts, “Drink and Working-Class Living Standards in Late 19thCentury Germany,” in W. Conze and U. Engelhardt, eds., Arbeiterexistenzen im 19. Jahrhundert (Stuttgart 1981), 79.
351

Notes

23. See below, pp. 228ff.
24. F. Brüggemeier and L. Niethammer, “Lodgers, Schnapps Casinos, and
Working-Class Colonies in a Heavy-Industrial Region,” in G.G. Iggers,
ed., The Social History of Politics (Leamington Spa 1985), 257f. See also
W. Hegemann, Das Steinere Berlin (Berlin 1930).
25. See above, pp. 5ff.
26. M. Mitterauer, Ledige Mütter (Munich 1983), 33.
27. J. Woyke, Birth Control in Germany, 1871–1933 (London 1988).
28. See above, pp. 51ff.
29. M. Hahn, Praktisches Kochbuch für die bürgerliche Küche (Neubabelsberg 1913), 1f.
30. R. Vierhaus, ed., Das Tagebuch der Baronin Spitzemberg (Munich 1960).
31. J.C.G. Röhl, “Kaiser Wilhelm II. Eine Charakterskizze,” in idem, Kaiser,
Hof und Staat (Munich 1987), 17–34. See also idem, Wilhelm II. (Munich
1993).
32. See below, pp. 82ff.
33. Quoted in W. Von Hippel, “Industrieller Wandel im ländlichen Raum,”
Archiv für Sozialgeschichte (1979): 105. See also K. Maase, “Kinder as
Fremde—Kinder als Feinde. Halbwüchsige, Massenkultur und Erwachsene im wilhelminschen Kaiserreich,” Historische Anthropologie (1996):
93–126.
34. See above, pp. 49ff.
35. See below, pp. 232ff.
36. K. Mannheim, “Das Problem der Generationen,” Kölner Vierteljahrshefte
für Soziologie (1928/29): 157–85 and 309–30; H. Jäger, “Generationen in
der Geschichte,” Geschichte und Gesellschaft (1977): 429–52; A.B. Spitzer,
“The Historical Problem of Generations,” American Historical Review
(1973): 1353–85.
37. See below, pp. 131ff., 248ff.
38. R. Wohl, The Generation of 1914 (Cambridge, Mass., 1979).
39. W. Laqueur, Young Germany (New York 1962).
40. K.H. Jarausch, Students, Society, and Politics in Imperial Germany
(Princeton 1982), 238.
41. F. Meyer, Schule der Untertanen (Hamburg 1976).
42. M. Lamberti, “Elementary School Teachers and the Struggle against Social Democracy in Wilhelmine Germany,” History of Education Quarterly
(1992): 73–97.
43. See below, pp. 240ff.
44. See below, pp. 252f.
45. See below, pp. 285ff.
46. See below, pp. 169ff.
47. See below, pp. 214ff.
352

Notes

48. See, e.g., J.C. Fout, “Sexual Politics in Wilhelmine Germany,” Journal of
the History of Sexuality (1992): 388–421; R.J. Evans, ed., The German
Underworld (London 1988); E.A. Johnson, Urbanization and Crime.
Germany, 1871–1914 (New York 1995).
49. See below, pp. 244ff. See also H.-U. Wehler, Deutsche Gesellschaftsgeschichte, 1849–1914 (Munich 1995), 892ff.
50. See above, pp. 45ff.
51. T. Nipperdey, “Religion und Gesellschaft: Deutschland um 1900,” Historische Zeitschrift (1988): 612.
52. M. Kaplan, The Jewish Feminist Movement in Germany (Westport, Conn.,
1979), 96f.
53. See above, pp. 64ff.
54. See below, pp. 97ff.
55. W.E. Mosse, Jews in the German Economy (Oxford 1987).
56. P.-C. Witt, “The Prussian Landrat as Tax Official, 1891–1918,” in G.G.
Iggers, ed., The Social History of Politics (Leamington Spa 1985), 137–54.
57. See, e.g., H. W. Smith, “The Discourse of Usury: Relations between
Christians and Jews in the German Countryside, 1880–1914,” Central European History (1999): 255–76, and the studies listed in the Bibliography.
58. See above, pp. 10ff.
59. See below, pp. 214ff.
60. See below, pp. 218f.
61. E. Hauschildt, Polnische Arbeitsemigranten in Wilhelmsburg bei Hamburg während des Kaiserreichs und der Weimarer Republik (Dortmund
1986), 67.
62. C. Klessmann, Polnische Bergarbeiter im Ruhrgebiet, 1870–1945 (Göttingen 1978), 93.
63. H.-U. Wehler, “Von den ‘Reichsfeinden’ zur ‘Reichskristallnacht’: Polenpolitik im deutschen Kaiserreich, 1871–1918,” in idem, ed., Krisenherde
des Kaiserreichs, 1871–1918 (Göttingen 1970), 187.
64. Quoted in C. Klessmann, Polnische Bergarbeiter (note 62), 66.
65. See below, pp. 252f. See also H. Hiery, Reichstagswahlen im Reichsland
(Düsseldorf 1986); D. Silverman, The Reluctant Union (Philadelphia
1972).
66. See below, pp. 252f.
67. R. Wohl, The Generation of 1914 (note 38), 81.
68. H. W. Smith, German Nationalism and Religious Conflict. Culture, Ideology, Politics, 1970–1914 (Princeton 1995), 13; W. Spohn, Piety, Secularism, Socialism, unpublished manuscript, n.d., 11, and less categorically,
idem, “Religion and Working-Class Formation in Imperial Germany,
1871–1914,” Politics and Society (1991): 109–32.
69. See the review in German History (1990): 211.
353

Notes

70. W. Brepohl, Der Aufbau des Ruhrvolkes im Zuge der Ost-West-Wanderung
(Recklinghausen 1948); C. Applegate, A Nation of Provincials. The German Idea of Heimat (Berkeley 1990).
71. K. Rohe, “Regionalkultur, regionale Identität und Regionalismus im Ruhrgebiet: Empirische Sachverhalte und theoretische Überlegungen,” in W.
Lipp, ed., Industriegesellschaft und Regionalkultur (Berlin 1984), 137.
72. See above, pp. 51ff.
73. R. Schüren, Soziale Mobilität (St. Katherinen 1989), 234.
74. H. Gollwitzer, Die Standesherren (note 16), 293.
75. See below, pp. 224ff.

Culture
1. P. Gay, Freud, Jews, and Other Germans (Oxford 1978), 21f. See also M.
Jeffries, Imperial Culture in Germany, 1871–1918 (New York 2003).
2. See, e.g., F. Lenger, Industrielle Revolution und Nationalstaatsgründung
(Stuttgart 2003), 232ff.
3. C.E. Schorske, Fin de Siècle Vienna (Cambridge 1981), 310. See also
U. Lehnert, Der Kaiser und die Siegesallee (Berlin 1998); R. Koshar,
From Monuments to Traces. Artifacts of German Memory, 1870–1990
(Berkeley 2001).
4. See, e.g., D. Augustine, Patricians and Parvenus (Oxford 1994).
5. J. Penzler, ed., Die Reden Kaiser Wilhelms II. in den Jahren 1888–1912,
Vol. III (Berlin 1907), 61f.
6. See above, pp. 118f.
7. H.A. Frenzel, Geschichte des Theaters (Frankfurt 1984), 490.
8. Quoted in H. Schanze, “Theater—Politik—Literatur,” in H.-P. Bayerndörfer et al., eds., Literatur und Theater im Wilhelminischen Zeitalter (Tübingen 1978), 285.
9. Quoted in P. Gay, Weimar Culture (Harmondsworth 1968), 4n. See also
G. Bollenbeck, Tradition, Avantgarde, Reaktion. Deutsche Kontroversen
um die kulturelle Moderne, 1880–1945 (Frankfurt 1999).
10. Quoted in F. May, Johannes Brahms (Munich 1983), Part II, 167.
11. See below, pp. 166f.
12. See below, pp. 133ff.
13. See below, pp. 214ff.
14. See below, pp. 166f.
15. See above, pp. 78ff. See also below, pp. 248ff.
16. C.E. Schorske, Vienna (note 3), xxvi.
17. Quoted in P. Gradenwitz, Kleine Kulturgeschichte der Klaviermusik (Munich 1986), 242.
18. Quoted in W. Schuh, Richard Strauss (Munich 1976), 183.
354

Notes

19. A. Harman et al., Man and His Music, Vol. IV: W Mellers, Romanticism
and the 20th Century (London 1969), 186.
20. See P. Paret, The Berlin Secession (Cambridge, Mass., 1980), 44.
21. H. Kramer, Deutsche Kultur zwischen 1871 und 1918 (Frankfurt 1971),
219.
22. F. Trommler, “Theorien und Programme der literarischen Bewegungen,”
in H. A. Glaser, ed., Deutsche Literatur (Reinbek 1987), 62.
23. P. Paret, “The Tschudi Affair,” Journal of Modern History (1981):
589–618.
24. R. Vierhaus, ed., Das Tagebuch der Baronin Spitzemberg (Munich 1990),
396. See also, B.I. Lewis, Art for All? (Princeton 2003).
25. R. Lenman, “From ‘Brown Sauce’ to ‘Plein Air’: Taste and the Art Market in Germany, 1889–1910,” in F. Forster-Hahn, ed., Imagining Modern
German Culture, 1889–1910 (Washington 1996), 53–69.
26. See below, pp. 224f.
27. C. David, “Stefan George: Aesthete or Terrorist?” in M. Baumont et al.,
eds., The Third Reich (New York 1955), 287–315.
28. R.M. Rilke, Gesammelte Briefe, Vol. II (Berlin 1939), 432.
29. H. Mann, Der Untertan (Berlin 1929), 142.
30. R. Lothar, Kritische Studien zur Psychologie der Litteratur [sic] (Munich
1895), 19.
31. F. Berteaux, “Die naturalistische Revolution in Berlin und München,” in
Bayerndörfer (note 8), 440f.
32. D. Welch, “Cinema and Society in Imperial Germany,” German History
(1990): 29.
33. See below, pp. 234ff.
34. On the “subculture” position see G. Roth, The Social Democrats of Imperial Germany (Totowa, N.J. 1961); on the “alternative culture” position
see V. Lidtke, The Alternative Culture (Oxford 1985).
35. For the following data see V. Lidtke, Culture (note 34), passim.
36. See, e.g., C.W. Davies, Theater for the People. The Story of the Volksbühne (Austin 1977).
37. See note 34 above.
38. V. Lidtke, Culture (note 34), 9.
39. D. Langewiesche and K. Schönhoven “Arbeiterbibliotheken und Arbeiterlektüre im wilhelminischen Deutschland,” Archiv für Sozialgeschichte
(1976): 135–204.
40. See above, pp. 113ff.
41. See below, pp. 189ff.
42. Quoted in J. Campbell, The German Werkbund (Princeton 1978), 67.
43. See above, pp. 33ff.
44. See above, pp. 36f.
355

Notes

45. F. Ringer, The Decline of the German Mandarins (Cambridge, Mass.,
1969).
46. W.-H. Friedrich and W. Killy, eds., Das Fischer-Lexikon: Literatur, Vol.
II/1 (Frankfurt 1965), 327.
47. Quoted in G.G. Iggers, Deutsche Geschichtswissenschaft (Munich 1971),
230.
48. See, e.g., A. Einstein, Relativity. The Special and General Theory (New
York 1961).
49. See above, pp. 36f.
50. Quoted in J. L. Heilbron, The Dilemmas of an Upright Man (Berkeley
1986), 10.
51. C.E. Schorske, German Social Democracy (New York 1972).
52. Quoted in G.G. Iggers, Geschichtswissenschaft (note 47), 256.
53. Quoted in ibid., 199n.
54. F. Lenger, Industrielle Revolution (note 2), 226.
55. G.G. Iggers, Geschichtswissenschaft (note 47), 179.
56. Quoted in ibid., 179.
57. See, e.g., T. Nipperdey, Deutsche Geschichte, 1866–1918, Vol. I (Munich
1990), 686ff.
58. R. Hinton Thomas, Nietzsche in German Politics and Society, 1890–1918
(Manchester 1983).
59. Quoted in E. Fehrenbach, “Rankerenaissance und Imperialismus in der
wilhelminischen Zeit,” in B. Faulenbach, ed., Geschichtswissenschaft in
Deutschland (Munich 1974), 60.
60. K. Koszyk, Deutsche Presse im 19. Jahrhundert (Berlin 1966), also for
the following.
61. A. Daum, Wissenschaftspopularisierung im 19. Jahrhundert (Munich
1998), 14.
62. See below, pp. 203ff.
63. See, e.g., H.-U. Wehler, Deutsche Gesellschaftsgeschichte, 1849–1914
(Munich 1995), 429ff.
64. G.D. Stark, Entrepreneurs of Ideology: Neoconservative Publishers in
Germany, 1890–1933 (Chapel Hill 1981).

Politics
1. See below, pp. 189ff.
2. For the full text see E. Hucko, ed., The Democratic Tradition. Four Constitutions (Leamington Spa 1987), 121ff.
3. F. Lenger, Industrielle Revolution und Nationalstaatsgründung (Stuttgart
2003), 280ff.

356

Notes

4. H. Pogge von Strandmann, “Permanenz der Staatsstreichdrohung,” in idem
and I. Geiss, Die Erforderlichkeit des Unmöglichen (Frankfurt 1965),
7–45.
5. See below, pp. 233ff.
6. T.S. Hamerow, “The Origins of Mass Politics in Germany, 1866–1867,” in
I. Geiss and B.-J. Wendt, eds., Deutschland in der Weltpolitik im 19. und
20. Jahrhundert (Düsseldorf 1973), 105–20.
7. H. Goldschmidt, Das Reich und Preussen im Kampf um die Führung
(Berlin 1931), 69.
8. Quoted in “Der Reichstag im Zeitalter des persönlichen Regiments Wilhelm II.,” in E. Deuerlein, ed., Der Reichstag (Bonn 1963), 63.
9. G. A. Ritter, Die deutschen Parteien (Göttingen 1985), 36.
10. Thus the title of H. Goldschmidt’s book (note 7).
11. H.-U. Wehler, Deutsche Gesellschaftsgeschichte, 1849–1914, (Munich
1995), 355ff. M. Stürmer, Regierung und Reichstag im Bismarckreich
(Düsseldorf 1974), 311ff.
12. J.C.G. Röhl, “Der ‘Königsmechanismus’ im Kaiserreich,” Historische
Zeitschrift (1983): 539–77; idem, Germany without Bismarck (London
1967).
13. H.-U. Wehler, The German Empire (Leamington Spa 1985), 52ff.
14. M. Rauh, Föderalimsus und Parlamentarismus im Wilhelminischen Reich
(Düsseldorf 1973); idem, Die Parlamentarisierung des Deutschen Reiches
(Düsseldorf 1977).
15. R.J. Evans, ed., Society and Politics in Wilhelmine Germany (London
1978); G. Eley, Reshaping the German Right (New Haven 1980).
16. M. L. Anderson, Practicing Democracy (Princeton 2000).
17. This is above all the position of H.-U. Wehler (note 13). For a while he
and some other scholars tried to conceptualize the problem not only with
the help of Max Weber’s sociology of domination, but also with Rudolf
Hilferding’s notion of “Organized Capitalism.” See H. A. Winkler, ed.,
Organisierter Kapitalismus (Göttingen 1974); J. Kocka, “Organisierter
Kapitalismus im Kaiserreich?” Historische Zeitschrift (1980): 613–31.
18. See above, pp. 24ff.
19. P.-C. Witt, “Finanzpolitik und sozialer Staat,” in H.-U. Wehler, Sozialgeschichte Heute (Göttingen 1974), 565.
20. See below, pp. 198ff.
21. Thus G. Jèze quoted in P.-C., “Finanzpolitik” (note 19). 565.
22. P.-C. Witt, “Finanzpolitik” (note 19), 22f.
23. H. Bechtel, Wirtschafts- und Sozialgeschichte Deutschlands (Munich 1967),
398.
24. See below, pp. 250ff.

357

Notes

25. See above all P.-C. Witt, Die Finanzpolitik des Deutschen Reiches von
1903 bis 1913 (Lübeck 1970).
26. See below, pp. 225ff.
27. V. R. Berghahn, “Das Kaiserreich in der Sackgasse,” Neue Politische Literatur (1971): 494–506.
28. T. Nipperdey, Deutsche Geschichte, 1866–1918, Vol. II (Munich 1992),
729ff.; M.L. Anderson, Practicing (note 16).
29. E. Deuerlein, “Der Reichstag in Verfassungsrecht und Verfassungswirklichkeit, 1871–1945,” in idem, Der Reichstag (note 8), 21.
30. M. Rauh, Parlamentarisierung (note 14), 7.
31. G. A. Ritter, Parteien (note 9), 86.
32. M. Stürmer, Regierung (note 11), 9.
33. See above, pp. 189ff.
34. M. L. Anderson, Practicing (note 16).
35. T. Nipperdey, Die Organisation der deutschen Parteien (Düsseldorf 1961),
24.
36. S. Neumann, Die Deutschen Parteien (Berlin 1932). See also A. Griessner, Massenverbände und Massenparteien im wilhelminischen Reich (Düsseldorf 2000).
37. R. Michels, Zur Soziologie des Parteiwesens in der modernen Demokratie (Berlin 1957).
38. Quoted in H.-U. Wehler, Gesellschaftsgeschichte (note 11), 825.
39. Quoted in M. Stürmer, Der Reichstag in der ersten Legislaturperiode,
1871–1873, unpublished manuscript, n.d., 20.
40. Quoted in ibid., 19.
41. See above, pp. 193ff.
42. H. Best, “Politische Modernisierung und parlamentarische Führungsgruppen in Deutschland, 1867–1918,” Historical Social Research (1988): 5–74.
43. Ibid., 34.
44. Quoted in V. Ullrich, Die nervöse Grossmacht. Aufstieg und Untergang
des deutschen Kaiserreichs, 1871–1918 (Frankfurt 1997), 37.
45. R.J. Evans, “Wahlrechtsraub, Massenstreik und Schopenstehkrawall. Der
Kampf gegen die Wahlrechtsverschlechterung, 1905–6,” in J. Berlin, ed.,
Das andere Hamburg. Freiheitliche Bestrebungen in der Hansestadt seit
dem Spätmittelalter (Hamburg 1981), 162–80.
46. H. Rosenberg, “The Pseudodemocratisation of the Junker Class,” in G.G.
Iggers, ed., The Social History of Politics (Leamington Spa 1985), 106.
47. M. L. Anderson, Practicing (note 16). See also S. Suval, Electoral Politics in Wilhelmine Germany (Chapel Hill 1985).
48. K. Rohe, “Die ‘verspätete’ Region,” in P. Steinbach, ed., Probleme der
politischen Partizipation im Modernisierungsprozess (Stuttgart 1982),
231–52; idem, Vom Revier zum Ruhrgebiet (Essen 1986).
358

Notes

49. See below, pp. 218ff.
50. See above, pp. 185ff.
51. Quoted in W. Mommsen, ed., Die deutschen Parteiprogramme, Vol. II
(Berlin 1932), 3. On the Free Conservatives, see V. Stalmann, Die Partei
Bismarcks (Düsseldorf 1999); M. Alexander, Die Freikonservative Partei,
1890–1918 (Düsseldorf 2000).
52. W. Mommsen, ed., Parteiprogramme (note 51), 47ff.
53. R. Levy, The Downfall of the Anti-Semitic Parties in Imperial Germany
(New Haven 1975).
54. See above, pp. 97ff. and below, pp. 218f.
55. Quoted in W. Mommsen, ed., Parteiprogramme (note 51), 83ff.
56. See below, pp. 236ff.
57. M.R. Lepsius, “Parteiensysteme und Sozialstruktur,” in W. Abel, ed.,
Wirtschaft, Geschichte und Wirtschaftsgeschichte (Stuttgart 1966), 371–
89. See also above pp. 88ff.
58. See above, pp. 121ff.
59. See above, pp. 25ff.
60. S. Mielke, Der Hansabund für Gewerbe, Handel und Industrie, 1909–
1914 (Göttingen 1976).
61. See below, pp. 20ff.
62. J.J. Kulczycki, The Foreign Worker and the German Labor Movement
(Oxford 1994).
63. See below pp. 240ff.; F. Boll, Massenbewegungen in Niedersachsen,
1906–1920 (Bonn 1981).
64. See below, pp. 235ff.
65. See above, pp. 41ff.
66. H.-J. Puhle, Von der Agrarkrise zum Präfaschismus (Wiesbaden 1972).
67. R. Chickering, We Men Who Feel Most German (London 1984); G. Eley,
Reshaping (note 15); M.S. Coetzee, The German Army League (New
Haven 1990).
68. See G. Eley, Reshaping (note 15).
69. See, e.g., C. Applegate, A Nation of Provincials: The German Idea of
Heimat (Berkeley 1990); A. Confino, The Nation as a Local Metaphor.
Württemberg, Imperial Germany, and National Memory, 1871–1918
(Chapel Hill 1997).
70. See I. Beilin, Celebrating the Nation’s Past: The 1913 Commemorations
and the Varieties of National Identity in Late Imperial Germany, PhD thesis, Columbia University, 1999; J.P. Smith, “The Monarchy vs. the Nation:
The ‘Festive Year’ 1913 in Wilhelmine Germany,” German Studies Review
(2000): 257–74.
71. See above, pp. 206f.
72. See above, pp. 87ff.
359

Notes

73. R. Chickering, Imperial Germany and a World without War (Princeton
1975), 37, 387f.
74. C. Klessmann, Polnische Bergarbeiter im Ruhrgebiet (Göttingen 1978),
103.
75. See, e.g., R. W. Tims, Germanizing Prussian Poland (New York 1941);
R. Blanke, Prussian Poland in the German Empire, 1871–1900 (Boulder
1981).
76. See above, pp. 202f.
77. See above, pp. 97ff.
78. M. Kaplan, The Jewish Feminist Movement in Germany (Westport 1979),
14.
79. See above, pp. 49ff.
80. See above, pp. 58ff.
81. U. Planert, Antifeminismus im Kaiserreich (Göttingen 1998).
82. U. Frevert, Women in German History (Oxford 1989), 138ff. See also
R. J. Evans, The Feminist Movement in Germany, 1894–1933 (London
1976); T. Kühne, Dreiklassenwahlrecht und Wahlkultur in Preussen, 1867–
1914 (Düsseldorf 1994).
83. J.C.G. Röhl, Germany (note 12).
84. I. V. Hull, The Entourage of the Kaiser (Cambridge 1982).
85. K. H. Jarausch, The Enigmatic Chancellor (New Haven 1973), 349ff.
86. I.V. Hull, The Entourage (note 84), 43.
87. P.-C. Witt, “Die Wohnverhältnisse der Arbeiter, Angestellten und Unterbeamten der Stadt Harburg zu Beginn des 20. Jahrhunderts,” in W. Treue,
ed., Geschichte als Aufgabe (Berlin 1988), 602–28; idem, “Kommunalpolitik in Harburg zwischen Interessen lokaler Eliten und Entstehung einer
moderen Leistungsverwaltung,” in J. Ellermeyer, ed., Harburg (Lüneburg
1988), 219–53.
88. See above, pp. 38f.
89. W. R. Krabbe, “Munizipalsozialismus und Interventionsstaat. Die Ausbreitung der städtischen Leistungsverwaltung im Kaiserreich,” Geschichte
in Wissenschaft und Unterricht (1979): 265–83. See also M. Hübner, Kommunalfinanzen, Kommunalunternehmen und Kommunalpolitik im Deutschen
Kaiserreich (Münster 1998).
90. Quoted in W. Abelshauser, “Staat, Infrastruktur und regionaler Wohlstandsausgleich im Preussen der Hochindustrialisierung,” in F. Blaich,
ed., Staatliche Umverteilungspolitik in historischer Perspektive (Berlin
1980), 47.
91. P.-C. Witt, “The Prussian Landrat as Tax Official, 1891–1918,” in G.G.
Iggers, ed., Social History (note 46), 137–54.
92. See, e.g., P. Weindling, Health, Race and German Politics between National Unification and Nazism (Cambridge 1989).
360

Notes

93. C. Sachsse and F. Tennstedt, Geschichte der Armenfürsorge in Deutschland, Vol. I (Stuttgart 1980).
94. G. A. Ritter, Social Welfare in Germany and Britain (Leamington Spa
1983); V. Hentschel, Geschichte der deutschen Sozialpolitik (Frankfurt
1983).
95. T. Nipperdey, Deutsche Geschichte, 1866–1918, Vol. II (Munich 1990),
341ff.
96. Quoted in J. Ehmer, Sozialgeschichte des Alters (Frankfurt 1990), 47.
97. G. A. Ritter, Social Welfare (note 94).
98. V. Hentschel, Geschichte (note 94), 9.
99. R. J. Evans, The German Underworld (London 1988), 14f.
100. Quoted in M. Makela, “The Politics of Parody: Some Thoughts on the
‘Modern’ in Turn-of-the-Century Munich,” in F. Forster-Hahn, Imagining
Modern German Culture: 1889–1910 (Washington 1996), 194. See also
P. Jelavich, “Paradoxes of Censorship in Modern Germany,” in M.S. Micale and R. L. Dietle, eds., Enlightenment, Passion, Modernity. Historical
Essays in European Thought and Culture (Stanford 2000), 265–85.
101. G.D. Stark, “Cinema, Society, and the State. Policing the Film Industry
in Imperial Germany,” in idem and B.K. Lackner, eds., Essays on Culture
and Society in Modern Germany (College Station, Texas, 1982), 122–66;
P. Jelavich, “‘Darf ich mich hier amüsieren?’ Bürgertum und früher Film,”
in M. Hettling and S.-L. Hoffmann., eds., Der bürgerliche Wertehimmel
(Göttingen 2000), 283–303.
102. R. J. Evans, ed., Kneipengespräche im Kaiserreich (Reinbek 1989), 8ff.
103. Idem, Death in Hamburg (Oxford 1987), 2.
104. Quoted in V.R. Berghahn, Der Tirpitz-Plan (Düsseldorf 1971), 263.
105. H. Pogge von Strandmann, “Permanenz” (note 4), 7–45.
106. T. Lindenberger, Strassenpolitik. Zur Sozialgeschichte der öffentlichen
Ordnung in Berlin, 1900–1914 (Berlin 1995).
107. Quoted in W. Deist, “Die Armee in Staat und Gesellschaft, 1890–1914,”
in M. Stürmer, ed., Das kaiserliche Deutschland, 1871–1918 (Düsseldorf
1970), 317.
108. Quoted ibid., 319.
109. Quoted in K. Saul, Staat, Industrie, Arbeiterbewegung im Kaiserreich
(Düsseldorf 1974), 275.
110. V.R. Berghahn, Germany and the Approach of War in 1914 (London
1973), 214ff.
111. Quoted in V.R. Berghahn, Tirpitz-Plan (note 104), 270. For a complete
set of the relevant documents see idem and W. Deist, eds., Rüstung im Zeichen der wilhelminischen Weltpolitik (Düsseldorf 1988), esp. 371ff.
112. W. Loth, “Das Zentrum un die Verfassungskrise des Kaiserreichs,”
Geschichte in Wissenschaft und Unterricht (1987): 213.
361

Notes

113. Quoted in F. Lenger, Industrielle Revolution und Nationlstaatsgründung
(Stuttgart 2003), 371.
114. H.-U. Wehler, Gesellschaftsgeschichte (note 11), 894ff. See also M. Gross,
The War against Catholicism (Ann Arbor 2004).
115. V. Lidtke, The Outlawed Party (Princeton 1966).
116. K.D. Barkin, “The Second Founding of the Reich,” German Studies Review (1987): 219–36.
117. H. Pogge von Strandmann, “Domestic Origins of Germany’s Colonial
Expansion under Bismarck,” Past & Present (1969): 140–59.
118. J.C.G. Röhl, Wilhelm II. Der Aufbau der Persönlichen Monarchie, 188–
1900 (Munich 2001), 21ff.
119. Ibid., 350ff.
120. Quoted in V.R. Berghahn, Tirpitz-Plan (note 104), 232. See also above
pp. 212ff.
121. See ibid., 108ff.
122. R.J. Ross, The Beleaguered Tower (Notre Dame 1976).
123. E. Kehr, Battleship Building and Party Politics in Germany (Chicago
1973).
124. V.R. Berghahn, Tirpitz-Plan (note 104), 173ff.
125. See, e.g., G. Eley, “Sammlungspolitik, Social Imperialism, and the
Navy Law of 1899,” Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen (1974): 29–63.
126. K.A. Lerman, The Chancellor as Courtier. Bernhard von Bülow and the
Governance of Germany, 1900–1909 (Cambridge 1990); P. Winzen,
Bülows Weltmachtkonzept (Boppard 1977); idem, Bernhard Fürst von
Bülow (Göttingen 2003).
127. P.-C. Witt, Die Finanzpolitik (note 25), 58ff. See also above pp. 185ff.
128. Ibid., 199ff.
129. See, e.g., V. Ullrich, Grossmacht (note 44), 223ff.
130. Quoted in E. von Vietsch, Bethmann Hollweg (Boppard 1969), 169.
131. See above, pp. 241f.
132. E. Kolb, Der Weg aus dem Krieg (Munich 1989).
133. A. Hillgruber, “Die ‘Krieg-in-Sicht’-Krise 1875,” in E. Schulin, ed.,
Wegscheide der Politik der europäischen Grossmächte in der späten Bismarckzeit (Wiesbaden 1968), 239–53.
134. See, e.g., K. Hildebrand, Das vergangene Reich (Munich 1995), 50ff.
135. See above, pp. 101ff.
136. J. A. Nichols, Germany after Bismarck (Cambridge, Mass., 1958).
137. P. M. Kennedy, The Rise of the Anglo-German Antagonism (London
1980).
138. See above, pp. 246f.
139. R. Weitowitz, Deutsche Politik und Handelspolitik unter Reichskanzler
Leo von Caprivi, 1890–1894 (Düsseldorf 1978).
362

Notes

140. P. Winzen, Weltmachtkonzept (note 126).
141. See V. R. Berghahn, Germany (note 110), 35ff.
142. K. Hildebrand, “Imperialismus, Wettrüsten und Kriegsausbruch,” Neue
Politische Literatur (1975): 160–94 (Part I), 339–64 (Part II).
143. See above, pp. xiif.
144. E. Kehr, Economic Interest, Militarism and Foreign Policy (Berkeley
1977), esp. his essay on “Anglophobia and Weltpolitik.” See also M. Epkenhans, Die wilhelminische Flottenrüstung (Stuttgart 1991).
145. C. Andrew, Théophile Delcassé and the Making of the Entente Cordiale,
1898–1905 (London 1968).
146. G. D. Crothers, The German Elections of 1907 (New York 1941). See
also above pp. 251f.
147. Quoted in W. Zank, “Panthersprung nach Agadir,” Die Zeit, 19 July
1991, 13. See also T. Meyer, “Endlich eine Tat, eine befreiende Tat…” Alfred von Kiderlen-Wächters “Panthersprung nach Agadir,” (Husum 2000).
148. K. Hildebrand, “Zwischen Allianz und Antagonismus,” in H. Dollinger,
ed., Weltpolitik, Europagedanke, Regionalismus (Münster 1982), 323. See
also J. Angelow, Kalkül oder Prestige? Der Zweibund am Vorabend des
Ersten Weltkrieges (Cologne 2000).

World War I
1. Falkenhayn’s Niederschrift in A. von Tirpitz, Deutsche Ohnmachtspolitik
im Weltkriege (Berlin 1926), 18f.
2. See, e.g., R. F. Hamilton and H.H. Herwig, eds., Origins of World War I
(Cambridge 2003).
3. Quoted in I. Geiss, Julikrise und Kriegsausbruch 1914, Vol. II (Hanover
1963/64), 372f.
4. V.R. Berghahn, Germany and the Approach of War in 1914 (London 1973),
213ff.
5. Ibid., 214f.
6. Quoted in W. Görlitz, The Kaiser and His Court (London 1961), 8.
7. Quoted in K.H. Jarausch, The Enigmatic Chancellor (New Haven 1972),
169.
8. Quoted in F. Fischer, Krieg der Illusionen (Düsseldorf 1969), 713.
9. Quoted in J.C.G. Röhl, “Admiral von Müller and the Approach of War,
1911–1914,” Historical Journal (1969): 670.
10. F. Fischer, Krieg (note 8), Engl. transl. London 1973. His earlier book
Griff nach der Weltmacht (Düsseldorf 1961) was translated as Germany’s
War Aims in the First World War (London 1969).
11. K.H. Jarausch, Chancellor (note 7), 148ff.
12. V.R. Berghahn, War (note 4), 196ff.
363

Notes

13. Ibid., 198f.
14. K.D. Erdmann, ed., Kurt Riezler—Tagebücher, Aufsärze, Dokumente (Göttingen 1972).
15. Quoted in K.H. Jarausch, Chancellor (note 7), 160.
16. Quoted in V.R. Berghahn, War (note 4), 201.
17. Quoted in I. Geiss, ed., Julikrise (note 3), Vol. I, 189.
18. Ibid., 200.
19. Ibid., 228.
20. Ibid., 265.
21. B. Sösemann, “Die Tagebücher Kurt Riezlers,” Historische Zeitschrift
(1983): 327–69.
22. K.D. Erdmann, “Zur Echtheit der Tagebücher Kurt Riezlers,” in ibid.,
371–402.
23. I. Geiss, ed., Julikrise (note 3), 87.
24. Quoted in ibid., 86.
25. Quoted in V.R. Berghahn and W. Deist, “Kaiserliche Marine und
Kriegsausbruch 1914,” Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen (1970): 45.
26. Quoted in L. Albertini, The Origins of the War of 1914, Vol. II (Oxford
1965), 154.
27. J. Joll, The Origins of the First World War (London 1984), 171ff., 196.
28. K. Wernecke, Der Wille zur Weltgeltung (Düsseldorf 1970), 193f.
29. F. Fischer, Krieg (note 8), 536.
30. Quoted in V.R. Berghahn, War (note 4), 181.
31. Ibid.
32. Quoted in F. Fischer, Krieg (note 8), 584.
33. See, e.g., G.A. Craig, The Politics of the Prussian Army (Oxford 1964),
136ff.
34. S. Förster, “Dreams and Nightmares,” in M. Boemecke et al., eds., Anticipating Total War (New York 1999), 374.
35. S. Förster, “Der deutsche Generalstab und die Illusion des kurzen Krieges,
1871–1914, Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen (1995): 61–95; idem,
“Facing ‘People’s War’,” Journal of Strategic Studies (1987): 209–30.
36. G. Ritter, Der Schlieffen-Plan (Munich 1956).
37. J. Keegan, The First World War (London 1998), 92. For a comprehensive
analysis of German methods of warfare, see J. Horne and A. Kramer, German Atrocities, 1914. A History of Denial (New Haven 2002).
38. J. Keegan, World War (note 37), 81ff.
39. J. Winter and B. Baggett, The Great War and the Shaping of the 20th
Century (New York 1996), 178ff.
40. N. Stone, The Eastern Front, 1914–1917 (London 1975).
41. J. Keegan, World War (note 37), 236ff.
42. Ibid., 246ff.
364

Notes

43. J.M. Cooper, Jr., “The United States,” in R.F. Hamilton and H.H. Herwig,
eds., The Origins of the First World War (Cambridge 2003), 415ff.; R.
Gregory, The Origins of American Intervention in the First World War
(New York 1971).
44. B. Tuchman, The Zimmermann Telegram (London-New York 1959).
45. H.H. Herwig, The First World War: Germany and Austria-Hungary,
1914–1918 (London 1997), 52ff.
46. L. Burchardt, Friedenswirtschaft und Kriegsvorsorge (Boppard 1968).
47. J.A. Johnson The Kaiser’s Chemists (Chapel Hill 1990).
48. G. D. Feldman, Army, Industry and Labor in Germany, 1914–1918
(Princeton 1966).
49. C.-L. Holtfrerich, Die Deutsche Inflation, 1914–1924 (Berlin 1980).
50. See above, pp. 185ff.
51. See, e.g., W. J. Mommsen, Die Urkatastrophe Deutschlands. Der Erste
Weltkrieg, 1914–1918 (Stuttgart 2002), 85f.
52. V. Ullrich, Die nervöse Grossmacht, 1871–1918 (Frankfurt 1997), 494ff.
53. See, e.g., D. Welch, Germany, Propaganda and Total War, 1914–1918
(New Brunswick 2000), 20ff.
54. V. Ullrich, Grossmacht (note 52), 485ff.
55. See above, pp. 265f.
56. F. Fischer, Germany’s War Aims (note 8), 98ff.
57. V.R. Berghahn, “German Big Business and the Quest for a European
Economic Empire in the Twentieth Century,” in idem, Quest for Economic
Empire (Oxford 1996), 1–33.
58. Quoted in F. Fischer, Krieg (note 8), 1.
59. Quoted in V.R. Berghahn, Der Tirpitz-Plan (Düsseldorf 1971), 600f.
60. F. Fischer, Germany’s War Aims (note 8), 106ff.
61. Quoted in G.D. Feldman, Army (note 48), 136.
62. Ibid.
63. I.F. Clarke, Voices Prophesying War (Oxford 1972); S.D. Denham, Visions of War (Berne 1992); A. Daum, Wissenschaftspopularisierung im
19. Jahrhundert (Munich 1998), 370ff.
64. See, e.g., V. Ullrich, Kriegsalltag (Cologne 1982); B. Ziemann, Front und
Heimat (Essen 1997); J. Vehey, The Spirit of 1914: Militarism, Myth and
Mobilization in Germany (Cambridge 2000); M. Stöcker, Augusterlebnis
1914 in Darmstadt (Darmstadt 1994).
65. V. Ullrich, “Hamburg vor 70 Jahren – 1. August 1914,” Hamburger Rundschau, 2 August 1984, 10.
66. Ibid.
67. J. Keegan, World War (note 37), 146ff.
68. A. Rachamimov, POWs and the Great War. Captivity on the Eastern Front
(Oxford 2002).
365

Notes

69. J. Winter and B. Baggett, The Great War (note 39), 156ff.
70. Ibid., 141.
71. V.G. Liulevicius, War Land on the Eastern Front (Cambridge 2000).
72. J. Kocka, Facing Total War (Leamington Spa 1984).
73. B. J. Davis, Home Fires Burning. Food, Politics, and Everyday Life in
World War I Berlin (Chapel Hill 2000).
74. J. Kocka, Total War (note 72).
75. G. von Rauch, A History of Soviet Russia (New York 1964), 34ff.
76. V. R. Berghahn, Der Erste Weltkrieg (Munich 2003), 90.
77. S. Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution (Oxford 1982); G. Hosking, A
History of the Soviet Union (London 1985).
78. J. Wheeler-Bennett, Brest-Litovsk. The Forgotten Peace (London 1938).
79. M. Kitchen The Silent Dictatorship (London 1976), 250ff.
80. Ibid., 256f.
81. W. Deist, “Die Politik der Seekriegsleitung und die Rebellion der Flotte
Ende Oktober 1918,” Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitgeschichte (1966): 341ff.
82. F.L. Carsten, Revolution in Central Europe, 1918–1919 (Berkeley 1972),
21ff.
83. H.-U. Wehler, The German Empire, 1871–1918 (Leamington Spa 1985).
84. For an early articulation of this challenge: R.J. Evans, ed., Society and
Politics in Wilhelmine Germany (London 1978).
85. See above, pp. 189ff.
86. M. L. Anderson, Practicing Democracy (Princeton 2000), 437.
87. See above, p. 284.
88. M. Kitchen, Dictatorship (note 79), 127ff.
89. H. Hagenlücke, Deutsche Vaterlandspartei (Düsseldorf 1997).
90. W.T. Angress, “The German Army’s ‘Judenzählung’ of 1916,” Leo Baeck
Institute Yearbook (1978): 117–37.
91. V. Ullrich, Grossmacht (note 64), 383ff.
92. G. Krumeich, “Die Dolchstosslegende,” in E. Francois and H. Schulze,
ed., Erinnerungsorte, Vol. I (Munich 2001), 585–99.

366

Bibliography

N.B.: This bibliography contains English-language works only and is organized in line with the main divisions listed in the Table of Contents. Detailed
listings of relevant German language literature in the author’s Das Kaiserreich, 1871–1918 (Stuttgart 2003) and his Der Erste Weltkrieg (Munich 2003).

I. General Studies
D. Blackbourn, The Long Century. A History of Germany, 1780–1918 (New
York 1997)
J. Breuilly, ed., 19th-Century Germany, 1780–1918 (New York 2001)
W. Carr, A History of Germany, 1815–1945 (London 1987)
R. Chickering, ed., Imperial Germany. A Historiographical Companion
(Westport, Conn., 1996)
G. A. Craig, Germany, 1866–1945 (Oxford 1978)
G. Eley and D. Blackbourn, The Peculiarities of German History (Oxford
1984)
H. Holborn, A History of Modern Germany (London 1969)
G.G. Iggers, ed., The Social History of Politics (Leamington Spa 1986)
M. Kitchen, The Political Economy of Germany, 1815–1914 (London 1978)
W. J. Mommsen, Imperial Germany, 1867–1918 (New York 1995)
S. Ogilvie and R. Overy, eds., Germany. A New Social and Economic History
(New York 2003)
D. Orlow, A History of Modern Germany (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1987)
J. Retallack, Germany in the Age of Kaiser Wilhelm II (New York 1996)
E. Sagarra, A Social History of Germany, 1648–1914 (London 1977)
J.J. Sheehan, ed., Imperial Germany (New York 1975)
F. B. Tipton, A History of Modern Germany since 1815 (Berkeley 2003)
H.-U. Wehler, The German Empire, 1871–1918 (Leamington Spa 1985)

II. The Economy
1. Economic Sectors and Structural Change
G. Bry, Wages in Germany, 1871–1914 (Princeton 1960)

Bibliography

J.H. Clapham, The Economic Development of France and Germany, 1815–
1914 (London 1975)
A.V. Desai, Real Wages in Germany, 1871–1914 (Oxford 1968)
W.O. Henderson, The Rise of German Industrial Power, 1834–1914 (London
1975)
W.R. Lee, ed., Industrialisation and Industrial Growth in Germany (London
1986)
H. Neuburger, German Banks and German Economic Growth, 1871–1914
(New York 1977)
P. Scholliers, ed., Real Wages in 19th- and 20th-Century Europe (Oxford 1989)
A. Sommaria and G. Tullio, German Macroeconomic History, 1880–1979
(London 1987)
G. Stolper, The German Economy from 1870 to the Present (London 1967)
F.B. Tipton, Regional Variation in the Economic Development of Germany
during the Nineteenth Century (Middletown, Conn., 1976)
T. Veblen, Imperial Germany and the Industrial Revolution (London 1915)
P-C. Witt, Wealth and Taxation in Central Europe (Oxford 1987)
2. The Organization of Industry
K. Barkin, The Controversy over German Industrialization (Chicago 1970)
D. Cahan, An Institute for an Empire (Cambridge 1989)
J.A. Johnson, The Kaiser’s Chemists (Chapel Hill 1990)
L. Schofer, The Formation of a Modern Labor Force (Berkeley 1975)
E.G. Spencer, Management and Labor in Imperial Germany (New Brunswick, N.J., 1984)
F. Wunderlich, Farm Labor in Germany, 1810–1945 (Princeton 1961)

III. Society
1. Demographic Structure and Development
K.-J. Bade, ed., Population, Labour and Migration in 19th- and 20th-Century
Germany (Oxford 1987)
S. Hochstadt, Mobility and Modernity: Migration in Germany, 1820–1989
(Ann Arbor 1999)
J. H. Jackson, Migration and Urbanization in the Ruhr Valley, 1850–1900
(San Diego 1980)
M. Walker, Germany and the Emigration, 1816–1885 (Cambridge, Mass., 1964)
2. Social Stratification and Inequality
D. Augustine, Partricians and Parvenues (Oxford 1994)
D. Blackbourn and R. J. Evans, eds., The German Bourgeoisie (London 1991)
368

Bibliography

L. Cecil, The German Diplomatic Service, 1871–1914 (Princeton 1979)
G. Cocks and K.H. Jarausch, eds., The German Professions, 1800–1950 (Oxford 1990)
D. Crew, Town in the Ruhr. A Social History of Bochum, 1860–1914 (New
York 1979)
K. Demeter, The German Officer Corps (London 1965)
R.J. Evans, Death in Hamburg (Oxford 1987)
R.J. Evans, ed., The German Working Class (London 1982)
R.J. Evans, ed., The German Underworld (London 1988)
R. J. Evans and W.R. Lee, eds., The German Family (London 1980)
R. J. Evans and W.R. Lee, eds., The German Peasantry (London 1986)
A. Gerschenkron, Bread and Democracy in Germany (New York 1965)
K. Gispen, New Professions, Old Order. Engineers and German Society,
1815–1914 (Cambridge 1989)
H.H. Herwig, The German Naval Officer Corps (Oxford 1973)
D. J. Hughes, The King’s Finest, 1871–1914 (New York 1987)
K.H. Jarausch, The Unfree Professions (Oxford 1990)
H. Kaelble, Industrialisation and Social Inequality in the 19th Century (Leamington Spa 1986)
M. Kaplan, The Making of the Jewish Middle Class (Oxford 1991)
M. Kitchen, The German Officer Corps, 1890–1914 (Oxford 1968)
J. Knodel, The Decline of Fertility in Germany, 1871–1939 (Princeton 1974)
J. Kocka and A. Mitchell, eds., Bourgeois Society in the 19th-Century Europe
(Oxford 1992)
P.G. Lauren, Diplomats and Bureaucrats (Stanford 1976)
H.-H. Liang, The Social Background of the Berlin Working-Class Movement
(Ann Arbor 1980)
W. E. Mosse, Jews in the German Economy (Oxford 1987)
R. Spree, Health and Social Class in Imperial Germany (New York 1987)
3. Women and Men
L. Abrams and E. Harvey, eds., Gender Relations in German History (Durham, N.C., 1997)
C.E. Adams, Women Clerks in Wilhelmine Germany (Cambridge 1988)
J.C. Albisetti, Schooling German Girls and Women (Princeton 1988)
A. T. Allen, Feminism and Motherhood in Germany, 1800–1914 (New
Brunswick, N.J., 1991)
K. Canning, The Languages of Labor and Gender (Ithaca, N.Y., 1996)
J.C. Fout, ed., German Women in the 19th Century (New York 1984)
B. Franzoi, At the Very Least She Pays the Rent (Westport, Conn., 1979)
U. Frevert, Women in German History (Oxford 1990)
M. Kaplan, The Jewish Feminist Movement in Germany (Westport, Conn., 1979)
369

Bibliography

J. Knodel, The Decline of Fertility in Germany, 1871–1914 (Princeton 1974)
P. Mazon, Gender and the Modern Research University, (Stanford 2003)
R. Orthmann, Out of Necessity. Women Working in Berlin at the Height of Industrialization (Hamden, Conn., 1991)
H. Pakula, An Uncommon Woman. The Empress Frederick (New York 1995)
D. Rowe, Representing Berlin. Sexuality and the Big City in Imperial and
Weimar Germany, (Aldershot 2003)
J. D. Steakley, The Homosexual Emancipation Movement in Germany (New
York 1975)
J. Woycke, Birth Control in Germany, 1871–1933 (London 1988)
4. The Young and the Aged
H. Becker, German Youth. Bond or Free (London 1946)
K.H. Jarausch, Students, Society, and Politics in Imperial Germany (Princeton 1982)
W. Laqueur, Young Germany (London 1962)
P. D. Stachura, The German Youth Movement, 1900–1945 (London 1981)
R. Wohl, The Generation of 1914 (Cambridge, Mass., 1979)
5. Agents of Socialization
J. C. Albisetti, Secondary School Reform in Imperial Germany (Princeton 1983)
R.J. Evands and W. R. Lee, eds., The German Family (London 1980)
D. Fallon, The German University (Boulder, Colo., 1980)
M. Lamberti, State, Society, and Elementary Schools in Imperial Germany
(Oxford 1989)
C. McClelland, State, Society, and Universities in Germany, 1700–1914
(Cambridge, Mass., 1980)
R.H. Samuel and R. Hinton Thomas Education and Society in Modern Germany (London 1949)
K.A. Schleunes, Schooling and Society (Oxford 1991)
6. Majorities and Minorities
a. Catholics
R. M. Bigler, The Politics of German Protestantism (Los Angeles 1972)
D. Blackbourn, Marpingen (New York 1994)
M. B. Gross, The War Against Catholicism (Ann Arbor 2004)
T. M. Loome, Liberal Catholicism, Reform Catholicism, Modernism (London 1979)
P. Panayi, Ethnic Minorities in 19th- and 20th-Century Germany (Harlow
2000)
J. Sperber, Popular Catholicism in 19th-Century Germany (Princeton 1984)
370

Bibliography

b. The Jewish Minority
S. E. Aschheim, Brothers and Strangers (Madison, Wisc., 1982)
M. Berghahn, Continental Britons (New York 1987)
V. Caron, Between France and Germany (Princeton 1980)
P. Gay, Freud, Jews, and Other Germans (Oxford 1978)
R. Gay, The Jews of Germany (New Haven, CT, 1992)
M. Kaplan, The Making of the Jewish Middle Class (New York 1991)
J. Katz, Out of the Ghetto (Cambridge, Mass., 1973)
F. Stern, Gold and Iron (New York 1977)
J. Wertheimer, Unwelcome Strangers (Oxford 1987)
c. Other Minorities
R. Blanke, Prussian Poland in the German Empire, 1871–1914 (Boulder, Colo.,
1981)
J. E. Craig, Scholarship and Nation-Building (Chicago 1982)
W. Hagen, Germans, Poles, and Jews (Chicago 1980)
T. Kominski, Polish Publicists and Prussian Politics (Stuttgart 1988)
J.J. Kulczycki, School Strikes in Prussian Poland, 1901–1907 (New York 1981)
R.C. Murphy, Guestworkers in the German Reich (Boulder, Colo., 1983)
H. K. Rosenthal, German and Pole (Gainesville, Fla., 1975)
D. Silverman, Reluctant Ally (Philadelphia 1972)

IV. Culture
1. High Culture and Popular Culture
L. Abrams, Workers’ Culture in Imperial Germany (London 1991)
A.T. Allen, Satire and Society in Wilhelmine Germany (Louisville, Ky., 1985)
E. D. Bilski, Berlin Metropolis. Jews and the New Culture, 1890–1918 (Berkeley 1999)
E. K. Bramsted, Aristocracy and the Middle Classes in Germany: Social Types
in German Literature, 1830–1900 (Chicago 1964)
S.E. Bronner and D. Kellner, eds., Passion and Rebellion (New York 1988)
R.M. Browning, German Poetry from 1750 to 1900 (New York 1984)
J. Campbell, The German Werkbund (Princeton 1978)
C. Chapple and H. Schulte, eds., The Turn of the Century. German Literature
and Art, 1890–1915 (Bonn 1981)
A. Confino, Recasting Time Immemorial. Württemberg, the German Empire,
and the Construction of Regional and National Memories, 1871–1918 (Atlantic Highlands, N.J., 1993)
B. Dijkstra, Idols of Perversity: Fantasies of Feminine Evil in Fin de Siècle
Culture (New York 1986)
371

Bibliography

C. W. Davies, Theater for the People. The Story of the Volksbühne (Austin,
Tex., 1977)
V. Dürr et al., eds., Imperial Germany (Madison, WI, 1985)
F. Forster-Hahn, ed., Imagining Modern German Culture, 1889–1910 (Hanover, N.H., 1996)
H. Glaser, The German Mind in the 19th Century (New York 1981)
R. Gray, The German Traditions in Literature, 1871–1914 (Cambridge 1965)
M. Jefferies, ed., Imperial Culture in Germany, 1871–1918 (New York 2003)
P. Jelavich, Munich and Theatrical Modernism (Cambridge, Mass., 1985)
P. Jelavich, Berlin Cabaret (Cambridge, Mass., 1993)
J. Jenkins, Provincial Modernity (Ithaca, N.Y. 2003)
C. Kay, Art and the German Bourgeoisie (Toronto 2004)
A. Kelly, ed., The German Worker (Berkeley 1987)
M. Kennedy, Richard Strauss (London 1976)
D. C. Large and W. Weber, eds., Wagnerism in European Culture (Ithaca,
N.Y., 1984)
R. Lenman, Artists and Society in Germany, 1850–1914 (Manchester 1997)
B. I. Lewis, Art for All? (Princeton 2003)
V. Lidtke, The Alternative Culture (Oxford 1985)
M. Makela, The Munich Secession (Princeton 1990)
G. Masur, Imperial Berlin (New York 1970)
P. Paret, The Berlin Secession (Cambridge, Mass., 1980)
P. Paret, German Encounters with Modernism, 1840–1945 (Cambridge 2001)
R. Pascal, From Naturalism to Expressionism (New York 1973)
T. J. Reed, Thomas Mann (Oxford 1974)
J. Remak, The Gentle Critic (Syracuse, N.Y., 1964)
J. S. Roberts, Drinking, Temperance, and the Working Class in 19th-Century
Germany (London 1984)
K. Roper, German Encounters with Modernity (Atlantic Highlands, N.J., 1991)
G. Roth, The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany (Totowa 1961)
R. E. Sackett, Popular Entertainment, Class, and Politics in Munich, 1900–
1923 (Cambridge, Mass., 1982)
C. E. Schorske, Fin de Siècle Vienna (Cambridge 1961)
C. E. Schorske, German Social Democracy, 1905–1917 (New York 1972)
H. Schulte, ed., The Tragedy of German Inwardness? (Hamilton, Ont., 1992)
J. J. Sheehan, Museums in the German Art World (Oxford 2000)
W. D. Smith, Politics and the Sciences of Culture in Germany, 1840–1920
(Oxford 1991)
G. D. Stark and B.K. Lachner, eds., Essays in Culture and Society in Modern Germany (Arlington, Tex., 1982)
M. A. Townsend, Forbidden Laughter (Ann Arbor 1992)

372

Bibliography

2. The Sciences and Humanities
S.E. Aschheim, The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany (Berkeley 1992)
R. Chickering, Karl Lamprecht (Atlantic Highlands, N.J., 1993)
J. E. Craig, Scholarship and Nation-Building (Chicago 1982)
E. J. Engstrom, Clinical Psychiatry in Imperial Germany (Ithaca, N.Y., 2004)
J. L. Heilbron, The Dilemmas of an Upright Man (Berkeley 1986)
G. G. Iggers, The German Conception of History (Middletown, Conn., 1983)
K. H. Jarausch, ed., The Transformation of Higher Learning, 1860–1930
(Stuttgart 1982)
J. A. Johnson, The Kaiser’s Chemists (Chapel Hill, 1990)
S. L. Marchand, Down from Olympus. Archaeology and Philhellenism in
Germany, 1750–1970 (Princeton 1996)
C. McClelland, The German Historians and England (Cambridge 1971)
L.S. Pyenson, Young Einstein (Bristol 1985)
F. Ringer, The Decline of the German Mandarins (Cambridge, Mass., 1966)
J.J. Sheehan, The Career of Lujo Brentano (Chicago 1966)
W. D. Smith, Politics and the Sciences of Culture in Germany, 1840–1920
(Oxford 1991)
A. Zimmerman, Anthropology and Antihumanism in Imperial Germany
(Chicago 2001)
3. The Press, Its Readership, and the Role of Intellectuals
P. Fritzsche, Reading Berlin 1900 (Cambridge, Mass., 1996)
A. Hall, Scandal, Sensation and Society. Democracy, the SPD Press and Wilhelmine Germany (Cambridge 1977)
G. D. Stark, Entrepreneurs of Ideology (Chapel Hill 1981)
F. Stern, The Politics of Cultural Despair (Berkeley 1961)
W. Struve, Elites against Democracy (Princeton 1973)

V. The Realm of Politics
1. Constitutions, Parties, Elections
M.L. Anderson, Windthorst (Oxford 1981)
M.L. Anderson, Practicing Democracy (Princeton 2000)
D. Blackbourn, Class, Religion, and Local Politics in Wilhelmine Germany
(New Haven 1980)
K.R. Calkins, Hugo Haase (Durham, NC, 1979)
C.D. Crothers, The German Elections of 1907 (New York 1967)
R. H. Dominick, Wilhelm Liebknecht and the Founding of the German Social
Democratic Party (Chapel Hill 1982)

373

Bibliography

K. Epstein, Matthias Erzberger and the Dilemma of German Democracy
(Princeton 1959)
E. Ettinger, Rosa Luxemburg (Boston 1986)
E. Evans, The German Center Party, 1870–1933 (Carbondale, Ill., 1981)
B. Fairbairn, Democracy in the Undemocratic State. The German Reichstag
Elections of 1898 and 1903 (Toronto 1997)
R. Fletcher, Revisionism and Empire (London 1984)
J. C. Fout, ed., Politics, Parties, and the Authoritarian State. Imperial Germany, 1871–1918 (New York 1992)
W. L. Guttsman, The German Social Democratic Party, 1875–1933 (London
1981)
J. C. Hunt, The People’s Party in Württemberg and Southern Germany,
1880–1914 (Stuttgart 1975)
M. John, Politics and the Law in Late 19th-Century Germany (Oxford 1989)
L. E. Jones and J. Retallack, eds., Elections, Mass Politics, and Social Change
in Modern Germany (Cambridge 1992)
R. Koshar, Social Life, Local Politics, and Nazism: Marburg, 1880–1935
(Chapel Hill 1986)
V. Lidtke, The Outlawed Party (Princeton 1966)
W. Maehl, August Bebel (Philadelphia 1980)
J. P. Nettl, Rosa Luxemburg (Oxford 1966)
M. Nolan, Social Democracy and Society (Cambridge 1981)
A. J. Peck, Radicals and Reactionaries (Washington, D.C., 1978)
J. Retallack, Notables of the Right (London 1988)
K. Rohe, Elections, Parties, and Political Traditions (New York 1990)
R. J. Ross, The Beleaguered Tower (Notre Dame, Ind., 1976)
C. E. Schorske, German Social Democracy, 1905–1917
J.L. Snell, The Democratic Movement in Germany, 1789–1914 (Chapel Hill
1976)
J. Sperber, The Kaiser’s Voters (Cambridge 1997)
G. P. Steenson, Karl Kautsky (Pittsburgh 1978)
S. Suval, Electoral Politics in Wilhelmine Germany (Chapel Hill 1985)
A. P. Thompson, Left Liberals, the State and Popular Politics in Wilhelmine
Germany (Oxford 2001)
D. White, The Splintered Party (Cambridge, Mass., 1976)
J.K. Zeender, The German Center Party, 1890–1906 (Philadelphia 1976)
2. Extra-Parliamentary Organizations
a. Economic Associations
E. D. Brose, Christian Labor and the Politics of Frustration in Imperial Germany (Washington, D.C., 1985
374

Bibliography

R. Gellately, The Politics of Economic Despair (London 1974)
A. Gerschenkron, Bread and Democracy in Germany (New York 1966)
K. Gispen, New Professions, Old Order. Engineers and German Society,
1815–1914 (Cambridge 1990)
C. McClelland, The German Experience of Professionalization (New York
1991)
R. G. Moeller, ed., Peasants and Lords in Modern Germany (Boston 1986)
J. A. Moses, Trade Unionism in Germany from Bismarck to Hitler (London
1982)
S. R. Tirrell, German Agrarian Politics after Bismarck’s Fall (New York 1971)
b. Nationalist Associations
S. Angel-Volkov, The Rise of Popular Antimodernism in Germany (Princeton
1978)
R. Chickering, We Men Who Feel Most German (London 1984)
M. S. Coetzee, The German Army League (New Haven, Conn., 1990)
A. Confino, The Nation as a Local Metaphor (Chapel Hill 1997)
S. Denham, Visions of War (Berne 1992)
G. Eley, Reshaping the German Right (New Haven, Conn., 1980)
M. Hughes, Nationalism and Society ( London 1988)
A. Kelly, The Descent of Darwin (Chapel Hill 1981)
P. Kennedy and A.J. Nicholls, eds., Nationalist and Racialist Movements in
Britain and Germany before 1914 (London 1981)
G.L. Mosse, The Nationalization of the Masses (New York 1975)
H. W. Smith, Nationalism and Religious Conflict (Princeton 1995)
F. Stern, The Failure of Illiberalism (New York 1992)
c. Political Organizations of Minorities and Majority Prejudice
R. Chickering, Imperial Germany and a World without War (Princeton 1975)
R. J. Evans, Proletarians and Politics (New York 1990)
R. Gutteridge, Open Thy Mouth for the Dumb. The German Evangelical
Church and the Jews (New York 1976)
J. F. Harris, The People Speak! Anti-Semitism and Emancipation in 19thCentury Bavaria (Ann Arbor 1999)
R. Levy, The Downfall of the Anti-Semitic Political Parties in Imperial Germany (New Haven, Conn., 1975)
W. H. Maehl, German Militarism and Socialism (Omaha, Nebr., 1968)
E. Nathans, The Politics of Citizenship in Germany (Oxford 2004)
P. J. Pulzer, The Rise of Political Antisemitism in Germany and Austria (New
York 1964)
S. Reagins, Jewish Responses to Anti-Semitism in Germany, 1870–1914 (Cincinnati 1980)
375

Bibliography

J. Reinharz, Fatherland or Promised Land (Ann Arbor 1975)
J. Schorsch, Jewish Reactions to German Anti-Semitism, 1870–1914 (New
York 1972)
N. Stargardt, The German Idea of Militarism. Radical and Socialist Critics,
1866–1914 (Cambridge 1994)
S. A. Stehlin, Bismarck and the Guelph Problem, 1866–1890 (The Hague
1973)
U. Tal, Christians and Jews in Germany, 1870–1914 (Ithaca, N.Y., 1974)
d. Women’s Organizations
R. J. Evans, The Feminist Movement in Germany, 1894–1933 (London 1976)
A. Hackett, The Politics of Feminism in Wilhelmine Germany, 1890–1918
(New York 1979)
M. Kaplan, The Jewish Feminist Movement in Germany (Westport, Conn.,
1979)
A. G. Meyer, The Feminism and Socialism of Lily Braun (Bloomington, Ind.,
1985)
N. R. Reagin, A German Women’s Movement: Class and Gender in Hanover
(Chapel Hill 1995)
R. Pore, Conflict of Interest: Women in Early German Social Democracy
(Westport, Conn., 1981)
J. Quataert, The Reluctant Feminists in German Social Democracy, 1885–
1918 (Princeton 1979)
L. Wildenthal, German Women for Empire, 1884–1945 (Durham, N.C., 2001)
3. The Executive
G. Bonham, Ideology and Interests in the German State (Hamden, Conn.,
1991)
G. Eghigian, Making Security Social (Ann Arbor 2003)
G. Eley and J. Retallack, eds., Wilhelminism and its Legacies (New York 2003)
I. Hull, The Entourage of Kaiser Wilhelm II, 1888–1918 (Cambridge 1982)
H. Jacob, German Administration since Bismarck: Central Authroity vs. Local Autonomy (New Haven, Conn., 1963)
M. John, Politics and the Law in Late 19th-Century Germany (Oxford 1989)
B. Ladd, Urban Planning and Civic Order in Germany, 1860–1914 (Cambridge, Mass., 1990)
W. R. Lee and E. Rosenhaft, eds., The State and Social Change in Germany,
1880–1981 (Oxford 1990)
V. Lidtke, The Outlawed Party (Princeton 1966)
D. S. Linton “Who Has the Youth, Has the Future” (Cambridge 1991)
W. J. Mommsen, ed., The Emergence of the Welfare State in Britain and Germany, 1850–1950 (London 1981)
376

Bibliography

G. A. Ritter, Social Welfare in Germany and Britain (Leamington Spa 1983)
E. G. Spencer, Police and Social Order in German Cities (De Kalb, Ill., 1992)
G. Steinmetz, Regulating the Social. The Welfare State and Local Politics in
Imperial Germany (Princeton 1993)
D. Warren, Jr., The Red Kingdom of Saxony (The Hague 1964)
P. Weindling, Health, Race, and German Politics between National Unification and Nazism (Cambridge 1989)
4. Domestic Politics, 1871–1914
M. Balfour, The Kaiser and His Times (Boston 1964)
L. Cecil, Wilhelm II (Chapel Hill 1989)
C. A. Craig, The Politics of the Prussian Army (Oxford 1955)
J.R. Dukes and J. Remak, eds., Another Germany (Boulder, Colo., 1988)
R. J. Evans, ed., Politics and Society in Wilhelmine Germany (London 1978)
L. Gall, Bismarck (London 1986)
B. Heckart, From Bassermann to Bebel (New Haven, Conn., 1974)
F. B. M. Hollyday, Bismarck’s Rival (Chapel Hill 1960)
K.H. Jarausch, The Enigmatic Chancellor (New Haven, Conn., 1973)
E. Kehr, Battleship Building and Party Politics in Germany (Chicago 1975)
G. O. Kent, Arnim and Bismarck (Oxford 1968)
T. Kohut, Wilhelm II and the Germans (Oxford 1991)
I. N. Lambi, Free Trade and Protectionism in Germany, 1868–1879 (Wiesbaden 1963)
K. A. Lerman, The Chancellor as Courtier. Bernhard von Bülow and the
Governance of Germany, 1900–1909 (Cambridge 1990)
A. Mombauer and W. Deist, eds., The Kaiser (Cambridge 2003)
J.A. Nicholls, Germany after Bismarck (Cambridge, Mass., 1958)
O. Pflanze, Bismarck and the Development of Germany (Princeton 1990)
J. C. G. Röhl, Germany without Bismarck (London 1967)
J. C. G. Röhl, The Kaiser and His Court (Cambridge 1994)
J. C. G. Röhl, Young Wilhelm (Cambridge 1998)
J. C. G. Röhl and N. Sombart, eds., Kaiser Wilhelm II (Cambridge 1982)
D. Schoenbaum, Zabern 1913 (London 1982)
F. Stern, Gold and Iron (London 1977)
E.- T. P. Wilke, Political Decadence in Imperial Germany (Urbana, Ill.,
1976)
5. Foreign Policy, 1871–1914
G. Barraclough, From Agadir to Armageddon (London 1982)
V. R. Berghahn, Germany and the Approach of War in 1914 (London 1973)
M. Boemeke et al., eds., Anticipating Total War (Cambridge 1999)
F. Fischer, War of Illusions (London 1973)
377

Bibliography

L.H. Gann and P. Duignan, The Rulers of German Africa (Stanford 1977)
I. Geiss, German Foreign Policy, 1871–1914 (London 1976)
R. F. Hamilton and H.H. Herwig, eds., The Origins of World War I (Cambridge 2003)
M. Howard, The Franco-Prussian War (London 1961)
G. F. Kennan, The Decline of Bismarck’s European Order (Princeton 1979)
P. M. Kennedy, The Rise of the Anglo-German Antagonism (London 1980)
A. J. Knoll, Togo and Imperial Germany, 1884–1914 (Stanford 1978)
I. N. Lambi, The Navy and German Power Politics (London 1984)
G. Schöllgen, ed., Escape into War? (Oxford 1990)
W.D. Smith, The German Colonial Empire (Chapel Hill 1978)
J. Steinberg, Yesterday’s Deterrent (London 1965)
J. Verhey, The Spirit of 1914 (Cambridge 2000)
S. R. Williamson, Jr., Austria-Hungary and the Origins of the First World
War (London 1991)

VI. Germany and the First World War
1. The War at the Front
K.E. Birnbaum, Peace Moves and U-Boat Warfare (Stockholm 1958)
A. Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen and Prussian War Planning (Oxford 1991)
R. Chickering and S. Förster, eds., Great War. Total War (Cambridge 2000)
N. Ferguson, The Pity of War (New York 1998)
F. Fischer, Germany’s War Aims in the First World War (London 1967)
J. Horne and A. Kramer, German Atrocities 1914 (New Haven, Conn., 2002)
V. G. Liulevicius, War Land on the Eastern Front (Cambridge 2000)
H. C. Meyer, Mitteleuropa in German Thought and Action (The Hague 1955)
G. Ritter, The Schlieffen Plan (New York 1958)
D. Showalter, Tannenberg: Clash of Empires (Hamden, Conn., 1991)
N. Stone, The Eastern Front (London 1975)
B. Tuchman, The Zimmermann Telegram (London 1959)
2. The Homefront
R. Armeson, Total Warfare and Compulsory Labor (The Hague 1964)
V. R. Berghahn and M. Kitchen, eds., Germany in the Age of Total War (London 1981)
P. Bridgewater, German Poets of the First World War (London 1985)
R. Chickering, Imperial Germany and the Great War, 1914–1918 (Cambridge 2000)
U. Daniel, The War from Within. German Working-Class Women in the First
World War (New York 1997)
378

Bibliography

B. Davis, Home Fires Burning (Chapel Hill 2000)
G. D. Feldman, Army, Industry, and Labor (Princeton 1966)
M. Kitchen, The Silent Dictatorship (London 1976)
J. Kocka, Facing Total War (Leamington Spa 1984)
A. Mendelssohn-Bartholdy, The War and German Society (New York 1971)
R. G. Moeller, German Pesants and Agrarian Politics, 1914–1924 (Chapel
Hill 1986)
R. Scheck, Alfred von Tirpitz and German Right-Wing Politics, 1914–1930
(Atlantic Highlands, N.J., 1997)
M. Siney, The Allied Blockade of Germany, 1914–1916 (Ann Arbor 1957)
C. P. Vincent, The Politics of Hunger. The Allied Blockade of Germany,
1915–1919 (Athens, Ohio, 1985)
D. Welch, Germany, Propaganda and Total War, 1914–1918 (London 2000)
G. Yaney, The World of the Manager. Food Administration in Berlin during
World War I (New York 1994)
3. Collapse and Revolution
R. Bessel, Germany after the First World War (Oxford 1994)
G. G. Bruntz, Allied Propaganda and the Collapse of the German Empire in
1918 (Stanford 1938)
F.L. Carsten, Revolution in Central Europe (Berkeley 1972)
F.L. Carsten, War against War. British and German Radical Movements in
the First World War (London 1982)
G. Dallas, 1918. War and Peace (New York, 2001)
D. Horn, The German Naval Mutinies of World War I (New Brunswick, N.J.,
1969)
P. Lerner, Hysterical Men. War, Psychiatry, and the Politics of Trauma in
Germany (Ithaca, N.Y., 2003)
D. McKibbin, War and Revolution in Leipzig, 1914–1918 (Lanham, Md.,
1998)
A. Mitchell, Revolution in Bavaria (Princeton 1965)
D. Morgan, The Socialist Left and the German Revolution (Ithaca, N.Y., 1975)
A. J. Ryder, The German Revolution of 1918 (Cambridge 1967)
E. Waldman, The Spartacist Uprising (Marquette 1958)
R. W. Whalen, Bitter Wounds. German Victims of the Great War (Ithaca,
N.Y., 1984)
J. Wheeler-Bennett, Brest-Litovsk. The Forgotten Peace (London 1938)
Z.A. Zeman, Germany and the Revolution in Russia, 1915–1918 (London
1950)

379

Subject Index

abortion, 65f.
Admirals’ Rebellion (1918), 294f.
AEG (Allgemeine ElektrizitätsGesellschaft), 157, 279
age structure, 71ff.
agriculture, 1ff., 13ff., 20f.
Agadir Crisis, 262f.
Agrarian League, 212f.
Alsace-Lorraine, 108ff., 252f.
anticlericalism, 83, 88ff., 245
antifeminism, 58ff., 222
anti-industrialism, 41ff., 248
antimilitarism, 216ff.
anti-Semitism, 97ff., 204, 218f.
antiurbanism, 41ff., 248
applied sciences, 33ff.
apprentices, 84
architecture, 156f.
army, 227, 240ff., 264ff., 273ff.
Army League, 215
avant-garde, 131ff.
Balkans, 263, 265ff.
banking, 12, 14, 21ff.
BASF (Badische Anilin und SodaFabriken), 23, 34
Battle of the Marne, 275
Battle of Verdun, 287f.
Battle of the Somme, 276, 288
Battle of Tannenberg, 288
Bauhaus, 157
BDI (Bund der Industriellen), 209
BEF (British Expeditionary Force), 276
Berlin Congress, 256
Berlin Secession, 137
BGB (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch), 71,
184
Bjoerkoe, treaty of, 262
Blaue Reiter, 138
blockade, 289f.

Bolsheviks, 292f.
bourgeoisie, 118f., 122ff.
bourgeois women, 50f., 59ff.
breast-feeding, 54
Brest-Litovsk, treaty of, 293
budget, 186ff., 253f., 280f.
Burgfrieden, 282ff.
cabaret, 144f.
capital markets, 4, 21f.
cartels, 25f.
Catholicism, 88ff., 194f., 207f., 218
CDI (Centralverband der Deutschen
Industrie), 209
censorship, 129, 139f., 146, 234f.
Center Party, 194f., 207
Centralverein (CV), 101, 209
chemistry, 14, 23, 33f., 160f.
child labor, 73ff.
churches, 88ff.
classes, 44, 58, 113ff.
class justice, 235f.
colonies, 258, 262
commerce, 3f.
Commercial Code, 185
communes, 228ff.
connubial mobility, 49ff.
Conservatives, 193, 204f.
Constitution of 1871, 178ff.
consumption, 18, 27, 52ff., 108ff., 144ff.
crime, 88, 234
cultural pessimism, 131ff., 163ff.
Daily Telegraph Affair, 192
Danes, 112f., 202
demography, 38ff.
Deutsche Friedensgesellschaft, 217
Deutsche Kolonialgesellschaft, 215
Die Brücke, 138f.
diet, 52ff.

Subject Index
divorce, 66, 71
DMV (Deutscher MetallarbeiterVerband), 30ff., 210f.
domestic servants, 62f.
Dual Alliance, 256f.
electoral systems, 198ff.
electrical engineering, 4, 28, 34, 157
emigration, 38ff.
employment, 7ff., 19ff.
employers’ associations, 29f., 45ff., 59ff.,
210
Entente Cordiale, 261
exports, 4f., 14, 248
Expressionism, 135ff.
family, 80ff.
farm labor, 3, 74f., 116f.
Fashoda Crisis of 1898, 261
Federal Council, 178ff., 185f.
female employment, 59ff.
female schooling, 60ff.
female students, 60f.
film, 146
finance, 186ff., 253f., 280f.
financial constitution, 185f.
franc-tireurs, 275
Franckenstein Clause, 187
fraternities, 86f.
Freie Volksbühne, 149
Gallipoli, 277
generational conflict, 78ff.
generations, 71ff.
gender, 58ff., 219ff.
German revolution of 1918, 294f.
Germanization, 20, 101ff., 218
“Great Depression”, 12ff.
Gründerboom”, 10ff.
Hague Peace Conferences, 217
Haldane Mission, 263
Hansabund, 210
Hartmann-Bund, 212
health, 51f.
Heimat, 115, 124
High Command, 282
high culture, 122ff.
high schools, 47, 85f.
Hindenburg program, 280

382

Hirsch-Duncker unions, 31, 211
homosexuality, 77, 88
housing, 55ff.
humanities, 163ff.
illegitimacy, 51, 63ff.
imperialism, 258ff., 283
Impressionism, 137
incomes, 5ff.
infant mortality, 51
infanticide, 65
interest groups, 208ff.
investments, 4, 11f.
industry, 3ff.
Jesuits, 244
Jews, 93ff., 218f.
Judenzählung (1916), 299
Jugendstil, 137
July Crisis of 1914, 264ff.
Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gesellschaft, 37, 162
KRA (Kriegsrohstoffabteilung), 279
“Kehrites”, xiii
Kriegerfrauen, 290
Kulturkampf, 83, 88ff., 244f.
labor conflicts, 27ff.
land laborers, 102, 116f.
“Legend of the Stab in the Back”, 299
Liberals, 191ff.
life expectancy, 51f.
limited war, 266ff.
literature, 126ff., 140ff., 153ff., 172ff.
living standard, 5ff., 52ff.
lobbies, 209ff.
local government, 228ff.
Lusitania, 278
marriage patterns, 49ff.
Marxism, 206f.
“matricular contributions”, 187
mass consumption, 18, 27, 52ff., 118ff.,
144ff.
mass mobilization, 198ff., 213ff.
mass production, 31
metaphysics, 161ff.
migrant workers, 21, 38ff., 101ff.
migration, 38ff.
militarism, 214ff., 264ff.

Subject Index
military service, 84f.
minorities, 87ff.
Mitteleuropa, 283
Mittellandkanal, 230, 249
Mittelstand, 118f., 201
mixed marriage, 49, 93f.
moderism, 131ff.
monarchy, 176ff.
monuments, 123f.
mortality, 51ff.
Munich Secession, 135
music, 130ff.
nationalism, 214ff., 260ff.
nationalist associations, 214ff.
Naturalism, 128ff.
navy, 250ff., 283, 294f.
Navy League, 215
nutrition, 52ff.
old age, 71ff.
opera, 130f.
pacifism, 216ff.
Pan-German League, 205, 215
parties, 190ff.
parliamentarism, 176ff., 297ff.
Patriotic Auxiliary Law, 280
“Perfidious Albion” (i.e., England), 282
“Personal Rule”, 178ff., 247ff.
Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt
(PTR), 36
pluralization, xvif., 224f.
Poles, 101ff., 218
poor relief, 231ff.
popular culture, 144ff.
population, 38ff.
POWs (prisoners of war), 289
press, 171ff.
prices, 52ff.
professional associations, 210ff.
protectionism, 13ff., 246f.
Protestantism, 83f., 88ff.
racism, 98ff.
railroads, 3f., 230
Rankeanism, 164f.
regions, 15ff.
Reich Association Law, 221
Reichsbank, 24

Reichstag, 177ff., 189ff.
Reich constitution, 176ff.
Reinsurance Treaty, 256f.
religion, 88ff.
repression, 233ff.
Ruhr region, 17, 115
Russian revolution, 291ff.
Sammlung, 216
Sarajevo, 266ff.
savings banks, 23
schools, 81ff.
sciences, 33ff., 159ff.
Secession, 135f.
September Memorandum (1914), 282f.
sexuality, 63ff.
shipping, 19
Social Democrats, 195ff.
social insurance, 232f.
social mobility, 45ff.
socialization, 80ff.
Society of the Eastern Marches (HKT).
20, 107, 205
Spring Offensive of 1918, 293f.
Staatsstreich, 180f., 247, 249
starvation, 289f.
stratification, 113ff.
strikes, 30ff., 252
students, 60f., 86f.
suffrage, 198ff., 221f.
syndicates, 26f.
Tangiers, 262
tariffs, 13ff., 246ff.
taxation, 5ff., 185ff., 251ff., 281
Taylorism, 31
Technische Hochschule, 34f.
theater, 128f., 141ff., 146ff.
total war, 287ff.
trade unions, 210ff.
transportation, 18f., 230
Triple Alliance, 258
Triple Entente, 258
“trivial literature”, 121ff., 144ff.
tuberculosis, 51f.
unemployment, 19ff.
universities, 86f., 158ff.
university students, 86f.
urbanization, 39

383

Subject Index
Volksbühne, 147
Volksverein für das katholische
Deutschland, 218
voting behavior, 198ff.

Werkvereine, 31
women, 58ff., 219ff.
workers’ colonies, 57f.
World War I, 264ff.

wage agreements, 31
war aims, 282f.
war finance, 281
war propaganda, 281f.
wealth, 5ff.
Wehrbeitrag (of 1913), 253f.
Werkbund, 156ff.

youth, 71ff.
Youth Movement, 80, 84
Ypres, 276

384

Zabern Affair, 252f.
Zimmermann Telegram, 278
Zionism, 100f., 219

Index of Persons

Anderson, Margaret L., xvi, 184, 192,
201, 297f.
Andreas-Salomé, Lou, 142
Anzengruber, Ludwig, 127
Arons, Leo, 242
Augspurg, Anita, 223
Bach, Johann S., 130
Bachem, Julius, 91f., 207
Bade, Klaus J., xvii, 2
Ballin, Albert, 46, 265
Baluschek, Hans, 136
Barlach, Ernst, 137
Baumgarten, Hermann, 181
Bebel, August, 88, 153f., 195, 206f.
Becker, Carl, J., 123
Beckmann, Max, 137
Betthoven, Ludwig van, 103, 131
Behmer, Hermann, 139
Behrens, Peter, 157
Behring, Emil, 161
Benningsen, Rudolf v., 191
Bergson, Henri, 165
Bernstein, Eduard, 207
Bethmann Hollweg, Theobald v., 179,
227, 243, 252ff., 262ff., 272, 278,
282ff., 298f.
Beyerlein, Franz A., 154
Bielschowsky, Albert, 159
Bismarck, Otto v., v, xi, xiv, xvi, 7, 21f.,
78f., 83, 89, 98, 105f., 109, 122,
124f., 127f. 130, 135, 159, 169,
178f., 181ff., 185, 187, 189ff., 196f.,
200, 202, 204, 207, 210, 212, 223ff.,
296, 300
Blackbourn, David, xvi
Bleibtreu, Georg, 123, 125
Bleibtreu, Karl, 143
Bleichröder, Gerson v., 7
Böhlau, Helene, 126

Bohr, Niels, 160
Borchard, Knut, 1, 129
Bosch, Carl, 279
Brahm, Otto, 128
Brahms, Johannes, 130f.
Brentano, Lujo, 165
Brepohl, Wilhelm, 115
Bruckmann, Peter, 157
Bülow, Bernhard v., 227, 242, 249ff.,
260, 263, 271
Busch, Wilhelm, 154
Capelle, Eduard v., 268f.
Caprivi, Leo v., 213, 227, 242, 248f.,
258, 260, 271
Cauer, Minna, 223
Chamberlain, Joseph A., 260
Conrad von Hötzendorf, Franz, 266
Corinth, Lovis, 137, 139f.
Courts-Mahler, Hedwig, 126, 173
Crew, David, 48
Dahn, Felix, 126
Debussy, Claude, 133
Dehio, Ludwig, 261
Delbrück, Hans, 165, 172
Dickens, Charles, 154
Dilthey, Wilhelm, 159, 165
Disraeli, Benjamin, 7
Dumas, Alexandre, 154
Ebert, Friedrich, 294, 300
Ebner-Eschenbach, Marie v., 126
Ehlert, Louis, 130
Ehrlich, Paul, 161
Einstein, Albert, 160ff., 170, 174
Eley, Geoff, xv, 184, 250
Endell, August, 157
Erdmann, Karl Dietrich, 268
Eulenburg-Hertefeld, Philipp zu, 226

Index of Persons
Fairbairn, Brett, xvi
Falkenhayn, Erich v., 264, 268, 287f.
Feininger, Lyonel, 137
Ferguson, Niall, xiii
Fischer, Emil, 36, 160
Fischer, Fritz, xiff., 189, 265f., 282, 296
Fontane, Theodor, 64, 126, 128
Ford, Henry, 26, 31f.
Francis Joseph II, emperor of AustriaHungary, 268
Freiligrath, Ferdinand, 154
Frenssen, Gustav, 154
Freud, Sigmund, 161
Freytag, Gustav, 127
Fried, Erich, 217
Friedrich, Caspar D., 139
Ganghofer, Ludwig, 127, 154
Georg II., Duke of Sachsen-Meiningen,
127
Gerstäcker, Friedrich, 154
Gladstone, William, 259
Göhre, Paul, 64
Goethe, Johann W. v., 153f., 159
Gorki, Maxim, 154
Groener, Wilhelm, 283
Gropius, Walter, 157
Haber, Fritz, 279
Halbe, Max, 129, 234
Haldane, Richard B., 263
Hammann, Otto, 242
Harden, Maximilian, 128, 172, 239
Harnack, Adolf v., 37
Hasenclever, Walter, 143
Hauptmann, Gerhard, 82, 128f., 144
Haydn, Joseph, 130
Hegel, Georg W.F., 163, 165
Heine, Heinrich, 154
Heisenberg, Werner, 161
Hertling, Georg v., 294
Hertz, Heinrich, 160
Herwig, Holger H., 279
Herzl, Theodor, 100, 219
Heyking, Elisabeth v., 154
Heymann, Lida, 223
Heyse, Paul, 127
Hildebrand, Klaus, xiii, 261
Hilferding, Rudolf, 22
Hiller, Kurt, 143

386

Hillern, Wilhelmine v., 173
Hillgruber, Andreas, xiii
Hindenburg, Paul v., 241, 280, 282, 288,
293
Hintze, Paul v., 293f.
Hinzpeter, Georg, 82
Hirschfeld, Magnus, 88
Hoffmann, Josef, 157
Hoffmann, Walther G., 53
Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst, Clodwig zu,
129, 249
Hollmann, Friedrich, 249
Holz, Arno, 129, 143
Hopman, Albert, 268f.
Hoyos, Alexander v., 266ff.
Huch, Ricarda, 142
Hugenberg, Alfred, 284f., 298
Ibsen, Henrik, 128
Jagow, Gottlieb v., 264, 267, 271f.
Jahn, Friedrich L., 152
Jarausch, Konrad H., 266ff.
Jellinek, Georg, 164
Joffre, Joseph, 275
Joll, James, 269
Kampf, Arthur, 136
Kandinsky, Wassili, 138
Kant, Immanuel, 163ff.
Kautsky, Karl, 169, 296
Kehr, Eckart, xiiff.
Keim, August, 222
Keller, Ferdinand, 123
Keller, Gottfried, 127
Keller, Paul, 126
Kellermann, Bernhard, 145
Kerensky, Alexander, 292
Keyserling, Eduard, 128
Kiderlen-Waechter, Alfred v., 262
Kirchner, Ernst L., 137f.
Klessmann, Christoph, 104
Knackfuss, Hermann, 125
Koch, Robert, 161
Kocka, Jürgen, xv, xvii, 28
Kollwitz, Käthe, 136, 138f.
Koner, Max, 125
Kornilov, Lavr, 292
Kretzer, Max, 128
Krille, Otto, 153

Index of Persons
Krüger, Paulus (gen. Ohm), 260
Krupp, Alfred, 14, 284
Krupp, Friedrich, 7, 11, 28, 57, 119
Lamprecht, Karl, 164, 169
Lange, Helene, 60
Lehar, Franz, 131
Leistikow, Walter, 136, 138
Lenbach, Franz v., 123, 135
Lenin, Vladimir, 292
Lenz, Max, 163, 169
Lessing, Karl F., 123
Lichnowsky, Karl v., 264
Lidtke, Vernon L., 150ff., 155
Liebermann, Max, 136, 138f.
Liebknecht, Karl, 217
Liebknecht, Wilhelm, 153, 195
Liliencron, Detlev v., 134
Lloyd George, David, 263
Löns, Hermann, 126
Loewenson, Erwin, 143
Löwenthal, Eduard, 217
Lothar, Rudolf, 142
Ludendorff, Erich, 276, 282, 293, 299
Ludwig II, king of Bavaria, 125
Luxemburg, Rosa, 154, 211
Lvov, Georgi, 292
Lyncker, Moritz v., 268
Mach, Ernst, 161f.
Mahler, Gustav., 134
Mann, Heinrich, 141
Mann, Thomas, 140f., 154, 234
Mannheim, Karl, 17, 78
Marlitt, Eugenie, 126, 145, 173
Martin, Rudolf, 95
Marx, Karl, 91f., 113, 147, 154, 163,
165f., 168ff., 206f., 286
Max, prince von Baden, 294
May, Karl, 145
Mayer, Gustav, 159, 168
Mehring, Franz, 153, 168
Meier-Graefe, Julius, 140
Mellers, Wilfrid, 134
Menzel, Adolph v., 123, 125, 127
Messel, Alfred, 157
Metzger, Joseph, 271
Mevissen, Gustav v., 36
Meyer, Conrad F., 127
Michaelis, Georg, 299

Michels, Robert, 195
Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig, 157
Miquel, Johannes v., 187
Möbius, Paul, 60
Moltke, Helmuth v., the elder, 274
Moltke, Helmuth v., the younger, 264ff.
Morris, William, 156
Mozart, Wolfgang A., 130, 134
Müller, Georg A. v., 266
Munch, Edvard, 135f.
Muthesius, Hermann, 156f.
Napoleon I, emperor of the French, 216
Napoleon III, Bonaparte, 274
Naumann, Friedrich, 156, 283
Nernst, Walther H., 36, 160, 166f.
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 132, 143, 166ff., 170
Nicholas II, tsar of Russia, 262, 292
Nipperdey, Thomas, xv, 90, 114, 189
Nolde, Emil, 137
Oldenburg-Januschau, Elard v., 6
Pascha, Enver, 277
Pechstein, Max, 137f.
Pétain, Philippe, 288
Pfemfert, Franz, 143
Piloty, Karl, 123, 125
Planck, Max, 8, 61, 159f.
Pless, Hans-Heinrich v., 5
Plessen, Hans v., 268
Puccini, Giacomo, 134
Quidde, Ludwig, 217
Raabe, Wilhelm, 128
Radziwill, Marie v., 253
Ranke, Leopold v., 163ff., 169
Rathenau, Emil, 22
Rathenau, Walther, 7, 157, 279
Rauh, Manfred, xiv, 184, 189f., 198,
297f.
Rehbein, Hans, 3
Retallack, James, xvi
Reuter, Fritz, 154
Reuter, Gabriele, 126
Reventlow, Franziska zu, 142
Rickert, Heinrich, 164
Riezler, Kurt, 267ff.
Rilke, Rainer M., 140

387

Index of Persons
Ritter, Gerhard A., xiv, 233
Rodin, Auguste, 139
Rodzianko, Mikhail, 292
Roedern, Siegfried v., 267
Röhl, John C.G., 183f.
Röntgen, Wilhelm, 160
Rohe, Karl, 115
Roth, Guenther, 150
Rutherford, Ernest, 160
Schäfer, Dietrich, 222
Schaffgotsch, Hans-Ulrich v., 5
Scheer, Reinhard, 294f.
Scheffel, Joseph v., 126
Scherer, Wilhelm, 159
Schiele, Egon, 139
Schiller, Friedrich v., 127, 153
Schivelbusch, Wolfgang, 17
Schlaf, Johannes, 129
Schlieffen, Alfred v., 265, 274f., 288
Schmidt, Erich, 159
Schmidt-Rottluff, Karl, 137f.
Schmoller, Gustav v., 168
Schöllgen, Gregor, 261
Schönberg, Arnold, 134, 146
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 166f.
Sell, Christian, 123
Shakespeare, William, 127
Siemens, Elly v., 119
Siemens, Ernst Werner v., 8, 18, 22, 28,
33f., 36
Simmel, Georg, 164, 168
Slevogt, Max, 137
Snow, Charles P., 163
Sösemann, Bernd, 268
Sombart, Werner, 159, 169
Speckmann, Dietrich, 126
Spielhagen, Friedrich, 127
Spitzemberg, Hildegard v., 70, 139
Spree, Reinhard, 12, 51
Sternheim, Carl, 141
Stöcker, Helene, 221
Stoewer, Willy, 125
Stolberg-Wernigerode, Udo v., 6
Storm, Theodor, 126, 171
Strauss, Richard, 133f.
Stürmer, Michael, 261

388

Sudermann, Hermann, 126, 129, 173
Suttner, Berta v., 126f.
Taylor Frederick W., 31f., 170
Thoma, Ludwig, 126, 141
Thompson, Edward P., xv
Tirpitz, Alfred v., 192, 227, 249ff., 260f.,
263f., 268, 270, 283, 295
Tönnies, Ferdinand, 168
Treitschke, Heinrich v., 169
Troeltsch, Ernst, 159, 169
Trotsky, Leon, 292f.
Trübner, Wilhelm, 137, 139
Tschudi, Hugo v., 139
Umfrid, Otto, 217
Unger, Rudolf, 171
van der Velde, Henry, 157
van Hoddis, Jakob, 141
Verne, Jules, 54
Viebig, Clara, 126, 154
Völderndorff, Otto v., 248
Vollmar, Georg v., 235
Wagner, Adolph, 168
Wagner, Richard, 130f., 133f.
Waldersee, Alfred v., 237, 241
Weber, Max, 44, 91, 113, 164f., 168
Wedekind, Frank, 142, 234
Wehler, Hans-Ulrich, xiiff., xvii, 183,
189, 296
Weininger, Otto, 161
Werner, Anton v., 123, 125ff., 135ff., 222
Wilhelm I, German emperor, 178, 182,
225f., 244, 247, 255
Wilhelm II, German emperor, xiv, 79,
82f., 90, 98, 138, 144, 182f., 216,
226f., 234, 237, 247ff., 259, 262ff.,
267ff., 291, 294f., 298
Wilson, Woodrow, 278f.
Winter, Jay, 288
Wolff, Theodor, 128
Wright, Frank L., 156
Zille, Heinrich, 136
Zola, Emile, 154

