Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

This is a study of the intense, complex, and escalating debate over sexuality
and sexual morality that roiled politics in Germany between 1880 and 1914.
That debate was grounded in the rapid evolution and growing complexity
of German society – the multiplication of cultural groupings, professional
associations, and social movements; the emergence of new social groups,
social milieus, and professions; the rapid development of the media and
commercial entertainments; and so on. All parties involved understood it
to be a debate over the most fundamental question of modern political life:
how to secure both national power and individual freedom in the context of
rapid social and cultural change.
Edward Ross Dickinson is professor of history at the University of California
at Davis. He previously taught at Victoria University of Wellington, New
Zealand, from 1991 to 2000, and at the University of Cincinnati from 2002
to 2007. He is the author of The Politics of German Child Welfare from the
Empire to the Federal Republic (1996) and of numerous articles in Central
European History, German Studies Review, European History Quarterly,
Journal of the History of Sexuality, Gender and History, History Workshop,
Journal of Modern History, German History, and Dance Chronicle.

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial
Germany, 1880–1914

EDWARD ROSS DICKINSON
University of California, Davis

32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, ny 10013-2473, usa
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107040717
© Edward Ross Dickinson 2014
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2014
Printed in the United States of America
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Dickinson, Edward Ross.
Sex, freedom, and power in imperial Germany, 1880–1914 / Edward Ross Dickinson.
pages cm
isbn 978-1-107-04071-7 (hardback)
1. Sexual ethics – Political aspects – Germany – History. 2. Sex – Political aspects – Germany –
History. 3. Social change – Political aspects – Germany – History. 4. Germany – Politics and
government – 1871–1918. I. Title.
hq32.d554 2013
176ʹ.4–dc23
2013021178
isbn 978-1-107-04071-7 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls for
external or third-party Internet Web sites referred to in this publication and does not guarantee
that any content on such Web sites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Contents

Acknowledgments
Abbreviations
Introduction: Sex, Politics, and Modernity I
part i. moral reform, 1880–1900
1 Christian Men and Morality
2 “A Spirit of Insubordination”: Popular Culture,
Modernism, and Morality
3 The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender
4 Religion, Women, and Morality

page vii
ix
1

13
30
51
77

5 Isolation and Impact

114

part ii. sexual radicalism, 1900–1914
6 Social Democratic Sexual Ethics
7 Homosexual Rights
8 Syphilis and Salvation
9 Sex Reform
10 Religion of Love

137
152
177
190
215

part iii. conflict, 1908–1914
11 Men, Sex, and Science

245

12 Confrontations, 1908–1914

281

v

Contents

vi

Conclusion: Sex, Politics, and Modernity II

304

Select Bibliography

317

Index

333

Acknowledgments

Research for this book was supported by grants from the German Academic
Exchange Service and the Charles Phelps Taft Memorial Fund at the University of Cincinnati. A small army of archivists have helped me with the
research; I am grateful to all of them and especially to Kerstin Wolff at
the Archiv der deutschen Frauenbewegung in Kassell and Michael Häusler
at the Diakonisches Werk in Dahlem. I owe thanks to Tim Beaglehole, Kynan
Gentry, Susan Grogan/Foley, Geoff Hume-Cook, Dolores Janiewski, Sara Kindon, Bronwen Labrum, David MacKay, Pat Moloney, Evelyn Wareham, and
Susan Mary Wightman at Victoria University in Wellington, New Zealand;
to Sigrun Haude, Jim Murray, and Willard Sunderland at the University of
Cincinnati; and to Bill Hagen, Ted Margadant, and Clarence Walker at the University of California at Davis. All these people were generous and kind-hearted
in giving me their intellectual companionship and institutional support. I am
particularly grateful to Maura O’Connor at Cincinnati; I owe my academic
career to her excellent professional advice. Richard Wetzell has been a valued
intellectual interlocutor since 1984. I am grateful to and for Geoff Eley of the
University of Michigan, whose unflagging intellectual energy, enthusiasm, and
generosity have been an inspiration to me since we first met in 1985. Bernd
and Gela Teichgräber and Gudrun Egloff have generously taken care of me in
Berlin for two decades; I couldn’t have done the research for this book without
their hospitality.
Parts of Chapters 1, 2, and 3 appeared first in “The Men’s Christian Morality
Movement in Germany, 1880–1914: Some Reflections on Sex, Politics, and Sexual Politics,” Journal of Modern History 75:1 (2003): 59–110. Parts of Chapters 9 and 10 appeared first in “Reflections on Feminism and Monism in the
Kaiserreich, 1900–1913,” Central European History 34:2 (2001): 191–230.
Parts of Chapter 11 appeared first in “‘A Dark, Impenetrable Wall of Complete
vii

viii

Acknowledgments

Incomprehension’: The Impossibility of Heterosexual Love in Imperial Germany,” Central European History 40:3 (2007): 467–497. Parts of Chapter 4
appeared first in “Dominion of the Spirit over the Flesh: Religion and Sexuality in the German Women’s Movements before 1914,” Gender and History
17:2 (2005): 1–32. Part of Chapter 11 appeared first in “Sex and the ‘Yellow
Peril’: Christian von Ehrenfels’ Program for the Revision of the European Sexual Order, 1902–1910,” German Studies Review 25:2 (2002): 255–284. I am
grateful to the University of Chicago Press, Cambridge University Press, Wiley
International, and the German Studies Association for permission to reuse this
material here.
It was a great privilege to be part of the “Rethinking German Modernities”
seminars organized by Geoff Eley, Jennifer Jenkins, Tracie Matysik, and me;
the discussions at those four seminars shaped my thinking about this project
profoundly. A grant from the Charles Phelps Taft Memorial Fund made possible one of those four seminars, in Cincinnati. A conference Richard Wetzell
and I organized on the history of sexuality in 2002, funded and hosted by the
German Historical Institute in Washington, D.C., was also formative for this
book.
I owe a great intellectual debt as well to my daughter Elizabeth, who
reminded me how wonderful it is to be alive, and to have a project.

Abbreviations

ADCV
ADF
ADW
ÄGSE
AKAK
AKDF
AKDS
AR
ARGB
BAK
BDF
BfM
BMBU
CAIM
CBDF
CF
DCV
DEF
DFHS
DGBG
DMB
DNBM
DZIAF
EFZ

Archiv des Deutschen Caritas-Verbandes
Archiv der deutschen Frauenbewegung
Archiv des Diakonischen Werkes der evangelischen Kirche in
Deutschland
Ärztliche Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft und Eugenik
Archiv für Kriminal-Anthropologie und Kriminalistik
Archiv des katholischen deutschen Frauenbundes
Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine
Allgemeine Rundschau
Archiv für Rassen- und Gesellschaftsbiologie
Bundesarchiv Koblenz
Bund deutscher Frauenvereine
Bund für Mutterschutz
Berliner Männerbund zur Bekämpfung der Unsittlichkeit
Centralausschuss für Innere Mission
Centralblatt des Bundes deutscher Frauenvereine
Die christliche Frau, journal of the KDF
Deutscher Caritasverband
Deutsch-Evangelischer Frauenbund
Deutscher Frauenverein zur Hebung der Sittlichkeit
Deutsche Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten
Deutscher Monistenbund
Deutsche Nationalkomitee zur internationalen Bekämpfung
des Mädchenhandels
Deutscher Zweig, International Abolitionist Federation
Evangelische Frauenzeitung, journal of the DEF
ix

x

EZA
Frau
Frauenblätter
GE
GG
Gleichheit
GSAPKB
HLA
HPB
IAF
IBMS
IGS
JFB
JSZ
KB
KDF
KFV
KMV
LAB
MDGBG
MMSV
MWHK
NDB

NG
NZ
PAR
RStGB
SAM
SBVR
SM
SP
VBWHK

Abbreviations
Evangelisches Zentral-Archiv
Die Frau: Monatsschrift für das gesamte Frauenleben unserer
Zeit
Frauenblätter zur Hebung der öffentlichen Sittlichkeit, journal of the DFHS
Gemeinschaft der Eigenen
Geschlecht und Gesellschaft
Die Gleichheit: Zeitschrift für die Interessen der Arbeiterinnen
Geheimes Staatsarvhiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz
Helene-Lange-Archiv
Historisch-Politische Blätter
Internationale Abolitionistische Föderation
Internationale Bund für Mutterschutz und Sexualreform
Internationale Gesellschaft für Sexualforschung
Jüdischer Frauenbund
Jahrbuch für sexuelle Zwischenstufen, journal of the WHK
Korrespondenzblatt der Berliner Vereine zur Bekämpfung
der öffentlichen Sittenlosigkeit, journal of the AKDS
Katholischer deutscher Frauenbund
Katholischer Fürsorgeverein für Mädchen, Frauen und
Kinder
Kölner Männerverein für die Bekämpfung der öffentlichen
Unsittlichkeit
Landesarchiv Berlin
Mitteilungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung
der Geschlechtskrankheiten
Marianische Mädchenschutzvereine
Mitteilungen des wissenschaftlich-humanitären Komitees
Neue Deutsche Biographie, ed. Bayerische Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Historische Kommission (Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 1953–2007)
Die Neue Generation
Die Neue Zeit
Politisch-Anthropologische Revue
Reichsstrafgesetzbuch
Staatsarchiv München
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des
Reichstages
Sozialistische Monatshefte
Sexual-Probleme
Vierteljahrsberichte des wissenschaftlich-humanitären Komitees

Abbreviations
VFF
VFJM
VJS
WHK
WSV
ZBG
ZSW

xi

Verband Fortschrittlicher Frauenvereine
Verein der Freundinnen junger Mädchen
Verein Jugendschutz
Wissenschaftlich-humanitäre Komitee
Westdeutscher Sittlichkeitsverein
Zeitschrift für Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten
Zeitschrift für Sexualwissenschaft

Introduction
Sex, Politics, Modernity I

Sex was a big problem in twentieth-century Germany. Who should have it,
with whom, how often, under what conditions, and for what purposes? What
should be done about those who had it under the wrong conditions, for the
wrong purposes, the wrong way, with the wrong partners, too often, too
early, or too late? When and where should people talk and write about it,
to what audiences, and what should they say or not say? From the middle
of the 1880s until almost a century later, these were important questions for
German politics; in fact, during that century German public life was regularly
roiled by intense debates over issues relating to sex and reproduction – over
pornography and censorship, prostitution and venereal disease, marriage and
divorce, contraception and abortion, the birthrate, homosexuality, and so on.
Taken together, these debates constituted one of the most important political
and cultural conflicts in twentieth-century German history.
This book examines the first and formative phase of this long struggle to
define the role of sex in German society. In the three decades before World
War I, Germans had to come to grips with the ways in which very rapid processes of technological, social, and cultural change were transforming sex –
for example, by enabling cheap mass reproduction of graphic images (including photographs) and a massive expansion of popular literature, by creating
entirely new forms of entertainment like the cinema or recorded music, or
by making contraceptives increasingly cheap and available. Very rapid urbanization created a new urban commercial nightlife of new scale, intensity, and
character. The growth of the white-collar middle class and rapid upward social
mobility, rising working-class incomes, the emergence of a mass working-class
movement, and particularly the expansion of women’s employment and the
sudden growth of the women’s movements threw relations between the classes
and the sexes into disarray and called into question the sexual power and privilege of middle-class men. Quite suddenly, Germans were confronted with a
1

2

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

question that seemed of enormous importance: what place would and should
sex have in a modern society?
The debate over that question generated an enormous volume of spoken
and printed verbiage and became virtually inescapable for any member of the
educated public. Each of the major ideological and political communities in
Germany put sexuality at the core of their anthropology, their conception
of what human beings are like and how they relate to each other. At a moment
when organizing a working modern society was clearly the question of the
hour, this in turn meant that sex seemed a profoundly important and urgent
issue. The most popular socialist work in the German Empire, for example,
was August Bebel’s Woman under Socialism (1879), which held that sexual
liberation was an integral part of the coming social and democratic revolution.
Conservative Christians in both the Conservative Party and the (Catholicdominated) Center Party saw the patriarchal family, with its clear division of
gender roles and its highly restrictive sexual mores, as the foundation of social
order and the state. Many liberals saw conservative Christians’ attempts to
impose their own peculiarly restrictive moral pedagogy (for example, through
censorship) as a dangerous and fundamentally tyrannical attack on the freedom
of art and of public opinion, both of which liberals regarded as foundational to
a free society. The debate over sexual morality and sexual practices was central
to the ongoing struggle in Germany in this period over the most fundamental
questions of political principle and political organization: over how to define
and to secure the freedom of the citizen and over how to guarantee the national
power that, most believed, ultimately defended that freedom.
This broad debate over sexuality and politics became increasingly intense,
embittered, and continuous over the thirty years examined in this book. That
was partly because the social, technological, and cultural revolutions only accelerated over this period. But it was also partly because the debate itself had a
dynamic of its own, in which opposing ideas and movements sparked intensifying responses in an escalating cultural and political feedback loop. At the
outset the reform of mores and legislation concerning sexuality was the project
of a relatively small group of Christian activists, facing both profound hostility
to their radical ideas and a powerful taboo against speaking about sex at all.
By the turn of the century, a bitter debate over censorship dominated parliamentary business for months on end. Between about 1902 and 1908, there was
a massive outpouring of discussion and of organizational initiatives around
issues of morality, decency, and reproduction, much of it among ideological
communities vehemently opposed to some of the core values championed by
conservative Christians. In the five years before World War I, the tone and volume of the confrontation between these different groups and agendas escalated
rapidly. By 1912 and 1913, as war loomed, issues of sexual and reproductive
behavior were increasingly understood to be central to the question of national
power – what constituted it, what it was for, and how to build or preserve it.
In that context, issues relating to sexuality, decency, and reproduction were

Sex, Politics, and Modernity I

3

debated with particular urgency, even fury; and the number and importance of
related legislative and administrative initiatives rose rapidly.
This pattern was by no means unique to Germany; very similar debates
were fought out throughout Europe, its colonial sphere, and North America.
Historians of modern Western societies have therefore long been drawn to
the assertion that these debates about sexuality are characteristic of European
and American modernity – of societies experiencing the very broad complex of
economic, social, cultural, and political changes that reshaped European and
American societies between the middle of the nineteenth (or, some argue, the
middle of the eighteenth) and the last third of the twentieth century. There is,
various historians have suggested, a distinctive connection between sexuality
and modernity: a particular transformation of sexuality is one of that broader
complex of changes or indeed is constitutive of important social and cultural
aspects of modernity.
The single most influential argument of this kind was made by Michel Foucault, who argued at the end of the 1970s that changes in ideas about and
practices of sexuality were foundational to the creation of the modern social
order in Europe in the two centuries after about 1750. Sexuality as a set of ideas
and practices, Foucault argued, was produced and deployed as perhaps the crucial technology of governmentality (how societies govern themselves) from the
late eighteenth century onward. The power/knowledge of sexual experts who
developed ways of administering life (that is, both individual bodies and populations or demographics) was a new modality of social discipline – a new
way of constructing a conceptual and social order that limited, constrained,
and defined options for individual and collective behavior – and thus was one
of the pillars of a new social order. Foucault’s assessment of this new system
of discipline, this new mode of ordering society, was extraordinarily grim. He
regarded National Socialism as a particularly “cunning” transitional combination of the old regime order of blood (power based on the efficient distribution
of death by the sovereign) and the new order of sex (power based on the management of life by experts); mass sterilization, mass public health propaganda,
and mass murder were “paroxysms” of the new “disciplinary power” over
sex/life, in which a complex of interrelated modern institutions, including both
the state and various fields of social science and social work, took upon itself
responsibility for managing (improving, purifying, and protecting) the physical
qualities of both individual bodies and the entire national population.1
Lawrence Birken, writing ten years after Foucault, offered a very different
analysis of the relationship between sexuality and modernity. Birken argued
that the modern conception of sexuality was directly connected to the emergence of democracy in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The disintegration of a holistic premodern worldview in which different people had
1

See Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality: An Introduction, vol. I (New York: Vintage,
1990), here esp. p. 149.

4

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

particular, different characteristics, rights, and social – and sexual – functions,
and its replacement by a new worldview in which all people are characterized by desire and pursue their pleasures in an open market, was foundational
to the emergence of the idea of equal and universal democratic, rights-based
citizenship. The valorization of desire as universal and productive was central not only to the development of a modern sexual culture but also to the
development of the consumer economy (which is founded on desire for things,
not for bodies), and thereby to the construction of the political economy of
modern democracies. As a transitional ideological formation characteristic of
the shift from a protoindustrial economy of scarcity to an industrial economy
of abundance, sexology did seek to defend sexual difference and normative
“heterogenitality” (Birken’s term for the heterosexual family). Nevertheless, its
own logic was ultimately and unavoidably a democratizing one; and in three
rapid, successive stages in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
it moved inexorably toward the “extension of the democratic model to the
furthest conceivable limit,” at which every human being has equal rights, and
the desires and needs of every individual are as valid and important as those
of every other. The disintegration of restrictive conceptions of sexuality and
sexual morality corresponded to, and indeed underlay, the articulation and
realization of “a succession of increasingly less restricted, symbolic definitions
of citizenship” in the political sense.2
The almost exactly diametrical opposition between these two conceptions
of the relationship between sex and politics in the modern Euro-American
world is symptomatic of a broader divergence in historians’ assessment of the
political potentials of modern societies. As A. Dirk Moses put it in an essay of
2008, whereas some have seen modernity as a “byword for material and intellectual advancement, national liberation and international peace, individual
freedom and enlightenment,” others have seen modernity as the age of “racist
utopias and totalizing visions of purity, soulless bureaucracy and the omnipotent state.”3 Mark Roseman pointed to the same pattern in 2011: “In rejecting
older modernization theories’ normative assumptions” about the emancipatory
logic of modernity, he suggested, “we have often produced a new moralizing
counter-narrative about modernity’s ‘fatal potential.’”4
2

Lawrence Birken, Consuming Desire: Sexual Science and the Emergence of a Culture of Abundance, 1871–1914 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988), pp. 95, 133, 132.
3 A. Dirk Moses, “Genocide and Modernity,” in The Historiography of Genocide, ed. Dan Stone
(Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan, 2008), p. 157.
4 Mark Roseman, “National Socialism and the End of Modernity,” American Historical Review
116 (2011): 688. See also Edward Ross Dickinson, “Biopolitics, Fascism, Democracy: Reflections on Our Discourse Concerning ‘Modernity,’” Central European History 37 (2004): 1–48;
Young-Sun Hong, “Neither Singular nor Alternative: Narratives of Modernity and Welfare in
Germany, 1870–1945,” Social History 30 (2005): 133–153; Dennis Sweeney, “Reconsidering
the Modernity Paradigm: Reform Movements, the Social and the State in Wilhelmine Germany,”
Social History 31 (2006): 405–434.

Sex, Politics, and Modernity I

5

This is a problem that has been particularly acute for historians of Germany,
because the disastrous rise and self-destruction of National Socialism has posed
the question whether totalitarianism and mass murder are logical or even necessary outcomes of modernization – or not. According to Hans-Ulrich Wehler’s
influential account based on modernization theory, published in 1969, Germany’s disastrous early twentieth-century history was at root the result of
Germany’s imperfect modernization – the fact that while economy, society,
and culture were modernizing rapidly in Germany in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, its political structure was not.5 More recently, numerous historians have understood the German catastrophe as a product not of a
deficit of modernity but of a particularly virulent form of modernity. The process of economic, social, and cultural modernization was particularly rapid and
comprehensive, and hence stressful, in Germany; and this made many Germans
especially susceptible to the appeal of radical social engineering projects.6 Modern German history was, in short, a case study in the dangers of “an extreme
form of technocratic reason” and of “early twentieth-century modernity’s dark
side.”7
In recent years, a growing number of historians have begun to express dissatisfaction with the tendency toward teleology in both these models. Modern
societies, they hold, are very complex and are unlikely to be characterized by
any unitary “logic” of development. They have, evidently, multiple and contradictory potentials.8 Twentieth-century Germany was home to both National
Socialism and one of the most successful liberal-democratic welfare states on
the planet. Both were modern, in the sense that they built on the whole complex
of changes that make up modernization – scientific and industrial development,
mass political participation, the growth of the mass media, and so on. With
respect specifically to sexuality, modernization leads to the retreat of prohibitions and conventions in sexual life; but it also leads to the expansion of
regulation and normalization by experts, agencies, and the media. Reasoning
from such dichotomies, some historians argue that the concept of modernity
is not a very useful one. As Mark Roseman put it, “the basic ingredients of
modernity allow for such massively varying societal outcomes and such huge
5

Hans Ulrich Wehler, The German Empire, 1871–1918 (Dover, NH: Berg, 1985).
See, e.g., Peter Fritzsche, “Did Weimar Fail?” Journal of Modern History 68 (1996) and “Nazi
Modern,” Modernism/Modernity 3 (1996); Detlev Peukert, “Der ‘Traum der Vernunft,’” in
Max Webers Diagnose der Moderne, ed. Detlev Peukert (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
1989); Detlev J. K. Peukert, “The Genesis of the ‘Final Solution’ from the Spirit of Science,” in
Reevaluating the Third Reich, ed. Thomas Childers and Jane Kaplan (New York: Holmes &
Meier, 1993).
7 Joan Quataert, “Introduction 2: Writing the History of Women and Gender in Imperial
Germany,” in Society, Culture, and the State in Germany, 1870–1930, ed. Geoff Eley (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996), p. 103.
8 See Edward Ross Dickinson, “Not So Scary After All? Reform in Imperial and Weimar
Germany,” Central European History 43 (2010): 149–172.
6

6

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

differences between successive epochs as to give modernity very little explanatory power” at all.9
This book starts from the premise that there is another, more fruitful question we can ask about the political potentials of modernization – including
its sexual-political potentials. We cannot dispense with the terms “modernity”
and “modernization,” because they are there, as brute historical facts, measurable in statistics on steel production, beer consumption, membership in professional organizations, participation in elections, print runs and circulations, and
so on and so forth, endlessly, across all realms of social, economic, political,
scientific, and cultural life. But modernity “explains” why particular things
happened in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries only in the sense that it
is the medium in which they happened – a condition, not a cause, of their
occurrence. Rather than asking what modernity “causes” (or “explains”),
therefore, we really should ask this: what does modernity make possible?
Once we ask this question, the logic of modernity becomes obvious; indeed,
the conundrum becomes the answer to the conundrum. What modernity “does”
is to generate multiple new possibilities. Modern politics is the reaction to and
struggle over the new and complex set of societal choices created by those
possibilities. If we give up the job of reducing the complexity of modernity to a
unitary, coherent dynamic or logic (as, for example, Birken and Foucault seek
to do), then we immediately create a new and much more interesting job for
ourselves: to figure out the dynamics of the complexity modernity generates.
This book, then, explores the ideas, social foundations, and development
of, and the interactions between, multiple competing movements that championed quite divergent proposals for reformulating the place of sex in German
society in response to the transformation of modernization, between 1880 and
1914. The three central findings of the following chapters may be summarized,
schematically, as follows.
First, the debate over sexual morality and sexual practices was cast by all
participants explicitly in political terms. Sexuality, sexual practices, and sexual
morality were understood to be directly and profoundly related to fundamental
political principles. In particular, again, sexuality was central to all parties’
understandings of how to combine power with freedom, both at the individual
level (and even within the person, as psychological characteristics) and in the
formal, constitutional sense. Furthermore, sexuality was a political issue also
in the sense that different positions in the debate over sex corresponded in very
concrete and tangible ways to the interests and agendas of particular social
groups – such as the clergy, doctors, teachers, the police, cultural and media
entrepreneurs, and so on.
Second, what was of decisive importance in this field was not that the
debate was moving in any particular direction, toward any particular crisis
or resolution, but rather that it was moving in all directions at once. It was
9

Roseman, “National Socialism and the End,” pp. 700–701, 689.

Sex, Politics, and Modernity I

7

characterized by the progressively clearer and more forceful articulation of
a rapidly proliferating menagerie of positions. And the champions of every
one of those positions were able, to one degree or another, to gain leverage
on public opinion and public policy (whether at the national, state, or local
level, and whether in the courts, in legislative bodies, or through administrative
agencies). From the historians’ perspective it is this rapid intensification and
diversification of the debate and the struggle to control policy that is most
significant, not the particular commitments of any one group.
Third, the debate between these rapidly multiplying positions, seen as a
whole, was a dynamic system. The individual groups and discourses engaged
evolved rapidly precisely because they were in dialogue and often confrontation with one another. The conflicts among them intensified their efforts to
mobilize their potential constituencies – and their success in doing so. Many
of them also shifted ground quite substantially in response to such conflicts,
or as they mobilized wider and less homogeneous constituencies. Quite often
they fractured as a result of such shifts, generating still further positions and
organizations. Ultimately, the fragments began to coalesce again into broader
camps or groupings – a development that only further ramped up the intensity
of conflict and mobilization. This is the real story of this period. What was
most important was not the articulation and advance of inherently dangerous
or inherently democratic ideas but the simultaneous and ramifying advance of
a large number and variety of ideas, a steady expansion of the dialogue and
debate among them, and the escalating mobilization of social groups in support of them. This is the political logic of modernity – a logic of intensifying
cultural, social, and political plurality and mobilization.
There is a very substantial historical literature on the politics of sexuality in
late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Germany. Most of the intellectual
developments, reform movements, legislative debates, and key figures discussed
in the following chapters have been the subject at least of a few articles, and
often of multiple substantial monographs. Many of these studies, in addition
to recounting the history on which they are focused, also draw conclusions
about the relationship between their particular objects of study and the wider
discussion of the political potentials of modernity. This book is therefore in
part a work of synthesis, drawing on this very large specialist literature.
The agenda of this book is different from that of most of these more specialized studies, however. Most of the scholarly literature focuses on particular
movements, and often on assessing the political potentials – positive or negative – of particular sets of ideas about sex. This study aims instead to assess
the political potentials of the debate as a whole, as a dynamic system. Those
potentials cannot be read only from inside individual movements; they were
determined instead by the interaction between those movements, by the complexity not of ideas but of the conflicts between ideas.
Examining the activities and ideas of the many groups studied in this book
from this fresh perspective – “against” or in parallel with one another, and

8

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

with close attention to the broader context of the debate as a whole and to
the consequences for their thinking and activism of interactions between multiple different groups – has required systematically going back to the sources,
reexamining even publications and archives that have been relatively intensively
studied (as well as many that have not). Unfortunately, that has in many cases at
least partially obscured my debt to the scholarly literature. Often, for example, I
first followed the research trail left by specialists who have examined particular
organizations or ideas to the relevant archives, publications, or personalities,
and I then built out from there. The reader willing to consult the footnotes
will find references to the specialist works I consulted. But of course, in addition, and more broadly, this book builds on, and is a product of, some two or
three decades of very active, indeed vibrant, scholarly discussion and research
in the modern history of sexuality, and the questions – and excitement –
it has generated. In particular, this book has been inspired and informed by the
very lively engagement with social theory characteristic of the literature on the
history of sexuality (which I have addressed in a number of other publications).
But given the aims of this book – to bring to life in a sense an entire world
of ideas and organizations, in all its complexity, its interconnections, and its
entanglements – the approach taken here is necessarily and deliberately highly
empirical.
In particular, this book also deliberately eschews the aim of understanding
the relationship of the debate over sex in the 1900s to the origins of National
Socialism, or to its rise to power in the 1930s. Again, this has been one of
the central concerns of the literature on the history of sexuality specifically
in Germany, as well as a focus of interest in the discussion of social theory
more broadly. My research has convinced me, however, that the period before
1914 has to be understood on its own terms. World War I was a caesura of
enormous importance in German history, specifically too in the history of the
politics of sexuality in Germany. But the particular nature of the impact of
the war and its consequences (up to and including the Great Depression and
Nazism) was determined by the structure of the society that passed through
those crises, and by the potentials it harbored. Ironically, therefore, ending this
book in 1914 is actually the most effective way accurately to reconstruct the
continuities between 1880 and 1933. We must reconstruct the world of 1913
to understand how it differed from that of 1930; and only once we do can we
understand why its parts – people, movements, and institutions – responded as
they did to the challenges they faced between 1914 and 1929.
This book is divided into three parts. Part I examines the various organizations that championed one or another variety of sexual conservatism in
Imperial Germany. Some of these groups, particularly of conservative Protestant men, were formed very early on in the development of the debate over
sexual morality, in the 1880s, and persisted right down to 1914; others, particularly of Catholic men, formed after the turn of the century and flourished
only in the last six or seven years before the war. These groups are addressed in

Sex, Politics, and Modernity I

9

Chapters 1–3. A second wave of conservative morality organizations emerged
in the 1890s and 1900s; in particular, in this period both conservative religious
women’s groups and politically and theologically liberal women’s organizations transformed the debate over morality. All these groups, and their impact
on the ideas of conservative religious men, are addressed in Chapter 4. Chapter 5 discusses the successes and failures – in legislatures and city halls, in
the courts, and in public opinion – of this broad range of moral conservative
organizations.
Part II examines the various organizations that championed one or another –
and often quite divergent – varieties of sexual radicalism. Most of these groups
formed between the late 1890s and 1905; and most of them also passed through
an important period of crisis, adjustment, and radicalization between 1907
and 1910. Chapter 6 examines the evolution of Social Democratic thinking
regarding sexual morality, which was foundational for sexual radicalism of all
varieties early on and continued to be crucially influential right down to 1914.
Chapter 7 examines the homosexual rights movement that took organizational
form in 1896/1897. Chapter 8 examines medical doctors’ organized campaign
against venereal disease, starting in 1902. Chapters 9 and 10 examine the
ideas and activities of the sex-reform movement that took organized form in
1904/1905. All five chapters trace a process of evolution and radicalization
driven by a whole set of internal conflicts and crises in the years between 1906
and 1910.
Part III examines the broad and escalating confrontation between these various groupings as it developed after about 1908. One development of this period
was the emergence of the diffuse but important – and very vocal – new science
of sexology (Sexualwissenschaft), and its bifurcation into bitterly opposed left
and right factions as a consequence of a growing confrontation with sex reform
and the women’s movements, on the one hand, and moral conservatives, on
the other. This is the topic of Chapter 11. Chapter 12 lays out the broader
escalating complex of confrontations between these three loose groupings –
religious moral conservatives, socialist and democratic sexual radicals, and
men committed both to the exclusive authority of science and to masculine
privilege.
The conclusion, finally, lays out the key findings of this study and returns to
an assessment of the more theoretical questions addressed in this introduction.
It elaborates an explanation of the book’s findings that is rooted in the social
and institutional history analyzed in the body of the book. And it offers some
reflections on the deeper structure of Germans’ thinking about sex and politics
in the period before World War I, and of the ultimate stakes that those involved
in the debate over sexual morality thought they were playing for. Ultimately,
beneath all the complexity of the debate, it suggests, those involved believed
that the “problem” of sexuality posed a stark question: what does it mean to
be, or to fail to be, human? The answer to this simple question, it turned out,
was not simple; and it got ever less simple over time.

10

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

Again, this book tells a very complex story. But it embraces that complexity
because we understand the political dynamics of modernity only when we
understand the full range of possibilities that modernization created. This book
explores one important thing that modernization made possible: the very rapid
proliferation of a remarkably diverse set of understandings of what the fact
that human beings reproduce sexually means for politics – politics at the level
of the state, politics at the level of interpersonal relations, and the internal
politics of the self. That proliferation in turn created an intense, escalating,
and ramifying set of political conflicts, with its own potentials. In the broadest
terms, the conclusion of this book is that the decisive political potential of sexual
modernity lies not in the politics of sexuality, in the sense of a particular political
tendency or agenda (say, democratic or totalitarian), but in the multiplicity of
tendencies and agendas it enabled and in the interactions among them. Perhaps
a somewhat convoluted formulation will sum this point up efficiently: what
was most important was not the politics of sexuality but the politics of the
politics of sexuality.

part i
MORAL REFORM, 1880–1900

1
Christian Men and Morality

I. The Origins and Structure of the Men’s Morality Movements,
1848–1914
The beginnings of modern forms of Protestant moral activism formed part of
the response to the perceived moral challenge of the French Revolution and
Enlightenment rationalism. That response was intensified by the social crisis
of pauperism in the 1840s and the Revolution of 1848. The Inner Mission,
an umbrella organization of Protestant lay associations formed in the latter
year, gave the charitable and moral reform efforts of conservative Protestants
an institutional focus in the 1850s and 1860s, and their expansion was further
fueled by the processes of urbanization, industrialization, class formation, secularization, and political transformation in the following decades – all of which
were regarded by conservative Christians as facets of an ongoing social-spiritual
decay. In the third quarter of the century, the Inner Mission was active in a wide
range of fields, from care for orphaned or delinquent children, to Bible study
and urban missions, and to temperance and religious and friendly societies for
Protestant workers.
From its inception the Inner Mission took an intense interest in matters of
sexual morality and public decency, and particularly in prostitution. The first
Protestant charitable shelters and homes for fallen girls and reformed prostitutes dated from the 1830s; there were eighteen such institutions in Germany
by the end of the 1870s, forty-nine by 1900, and eighty-eight by 1911.1 And
from the end of the 1860s, the Inner Mission was engaged in an intensifying
campaign to persuade the government to do something about the problem of
1

“Die Rettungsarbeit in den Anstalten für die verirrten Töchter unsres Volkes,” Fliegende Blätter
aus dem Rauhen Hause zu Horn bei Hamburg (hereinafter Fliegende Blätter) 57 (1900): 239;
Friedrich Mahling, Die Innere Mission (Gütersloh: Bertelsmann, 1937), p. 644.

13

14

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

prostitution, which was tolerated under the Criminal Code (Reichsstrafgesetzbuch [RStGB]) of 1871 as long as women in the sex trade conformed to local
police regulations.2
Because the Protestant Church was an established church, however, the
growing prominence of this issue put the clergymen who made up the majority
of the leadership of the Inner Mission in a difficult position. They were in effect
part of the authoritarian government, yet regulation was one of the institutions
of that state. As the leader of the most influential Protestant morality association
put it in 1910, the agitation of the Inner Mission had therefore necessarily been
“diffident” and “much too respectable and academic.”3 What was more, at
least in the early years of the movement, the prevailing code of sexual morality
and public decency made it appear potentially outrageous to discuss matters
such as prostitution in any public venue.4 In particular, well into the early years
of the twentieth century, it was widely regarded as in itself sexually immoral to
address the subject of sexual immorality before mixed audiences; but women
played a crucial role in the Inner Mission and in the churches.5 Some topics, as
one Berlin activist put it, simply could not be discussed “in the house of God.”6
By the mid-1880s, therefore, it clearly made sense to establish an organizationally autonomous and exclusively male Protestant morality movement. In
1885 the West German Morality Association (Westdeutscher Sittlichkeitsverein
[WSV]) was formed in Mönchen-Gladbach in the Rhineland under the leadership of Pastor Ludwig Weber – a leading figure in the conservative Protestant
workers’ associations and close associate of Adolf Stoecker in the Christian
Social movement.7 Two years later a similar group, the Men’s Alliance for Combating Public Immorality (Berliner Männerbund zur Bekämpfung der Unsittlichkeit [BMBU]), was organized in Berlin, under the leadership of Wilhelm
Philipps and other close associates of Stoecker and the Christian Social Party,
2

Die öffentliche Sittenlosigkeit mit besonderer Beziehung auf Berlin, Hamburg, und die anderen
grossen Städte des nördlichen und mittleren Deutschlands (Berlin: Enslin, 1869); Isabell LisbergHaag, “Die Unzucht–das Grab der Völker”: Die evangelische Sittlichkeitsbewegung und die
“sexuelle Moderne” (1870–1918) (Hamburg: Lit, 1999), pp. 68–71.
3 Ludwig Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre der Sittlichkeitsbewegung: Bilder aus der Geschichte des
Westdeutschen Sittlichkeitsvereins und der Allgemeinen deutschen Sittlichkeits-Konferenz (Duisburg: WSV, 1910), p. 6, and N., “Die deutsche Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” Korrespondenzblatt der
Berliner Vereine zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Sittenlosigkeit (hereinafter KB) 12 (1898): 3.
4 Adolf Henning, “Die öffentliche Sittenlosigkeit und die Arbeit der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine:
Eine Denkschrift,” Fliegende Blätter 54 (1897): 369.
5 See, e.g., Samuel Keller, “Gleiches Recht für Mann und Weib,” AKDS, Verhandlungen der
Allgemeinen Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine vom 14. und 15. Oktober 1891 zu
Dresden (Berlin: AKDS, 1892), p. 76.
6 N., “Die deutsche Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” KB 12 (1898): 4.
7 Mahling, Innere Mission, pp. 254–255. On Stoecker, see Jeremy Telman, “Adolf Stoecker:
Anti-Semite with a Christian Mission,” Jewish History 9:2 (1995): 93–112. On Weber, see
Gert Lewek, Kirche und soziale Frage um die Jahrhundertwende (Neukirchen: Verlag des
Erziehungsvereins, 1963).

Christian Men and Morality

15

and with close ties to Stoecker’s Berlin city mission.8 For the next half-century,
these two organizations would form the backbone and organizational focus
of the Protestant morality movement in Germany. In the summer of 1889 a
number of similar groups agreed to form the General Conference of German
Morality Associations (Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine
[AKDS]), with Weber as chairman.9 By the turn of the century there were fortyeight Protestant morality associations in Germany. Most joined the AKDS, as
did most of the provincial associations of the Inner Mission and a large number of parish councils (more than 200 by 1899).10 The organization held an
annual conference, distributed tens of thousands of leaflets and flyers annually,
published a regular newsletter (the Korrespondenzblatt), submitted numerous
petitions to governments at all levels (national, state, and local), and maintained
close ties with related Protestant associations.
The rapid consolidation of the Protestant men’s morality movement was
catalyzed in part by a desire to retain the initiative in a field in which they faced
growing challenges to their cultural authority from no less than three different
groups. One was a diffuse and localized set of nondenominational morality
associations, which were also emerging in the early and middle 1880s. Some
of these groups grew out of the temperance movement, which was organized
on interconfessional lines; others arose in more liberal Protestant circles.11 The
second group was the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). For the most
part, the SPD confined itself, in its early years, to arguing that prostitution was
a by-product of capitalism and would disappear with it. But August Bebel’s
Woman under Socialism, which was first published in 1878, also offered the
beginnings of a coherent materialist alternative to Christian sexual ethics. Bebel
was one of the founders and most popular leaders of the SPD, and the book
achieved enormous popular success, seeing twenty-one printings by 1893.12
Finally, at the beginning of the 1880s, the international movement against
the regulation of prostitution, which had its origins in England in the 1860s,
8

See Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, pp. 17–18; “Statut und Geschäftsordnung des Männerbundes
zur Bekämpfung der Unsittlichkeit,” Archiv des Diakonischen Werkes (ADW), BP I, 240; “Die
Begründung des Männerbundes,” KB 1:1 (1887): 4. On the early history of the WSV, see
also 50 Jahre Kampf für Volkssittlichkeit und Volkskraft: Die Geschichte des Westdeutschen
Sittlichkeitsvereine von seinen Anfängen his heute (1885–1935) (Schwelm: Meiners, 1935),
pp. 13–53; on Philipps, see Biographisches Handbuch des preussischen Abgeordentenhauses
1867–1918 (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1988), p. 299.
9 “Protokoll der Konferenz in Hannover am 31. Oktober 1889,” ADW, BP I, 240.
10 Central-Ausschuss für die Innere Mission der deutschen evangelischen Kirche, ed., Statistik
der Inneren Mission der deutschen evangelischen Kirche (Berlin: CAIM, 1899), p. 256; “XI
Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine,” KB 13 (1899): 92.
11 See Katharina Scheven, “Geschichte der Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” in Am Born der Gemeinnützigkeit: Festgabe zum 80. Geburtstage des Herrn Geh. Reg.-Rat Prof. Dr. jur. Victor
Böhmert, ed. Peter Schmidt (Dresden: O. V. Böhmert, 1909), p. 126.
12 August Bebel, Die Frau und der Sozialismus (Die Frau in der Vergangenheit, Gegenwart und
Zukunft), twenty-first printing (Stuttgart: Dietz, 1893).

16

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

began to gain influence in Germany as well. In 1875 the British, Continental
and General Federation for the Abolition of Prostitution as a Legal or Tolerated Institution (known as the International Abolitionist Federation [IAF])
was organized, and in 1880 what was effectively the first German chapter
was formed in Berlin, under the leadership of Gertrud Guillaume-Schack.13
This last group was probably the most immediately important challenge to the
AKDS, not least because the IAF appears to have been attractive to a number
of women’s rescue associations close to the Inner Mission.14
In the early 1880s Protestant activists sustained close ties to the IAF; Ludwig
Weber was even a member of the executive commission of the organization
until 1887. The principles propagated by the IAF were, however, in some
respects quite threatening to conservative Protestants. The liberal Protestants
who dominated in the IAF argued that the individual had the right to do
whatever she or he wished with her or his own body, short of compromising
the rights and well-being of others; the job of the state was not to enforce
morality or particular religious values but to defend the rights and freedoms
of the citizen. The organization therefore argued for the complete decriminalization of prostitution. Theologically conservative Protestants in Germany’s
established churches, in contrast, assumed – as Ludwig Weber put it in 1892 –
that “the state is the guardian of God’s commandments.”15 Until the early
1890s they supported, albeit with growing ambivalence, some form of regulation; thereafter they concluded that all prostitution should be criminalized.
(Confusingly, only the IAF position – in favor of both abolition of regulation
and decriminalization of prostitution – was referred to at the time as “abolitionist.” Conservative Protestants too favored the abolition of regulation; but
they were almost never called “abolitionists.”)
Conservative Protestants also looked askance at the leading role played by
women in the IAF. Their view was that women’s “principle task” in matters of morality “will of course always be the purification and cleansing
13

See A. Michelsen, “Der internationale Bund gegen das Kontrollsystem,” Monatsschrift für
Innere Mission 4 (1884): 182, and A. Michelsen, “Der Kampf gegen das Kontrollsystem,”
Monatschrift für Innere Mission 4 (1884): 373–383; Gertrud Bäumer and Helene Lange, eds.,
Handbuch der Frauenbewegung, Teil II: Frauenbewegung und soziale Frauenthätitgkeit in
Deutschland nach Einzelgebieten (Berlin: W. Moeser, 1901), pp. 164–172. On the IAF in Germany, see Lutz Sauerteig, “Frauenemanzipation und Sittlichkeit: Die Rezeption des englischen
Abolitionismus in Deutschland,” in Aneignung und Abwehr: Interkultureller Transfer zwischen
Deutschland und Grossbritanien im 19. Jahrhundert, ed. Rudolf Muhs, Johannes Paulmann,
and Willibald Steinmetz (Bodenheim: Philo, 1998), pp. 159–197. On Guillaume-Schack, see
Ute Gerhard, Frauenbewegung und Feminismus: Eine Geschichte seit 1789 (Munich: Beck,
2009), pp. 60–61.
14 Petra Schmackpfeffer, Frauenbewegung und Prostitution: Über das Verhältnis der alten und
neuen deutschen Frauenbewegung zur Prostitution (Oldenburg: Bibliotheks-und Informationssystem der Universität Oldenburg, 1989), pp. 40–42; Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, p. 6.
15 AKDS, Verhandlungen der Allgemeinen Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine vom 19.
und 20. Oktober 1892 zu Darmstadt (Berlin: AKDS, 1893), p. 43.

Christian Men and Morality

17

of . . . family life”; beyond that women should devote themselves to “silent
service,” for example, in protecting or rescuing their endangered and fallen
sisters. It was specifically men’s work to “fight with sharp sword against the
monster of vice” through public and political action.16 The founders of the
WSV accordingly decided that women could not be full members. None of this
was compatible with the principles and practice of the IAF, and in fact Weber
was – as he put it in 1910 – “thrown out” of the IAF executive committee in
1887.17
Conservative assumptions regarding gender soon came to be embodied in a
careful division of labor within the AKDS. Protestant women’s groups, gathered into the Women’s Association for the Improvement of Morality (Deutscher
Frauenverein zur Hebung der Sittlichkeit [DFHS]), formed in 1887, met with
the annual AKDS conferences; but the two sexes met mostly in separate sessions, hearing different speakers on often quite different topics. Before the
turn of the century the women’s sessions were addressed almost exclusively by
male pastors and focused almost exclusively on women’s domestic roles; their
journal, published from 1892 onward, was edited by a male pastor; and their
organization itself was headed by a male pastor.18
The origins of the Catholic men’s morality associations lie in the second
wave of the formation of the broader German morality movement at the end
of the 1890s, which saw the emergence of a whole range of women’s, Catholic,
Jewish, and interconfessional organizations. The issues on which these new
groups focused included not only prostitution but also broader cultural concerns sparked by the flourishing of the new urban mass culture. This second
wave is discussed in the next chapter. It is appropriate to discuss the Catholic
men’s groups here, however, because their agenda and activities were in key
respects quite similar to those of the Protestant men’s organizations created
more than a decade earlier.
The Catholic men’s morality movement emerged as part of the broader
flourishing of Catholic lay associational life after the abandonment of the last
vestiges of the Kulturkampf – the Prussian state’s assault on political Catholicism – in the late 1880s. The movement emerged first in the Rhineland, where
the Catholic community was more cosmopolitan than in the south and east, and
only later spread to Bavaria and the eastern Catholic diaspora. The Cologne
Men’s Association for Combating Public Immorality (Kölner Männerverein
für die Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Unsittlichkeit [KMV]), formed in 1898,
remained its permanent organizational core. Formally interconfessional, these
16

Ludwig Weber, “Jahresbericht des christlichen Vereins zur Hebung der öffentlichen Sittlichkeit
fuer Deutschland für das Vereinsjahr 1887/88,” p. 3, Evangelisches Zentral-Archiv (EZA),
Bestand 7, no. 3841; “Unsere Frauenvereine,” KB 1 (1887): 33, and “Auf zum Kampf,” KB 1
(1887): 10.
17 Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, p. 19.
18 On these developments, see also Lisberg-Haag, “Die Unzucht,” pp. 143–146.

18

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

organizations were very much dominated by Catholics.19 Just as the AKDS
had very close ties to the Christian Social movement and to the Conservative Party, the KMV had close ties both to political Catholicism and to
the Catholic charitable establishment, including the Popular Association for
Catholic Germany (Volksverein für das katholische Deutschland, founded in
1890) and the national organization of Catholic charities (Deutscher Caritasverband [DCV], founded in 1897). Also like its Protestant counterpart, the
Catholic men’s morality movement built on a long tradition of rescue work
among women’s religious orders.20 Partly due to tensions between the more
progressive Rhineland Catholic community and the Church, the Catholic movement developed relatively slowly in its first decade. A national association of
Catholic men’s morality groups was not formed until 1907; once formed, it
did not publish its national journal, Der Volkswart, until 1908; and a full-time
general secretary was only hired in 1912. Thereafter, however, its growth was
explosive: it had only 16 member associations in 1912 but grew to 131 by
the outbreak of World War I; two-thirds of these were in the Rhineland and
Westphalia.21
Neither the Protestant nor the Catholic morality associations were large
organizations by the standards of the day. The Protestant men’s organizations
had somewhere between 10,000 and 20,000 members by 1910.22 The Catholic
men’s groups achieved a similar size only in the last years before the war; even
in 1912, their journal, Der Volkswart, had a circulation of only 1,600.23 Both
Protestants and Catholics published much larger aggregate membership figures
based on total membership in associations that joined as corporate bodies.
The KMV, for example, reported that, in addition to individual memberships,
seventy-three Catholic organizations – with a total membership of 15,000 –
joined; in Munich corporate membership of twenty-five other associations
19

See, e.g., “Die Gründung eines ‘Münchener Männervereins zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen
Unsittlichkeit’ in München,” KB 20 (1906): 64.
20 Wilhelm Liese, Wohlfahrtspflege und Caritas im Deutschen Reich, in Deutsch-Österreich, der
Schweiz und Luxemburg (Mönchen-Gladbach: Volksverein, 1914), p. 164.
21 See Ernst Lennartz, Der Kölner Männerverein zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Unsittlichkeit:
Seine Geschichte und sein Wirken (Cologne: Josef Zacher, n.d.); “Kölner Männer-Verein zur
Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Unsittlichkeit, III. Bericht über die Gesamttätigkeit des Vereins,”
1903, Archiv des Deutschen Caritas-Verbandes (ADCV), CA-XXI, no. 19a; “Aus unseren
Vereinen,” Volkswart 7 (1914): 57–60; M. W. Schmidt, “Aus der Geschichte der Männervereine
z. B. d. ö. U.,” Volkswart 8 (1915): 54–56, 77–79.
22 Matthias Gross, “Die evangelische Sittlichkeitsbewegung im Deutschen Kaiserreich: Entstehung, Ideologie und Tätigkeitsfelder von der Mitte der 1880er Jahre bis zum Beginn der Ersten
Weltkriegs,” MA thesis, Hamburg, 1994, pp. 15, 96; “Die 25-jährige Jubiläumsfeier des
Westdeutschen Sittlichkeitsvereins zu Mülhausen (Ruhr),” Volkswart 4 (1911): 11; “DeutschEvangelischer Verein zur Förderung der Sittlichkeit e.V. Mitglieder-Bestand 1910/1911,” ADW,
CA 528 IV; Max Oberbreyer, Die Leipziger Sittlichkeitsbewegung (Leipzig: Reinhold Werther,
1892), p. 6.
23 “Aus unseren Vereinen,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 9, 72, and Volkswart 2 (1909): 44; Sperlings
Zeitschriften-Adressbuch, vol. 47 (Sperling: Stuttgart, 1912), p. 219.

Christian Men and Morality

19

added 50,000.24 Such figures for corporate memberships were not entirely
fictional, because both Protestant and Catholic morality associations appear to
have been well integrated into their respective broader associational communities. But clearly the men’s morality movements, more narrowly defined, numbered, all told, in the low tens of thousands of members. Both the Volksverein
and the Protestant League (Evangelischer Bund, formed in 1886), in contrast,
numbered in the hundreds of thousands by 1914.
The social position of the membership of the morality associations, however, helped to give them much greater influence than membership figures
suggest. Available membership lists indicate that between a third and a half
(depending on the locality) of the men involved in the Protestant associations
were clergymen and church officials, often of quite high rank; a quarter to a
third were government officials and military officers, again often in quite senior
positions; another quarter were businessmen, teachers, doctors, and artisans;
and perhaps one in ten were members of the nobility.25 The governing board
of the AKDS was even more heavily drawn from the governing elite: around
the turn of the century some two-thirds of its members were members of the
clergy, 20 percent were civil servants, and 10 percent were military officers.26
The Catholic movement was a less elite group; in particular it included fewer
members of the nobility, and teachers rather than the clergy played a larger
role in the active leadership. But it was still clearly dominated by prominent
members of local communities. Of the 118 chairmen of the individual chapters
of the KMV in 1913, 38 were teachers and academics; 23 were lawyers, judges,
or jurists; 16 were doctors; 11 were members of the clergy; 11 were members
of parliament or city councils; 9 were businessmen or artisans; and 4 were
members of the nobility.27 Of the individual members of the Munich men’s
morality association at its founding in 1906, a fifth were clergy and a fifth were
civil servants or members of municipal or state parliaments, a quarter were
teachers or academics, and another quarter were businessmen, professionals,
and artisans. Again, many of these men were members of the urban or regional

24

M. W. Schmidt, “Aus der Geschichte”; “München,” in “Aus unseren Vereinen,” Volkswart 1
(1908): 9.
25 “Jahresbericht des Berliner Männerbundes zur Bekämpfung der Unsittlichkeit über das Jahr
1889–1890,” ADW, BP I, 240; “Mitgliederliste der Allgemeinen Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine,” 1893, ADW, CA/GF 531.1; “Herzliche Bitte zum Beitritt zur Allgemeinen
Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine,” ADW, CA-528, Band II; Weisskreuzbund, Dreissig Jahre Weisskreuzarbeit (n.p.: Buchhandlung des Weissen Kreuzes, 1921), p. 34; Katharina
Scheven, “Zur Geschichte der Sittlichkeitsbewegung in Deutschland,” in Schmidt, ed., Am Born
der Gemeinnützigkeit, p. 126; KB 5 (1891): 118; and John C. Fout, “Sexual Politics in Wilhelmine Germany: The Male Gender Crisis, Moral Purity, and Homophobia,” in Forbidden
History, ed. John C. Fout (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), p. 281.
26 “Die XV. Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine,” KB 17 (1903): 72.
27 M. W. Schmidt, “Aus der Geschichte der Männervereine zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen
Unsittlichkeit,” Volkswart 8 (1915): 54–56, 77–79.

20

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

elite – university professors, judges, members of parliament, newspaper editors,
doctors, high officials in the church bureaucracy, and so on.28
Ties to the Christian church establishments also gave the morality movements financial and organizational resources far beyond what one would expect
for groups of this size. The Catholic bishops issued pastoral letters in 1909 and
1913 in support of the morality movement, for example, and the annual conference of German Catholics announced its support for the morality associations
already in 1905.29 On the Protestant side, again, a number of parish and
provincial church authorities joined the AKDS as corporate members, and the
AKDS was supported by church synods and by the church hierarchy, as well
as by the Inner Mission.30
Equally important, the morality movements often acted locally as, effectively, coordinating bodies for activities related to the preservation of public decency and morality that were in fact supported by a broad range of
confessionally oriented associations. Although individual chapters of Catholic
and Protestant morality movements had membership in the low hundreds, for
example, they were often able to draw audiences in the low thousands to public
meetings on specific issues.31
On both sides of the confessional divide, moreover, the men’s morality movement had very powerful political connections at the national level. Key figures
in both movements were members of the national parliament (for example,
Adolf Henning, general secretary of the AKDS from 1895 to 1902). Other
prominent parliamentarians were supporters (including, for example, Adolf
Stoecker; Reinhard Mumm, a key second-generation figure in the Christian
Social movement; Franz Hitze, one of the founders of the Volksverein and the
DCV; and Hermann Roeren, a leading figure in the predominantly Catholic
Center Party). Regionally, leading members sat in state parliaments, for example, in Prussia and Bavaria. The presence of these men in the state and national
legislatures gave their organizations an influence, at critical junctures, far out
of proportion to their relative size.32

28

“Aufruf zum Anschluss an den Münchener Männerverein zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen
Unsittlichkeit,” n.d. [1906], Staatsarchiv München (SAM), Polizeidirektion, no. 4475;
“Mitgliederverzeichnis des Münchener Männervereins zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Unsittlichkeit,” n.d., SAM, Polizeidirektion, no. 4475.
29 See Friedrich Weyer, “Volkswartbund e.V.,” in Jahrbuch der Caritaswissenschaft 1963
(Freiburg: Lambertus, 1963), p. 125.
30 On financial support specifically, see Evangelischer Oberkirchenrat to Königliche Konsistorium,
23 December 1899, EZA, Bestand 7, no. 3841.
31 “Aus unseren Vereinen,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 60–61, 72–74; “Eine hochbedeutsame Kundgebung,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 147; Mahling, Innere Mission, p. 889.
32 Franz-Josef Stegmann, “Franz Hitze,” in Neue Deutsche Biographie (hereinafter NDB), vol. 9,
ed. Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Historische Kommission (Berlin: Duncker &
Humblot, 1972), pp. 272–273; Weyer, “Volkswartbund,” p. 125; “Aus unseren Vereinen,”
Volkswart 7 (1914): 57–59.

Christian Men and Morality

21

II. Prostitution, the Men’s Morality Movement, and the State
For the great majority in the Protestant men’s morality movement, prostitution
was the single most important moral problem of the age. Under §361.6 of
the Criminal Code (Reichsstrafgesetzbuch [RStGB]) it was illegal to practice
prostitution if one were not registered with the police as a prostitute or did
not obey the regulations the police authorities issued. Each city had its own
rules, and systems varied considerably. Some large cities had brothels (which
were technically illegal); some had compulsory registration but no brothels;
others had only voluntary registration. Whatever the specific system adopted,
a large proportion of cities – particularly bigger cities – did have some form of
regulation; one survey in 1887 found that of 706 responding cities and towns,
218 enforced some form of regulation.33
Police regulations concerning prostitution were draconian. They required
that registered prostitutes submit to regular (often twice-weekly) medical examinations and subjected unregistered prostitutes to criminal penalties and in
many cities to compulsory registration (and subsequent regular inspections) at
the discretion of the police.34 They permitted compulsory medical examination
of women suspected of engaging in prostitution and provided for compulsory
treatment (in locked wards) of women found to be infected. In most towns,
they stipulated many locales (near schools or churches, in houses where minors
resided, and so on) where prostitutes were not allowed to live or loiter, or
public spaces they were not allowed to enter (certain streets, districts, theaters,
museums, parks, libraries, zoos, racetracks, music halls, and so on).35
The rationale for this system was complex. Whereas men were commonly
held to be dominated by an aggressive and potentially overwhelming sex drive,
most women were believed to be essentially uninterested in sex. What was
more, most men of the middle and lower-middle classes found it impossible to marry before their late twenties, because before that age they could
not afford to support a family, and contraceptive knowledge was rudimentary. There was therefore a period of some years during which most middleclass men’s sexual “needs” could not be met within the respectable familial
social order. Yet before World War I the weight of medical opinion held that
long-term celibacy compromised the physical and mental health of any normal young man, and that masturbation had frightful consequences for the
33

See H. Stursberg, Die Prostitution in Deutschland und ihre Bekämpfung (Düsseldorf: RheinischWestfälische Gefängnisgesellschaft, 1887); Abraham Flexner, Prostitution in Europe (New
York: Century, 1914), pp. 29, 130, 168–169.
34 Flexner, Prostitution, pp. 26–27; Anna Pappritz, “Die Parias unserer Gesellschaft,” Frauenbewegung 7 (1901): 131.
35 See Bäumer and Lange, Handbuch, pp. 156–161; Flexner, Prostitution, pp. 415–428; Wilhelm
Hammer, Zehn Lebensläufe Berliner Kontrollmädchen (Berlin: Seemann, 1905), pp. 22–26;
Dr. Stachow, “Die Kontrollstrasse in Bremen,” Zeitschrift für Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten (hereinafter ZBG) 4 (1905): 84–85.

22

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

mental and physical health, up to and including epilepsy, madness, suicide,
and homosexuality.36 Equally important, it was also widely believed that men’s
sexual desires, if not gratified in an orderly manner, could become psychologically overwhelming, leading them to seduce or even rape respectable girls and
women. The whole system of regulation was made all the more acceptable
by the widespread belief that – as one particularly crass exponent argued in
1900 – some women were “born whores,” being “sensual creatures,” “lazy,”
and “work-shy.” Some psychiatrists held that most prostitutes were simply
“retarded . . . abnormal . . . degenerate,” psychopathic or “for the most part
creatures born with wicked tendencies.”37 In fact, in many cases, proponents
of the system explicitly portrayed prostitutes as aggressors against the more
vulnerable male. In 1899, for example, one prominent expert on venereal diseases argued that the prostitute’s business “consists in the exploitation of the
physiological-psychological weaknesses of men.”38
Not surprisingly, then, around the turn of the century a very large proportion
of men seem to have paid for sex. Surveys published in 1910 and 1911 reported
that some 93 percent of medical students and doctors had first had sex with a
prostitute.39 Another study found that, of men infected with STDs in Hanover
in 1907 and 1908, about nine out of ten had been infected through intercourse
with a woman whom they paid for sex.40 A third study, published in 1914,
found that 60 percent of men had first had sex with a prostitute.41
As one might expect, given the extent of the sex trade, the system of regulation was designed not to suppress prostitution but only to minimize the
36

Hermann Rohleder, Die Masturbation: Eine Monographie für Ärzte und Pädagogen (Berlin:
Fischer’s Medicinische Buchhandlung, 1899), pp. 186, 192, 216; Marina Schuster, “Sexualaufklärung im Kaiserreich,” in Sexualmoral und Zeitgeist im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert,
ed. Anja Bagel-Bohlan and Michael Salewski (Opladen: Leske & Budrich, 1990), pp. 75–76;
Albert Eulenburg, “Die sexuelle Abstinenz und ihre Einwirkung auf die Gesundheit,” ZBG 13
(1911): 12.
37 Review of Berger, “Die Prostitution in Hannover,” Archiv für Kriminal-Anthropologie und
Kriminalistik (hereinafter AKAK) 9 (1902): 368; Hermann Rohleder, “Die Eugenik (Rassenhygiene) und ihre Bedeutung fürs weibliche Geschlecht,” Die Neue Generation (hereinafter
NG) 11 (1915): 342–343; Benjamin Tarnowsky, Prostitution und Abolitionismus (Hamburg:
Leopold Voss, 1890), pp. VII–VIII; Otto Mönkemöller, Korrektionsanstalt und Landarmenhaus: Ein soziologischer Beitrag zur Kriminalität und Psychopathologie des Weibes (Leipzig:
J. A. Barth, 1908), p. 113.
38 C. Ströhmberg, Die Prostitution: Ein Beitrag zur öffentlichen Sexualhygiene und zur staatlichen
Prophylaxe der Geschlechtskrankheiten (Stuttgart: Ferdinand Enke, 1899), pp. 33, 17, 37, 62–
63.
39 E. Meirowsky and A. Neisser, “Eine neue sexualpädagogische Enquete,” ZBG 12 (1911/1912):
349, 350; E. Meirowsky, “Über das sexuelle Leben unserer höheren Schüler,” ZBG 11
(1909/1910): 5, 6. See also Flexner, Prostitution, p. 42.
40 Felix Block, “Die nicht gewerbsmässige Prostitution, ihre Ursachen, Formen, Gefahren und
deren Bekämpfung,” ZBG 10 (1909): 70–71.
41 Johannes Dück, “Aus dem Geschlechtsleben unserer Zeit,” Sexual-Probleme (hereinafter SP)
10 (1914): 550.

Christian Men and Morality

23

damage it did to moral and physical health. Most important, compulsory
medical inspection and treatment aimed to combat the spread of venereal
diseases – which, in the absence of antibiotics, were effectively incurable. The
system was expressly intended, too, to be sufficiently unpleasant and restrictive
for prostitutes to discourage “normal” young women from entering the industry. And above all it was meant to remove prostitutes from the streets, thereby
(in theory) helping to protect morality.
The image of the sinful, incorrigible, and dangerous prostitute was not without appeal to conservative Christians; women who refused to be “rescued,”
in particular, could be stigmatized in this way. Within the AKDS, however,
the dominant opinion was vehemently opposed to regulation, and by 1892 the
Inner Mission adopted this view as well.42 In fact, the leadership of the AKDS
rejected every one of the arguments advanced in defense of regulated prostitution and characterized the whole system as beneath contempt.
As a public health measure, they argued, regulation was worse than worthless. Given the onerous nature of police regulations, women sought by every
possible means to avoid being caught and registered as prostitutes by the police.
As a result, critics generally argued that only about 10 percent of women who
made all or part of their living in the sex industry were registered.43 In any case,
it would have been simply impossible to arrest and inspect the huge number
of women – estimates ranged from 200,000 to 330,000 before World War I –
who practiced prostitution without police approval.44 In Berlin each police
doctor examined 1,500 to 2,000 women each month; in Hamburg police doctors neither wore gloves nor washed their hands between examinations, and
women often simply did not come to the required examinations.45 In any case,
obviously any system of inspection and compulsory treatment that targeted
only prostitutes and not their clients was bound to fail, because the latter
would merely continually reinfect the former. In order to be really effective,
the AKDS argued in 1904, the system of regular compulsory medical examinations would have had to encompass all those who engaged in extramarital
sex – about 20 percent of all women and 30 percent of all men.46 As Friedrich
Bohn, general secretary of the AKDS from 1904 onward, remarked in 1914,
the whole system was “from a hygienic standpoint just as ludicrous as the
deepest, darkest medieval superstition.”47
42

On the disagreement between the morality associations and the Centralausschuss für Innere
Mission (CAIM) in the late 1880s, see Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, p. 31.
43 See, e.g., Adolf Henning, “Die öffentliche Sittenlosigkeit und die Arbiet der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine,” Fliegende Blätter 54 (1897): 414; Flexner, Prostitution, pp. 180–183.
44 Ludwig Klemm, Die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit und ihre Bekämpfung (Dresden: Reichel, 1888),
p. 8; Flexner, Prostitution, p. 28.
45 Flexner, Prostitution, pp. 214, 216, 235.
46 Petition of the AKDS to Bundesrat, 15 March 1904, ADW, CA 526, p. 6.
47 Friedrich Bohn, Was dann? Positive Vorschläge zur Lösung der Prostitutionsfrage (Berlin:
AKDS, 1914), pp. 8, 9.

24

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

The Protestant morality organizations held regulation to be equally ineffective in securing public order and safety. Pastor Phillips of the BMBU dismissed
as a “vulgar lie” (gemeine Lüge) the idea that men were incapable of controlling their sexual drives and that abstinence was harmful for men; others called
variously it a “crazy notion,” a “demonic delusion,” a “laughable assertion,”
and an insult to decent men.48 Far from protecting innocent girls and women,
prostitution, particularly in brothels, merely accustomed men to abusive sexual
practices and actually stimulated their aggressive sexual desires. As Bohn put it
in 1912, brothels were “schools of perversity and of the most horridly vulgar
acts.”49 Regulated prostitution therefore resulted in a greater number of rapes
and assaults than would otherwise have been the case.50 There was, furthermore, a widespread conviction in the morality movements that the brothels
were fed by a thriving trade in deceived or abducted girls and young women
(Mädchenhandel, or traffic in girls).51 A system of debt-peonage made it impossible for women to escape many brothels, with prostitutes charged exorbitant
amounts for rent, board, clothes, infractions of the house rules, and so on.
And even women who did manage to find “respectable” jobs, leave the sex
industry, and be deregistered were frequently fired when the police showed up
to make sure they were not lying about their new employment.52 As Ludwig
Weber put it in 1888, then, “many prostitutes are made true slaves of vice only
by regulation.”53
In fact, the slavery metaphor was in constant use in the men’s morality
movement throughout the period before World War I.54 Regulation, Protestant
men argued, constituted a gross assault on the natural and civil rights of women.
As Adolf Henning, general secretary of the AKDS from 1895 to 1902, argued in
1897, it was a “profound injustice” that women involved in the sex trade were
48

Philipps is quoted in Oberbreyer, Die Leipziger Sittlichkeitsbewegung, p. 9; Hermann Dalton,
“Was uns in den Kampf wider die Unsittlichkeit treibt,” Korrespondent 7 (1891): 35; “Stellung
und Wirken des Sittlichkeitsvereins in Heidelberg,” KB 19 (1905): 19; Seved Ribbing, Zwei
sexuell-hygienische Abhandlungen (Stuttgart: Hobbing & Büchle, 1896 [1888, first German
edition 1890]); Hermann Dalton, Auf zum Kampfe wider die Unzucht! (Berlin: Stadtmission,
1890), p. 17.
49 AKDS, Verhandlungen der Allgemeinen Konferenz . . . Darmstadt, p. 51; Bohn, Was dann? p. 9.
50 See, e.g., “Aufruf des Männervereins zur Bekämpfung der Unsittlichkeit in Berlin,” KB 1 (1887):
5.
51 Some representative cases are cited in “Vom Mädchenhandel,” KB 18 (1904): 43–44.
52 See, e.g., “Petition des Bundes deutscher Frauenvereine an den Reichstag zu dem Entwurf eines
Gesetzes betreffend Aenderung und Ergänzung des Strafgesetzbuches” of 1898, Landesarchiv
Berlin (hereinafter LAB), Helene-Lange-Archiv (hereinafter HLA), Film 46-203.4; Flexner, Prostitution, pp. 36–37; and Regina Schulte, Sperrbezirke: Tugendhaftigkeit und Prostitution ion
der bürgerlichen Welt (Frankfurt: Syndikat, 1979), p. 203; “Die Berliner Hausbesitzer und die
Anklage wegen Kuppelei,” KB 4 (1890): 14.
53 Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, p. 33.
54 See, e.g., Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, p. 33; CAIM, Zur Frage der öffentlichen Sittenlosigkeit
(Berlin: CAIM, 1892), p. 4.

Christian Men and Morality

25

subject to arbitrary arrest and medical inspection, whereas the men who paid
them were simply ignored by the police. This was an abrogation of “equality
before the law, the first principle of constitutional law.”55 And what made the
slavery metaphor most attractive was the idea that, in principle, the system of
regulation treated women as things, as a mere means to an end – “objects for
the satisfaction of lust, . . . second-class beings, even white slaves,” as the AKDS
put it in a 1904 petition.56 This was by definition ethically intolerable.
As for the general population, Henning held that the toleration of registered
prostitutes made many urban spaces effectively “markets of lechery, meat markets”; even on the street, “in larger cities prostitution thrusts itself upon the
notice of the disinterested observer against his will.”57 Some observers warned
that immature girls took registered prostitutes, who “do not need to work
and yet wear such nice clothes,” as role models.58 And the AKDS’s petition of
1904 argued that regulation “confuses the moral conscience of the populace”
by giving the impression that prostitution was not wrong and immoral but
necessary and legitimate.59
Regulation therefore undermined the legitimacy of the state and its institutions more generally; for as Heidelberg’s morality association argued in a
petition of 1902, licensed prostitution “stands . . . in irreconcilable contradiction with the very idea of the state, which should serve morality and the true
welfare of the nation.” As a result of regulation, therefore, “respect for the
state . . . is damaged in the most severe way.”60 As Wilhelm Philipps told a
conference of the Inner Mission in 1903, “the principle of the ‘necessary evil’
logically turns the state into a procurer and pimp.”61
Ultimately, however, what was decisive for the Protestant morality campaigners was not that regulation was ineffective or unjust but that it was sinful.
It was, as Henning put it, an instance of “disregard for divine order in sexual
life.”62 As the AKDS’s 1904 petition argued, Christianity held that prostitutes
too “are and remain human beings, beings with immortal souls.” Regulation
was therefore an “atrocious sacrilege, which . . . cries out to heaven and makes
a mockery of any sense of moral and legal order.”63
55

Henning, “Die öffentliche Sittenlosigkeit,” pp. 413, 415.
Petition of the AKDS to the Bundesrat, 15 March 1904, ADW, CA 526.
57 Henning, “Die öffentliche Sittenlosigkeit,” pp. 379, 413.
58 See Lennartz, Der Kölner Männerverein, p. 18, or “Massnahmen zur Bekaempfung der oeffentlichen Unsittlichkeit,” Die christliche Frau (hereinafter CF) 15 (1917): 301.
59 Henning, “Die öffentliche Sittenlosigkeit,” pp. 414–415.
60 “Gesuch des Vorstandes des Heidelberger Vereins für die Hebung der öffentlichen Sittlichkeit,
die sittlichen Zustände in Heidelberg betr.,” KB 16 (1902): 70.
61 CAIM, Verhandlungen des 32. Kongresses für Innere Mission in Braunschweig vom 21. bis 24.
September 1903 (Braunschweig: Hellmuth Wollermann, 1903), p. 103.
62 Henning, “Die öffentliche Sittenlosigkeit,” p. 370.
63 AKDS to Bundesrat, 15 March 1904, ADW, CA 526.
56

26

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

In contrast to their Protestant counterparts, the Catholic men’s morality
campaigners remained divided and rather ambivalent regarding regulation –
indeed, this was by far the most important difference between the two groups.
There were voices within the Catholic morality movement that condemned
regulation as vehemently as Protestants did. The first issue of Der Volkswart
in 1908, for example, carried an article that deplored the fact that regulation
“robs some of one’s fellow human beings of their dignity, and degrades them
to the level of animals.”64 In 1912, Joseph Mausbach, one of the leading
Catholic moral theologians of his day, told the national Catholic conference
(Katholikentag) that “the state’s authority must avoid anything that is the
equivalent of the legalization of vice, an amnesty for the seduction of youth, an
offence against public decency.”65 On the whole, however, it appears that the
majority in the Catholic men’s organizations accepted the idea that some form
of regulation of prostitution was needed. They held that most of the deficiencies
of the existing system could be corrected by adopting the “barracks” system
(Kasernierung) – confining women in the sex trade to particular neighborhoods
or dead-end streets. Under such a system, women could be more systematically
subjected to medical oversight and removed from public view, and more direct
control over the trade would allow the police to prevent the egregious financial
exploitation of women, or the recruitment of minors. The Catholic men’s
associations did not formally take a position on the question of prostitution
before World War I, and Der Volkswart carried an extensive series of articles in
1910 in which both advocates and critics of regulation and Kasernierung were
given a voice.66 Nevertheless, again, it appears that the majority in Catholic
circles regarded some form of more stringent and restrictive regulation as the
proper approach to prostitution.
But prostitution was also simply not as important within the Catholic movement as among Protestants. Catholics were more concerned with immoral
images, texts, and performances and came to a consideration of prostitution
rather late. The KMV formed a special commission on the prostitution question only in 1905, and the organization did not task its executive committee
with developing an explicit position on the issue until 1914.67
64

Herm[ann] Kleine, “Gedanken zur Sittlichkeitsfrage,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 105.
Joseph Mausbach, “Der Kampf gegen die moderne Sittenlosigkeit–eine Kulturaufgabe des
deutschen Volkes,” Volkswart 5 (1912): 133. See Winfried Becker, “Mausbach, Joseph,”
in Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon, vol. 5 (Hamm: Bautz, 1993), pp. 1071–
1077.
66 Lennartz, Der Kölner Männerverein, pp. 15–16; Vollrath von Lepel, “Die Prostitution in
den Grossstädten,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 167; Anna Pappritz, “Zur Kritik des Abolitionismus,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 3, 4; Katharina Scheven, “Zur Frage: Abolitionismus oder Reglementierung,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 36; “Abolitionismus oder Reglementierung,” Volkswart 3
(1910): 3.
67 Lennartz, Der Kölner Männerverein, p. 19; “Rechenschaftsbericht des Verbandesvorstands,”
Volkswart 7 (1914): 67.
65

Christian Men and Morality

27

The Catholic position on prostitution might be characterized, then, as in
some sense more “conservative” than that of the Protestant morality movement. The latter, in contrast, adopted what amounted to a radically utopian
program for the complete suppression of the sex trade. In its 1904 petition,
the AKDS argued that selling sex should be made illegal under all circumstances (and that police regulation should be abolished); that girls under age
twenty-one found to be selling sex should be forcibly returned to the care of
their parents, guardians, or if necessary a reformatory or “rescue” institution;
that prostitution should be made not a misdemeanor (Übertretung) but a crime
(Verbrechen) against morality, in the same category as, for example, rape or
incest; that accordingly the standard penalty should be raised from maximally
six weeks to months or even years; and that, on completion of this prison sentence, women convicted of selling sex should be confined to the workhouse,
where they could be reeducated in “order, hard work, and a regular life.”68
The leadership of the morality movements was by no means completely blind
to the potential social origins of prostitution. Contemporaries were convinced
that the sex trade was growing rapidly in the decades around the turn of the
century, and it was commonly argued that a major reason for this growth was
the economic vulnerability of young and inexperienced women moving from
rural areas to urban centers, or of young women in downwardly mobile social
groups, such as artisans.69 As Samuel Keller put it in a speech to the AKDS
in 1891, “girls are almost always in such a situation that at any moment the
possibility can arise that their chastity is endangered . . . for the sake of earning
their bread!”70 And denunciation of the “hunger wages” paid to women was a
common theme in discussion of prostitution from the very outset, for example,
in the Inner Mission’s petition of 1869.71
Particularly in the early 1890s, a number of important figures in the Protestant men’s morality movements explicitly favored better professional training
for women, the principle of equal pay for equal work, and even the unionization of female workers to fight for higher wages.72 The Inner Mission discussed
the “goals and limits imposed on the women’s movement by the gospel” at its
1897 conference and came to quite measured conclusions, arguing that within
68

AKDS petition to the Bundesrat, 15 March 1904, ADW, CA 526, pp. 3–4.
See Walter Müller, Angelika Willms, and Johanna Handl, Struktur der Frauenarbeit 1880–1980
(Frankfurt: Campus, 1983), p. 35.
70 Keller, “Gleiches Recht,” p. 74.
71 Henning, “Die öffentliche Sittenlosigkeit,” p. 16.
72 See Ludwig Weber, “Die Stellung des Staates zur öffentlichen Unzucht,” n.d., ADW, CA 526;
“Verschulden der Männerwelt,” KB 5 (1891): 19; Ludwig Weber, “Die Stellung des Evangelischen Bundes zur modernen Frauenbewegung,” Frauenblätter zur Hebung der öffentlichen
Sittlichkeit (hereinafter Frauenblätter) 10 (1901): 62; “Die Kellnerinnenfrage,” KB 5 (1891):
93; H. K., “Zur Arbeiterinnenfrage,” KB 8 (1894): 89; A. H., “Die Lohnbewegung im Konfektionsgewerbe,” KB 10 (1896): 27–29; N., “Verschulden der Männerwelt,” “Die Kellnerinnen,”
and “Soziale Nachtbilder,” KB 5 (1891): 19, 93, 101.
69

28

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

the limits imposed by “the natural characteristics given to woman by the order
of creation” it was “a Christian duty, in particular for men, not to establish
any arbitrary limitation . . . on women’s choice of profession or professional
activity, indeed to support and encourage her in every way.”73 Some Catholic
activists would later take up the same call.74 The morality campaigners also
regarded the “housing question” – the fact that the working classes lived in
almost unbelievably crowded conditions – as a particularly grave threat to
morality, because it made physical modesty a practical impossibility.75
And yet, the standard argument of male morality reformers was actually
that, although social conditions could contribute to the undermining of morality, individuals were vulnerable to the moral dangers of their social environment only because they were themselves not morally strong. Der Volkswart,
for example, argued in 1910 that the “deepest cause” of prostitution was
defective “strength of will”; “social conditions, late marriage of young men,
deprivation among girls etc. can then be added as secondary causes.” The
real answer to the problem, therefore, was less to address those social causes
than to ensure the “deeper penetration of the Christian faith, which with its
eternal spiritual ideas and powers is most effective in tempering momentary
desires,” into society and into the hearts of individuals.76 Protestants made
a similar argument. “All immorality,” one AKDS speaker observed, “comes
from one common source, the sinful urges of the human heart. Social conditions, be they ever so good, do not have the power to protect man from the
temptation within. Social conditions, be they ever so miserable, cannot rob
him of his moral self-determination.” As Ludwig Weber put it in 1903, “we
are no materialists, and therefore do not over-estimate the influence of socialeconomic factors.”77 The problem of prostitution could only be resolved by a
“religious-moral reformation.”78
The problem was that contemporary developments in the broader cultural
environment in which the morality campaign operated suggested that nothing
was further from people’s minds than such a spiritual revival. The most obviously dynamic and widespread cultural developments of the period seemed to
be headed in precisely the opposite direction. Increasingly conservative Christians understood the phenomenon of prostitution to be only the most important
product of a much broader moral crisis – the accelerating “sexualization” of
73

CAIM, Welche Ziele und Schranken sind der Frauenbewegung durch das Evangelium gesetzt?
(Berlin: CAIM, 1899).
74 Johannes Mumbauer, “Der Anteil der Frau am Kampfe gegen die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit,”
CF 5 (1906): 85.
75 H. Wittenberg and E. Hückstädt, eds., Die gesellschaftlich-sittlichen Verhältnisse der evangelischen Landbewohner im Deutschen Reich (Leipzig: Reinhold Werther, 1895), p. 220.
76 “Abolitionismus oder Reglementierung,” Volkswart 3 (1910): 5.
77 Both quotations are found in Gross, “Die evangelische Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” p. 124.
78 In Max Oberbreyer, Die Leipziger Sittlichkeitsbewegung (Leipzig: Reinhold Werther, 1892),
p. 15.

Christian Men and Morality

29

public discourse, which, they believed, fueled the lust and cynicism that fed
the sex trade. In the early years of the morality movement, concern with this
broader cultural phenomenon was primarily important to Protestants as part of
their analysis of the origins of prostitution. Increasingly, after 1900, however,
the tone of cultural life more broadly became an independent concern, pursued
in tandem with and not merely as a corollary to the campaign against prostitution. For the Catholic men’s morality movement that emerged at the turn of
the century, this broader cultural complex was in fact the primary motivation
for public activism.
For men in the morality movements of both confessions, this broader sexualization of public culture was merely the most visible and virulent expression of
a deeper, underlying evil: the growing influence of a purely secular, materialist
understanding of the world. The evils of prostitution, then, told them that what
their society needed was to turn to God; but all around them, people seemed
to be turning away from God.
Chapter 2 examines their analysis of this trend.

2
“A Spirit of Insubordination”
Popular Culture, Modernism, and Morality

I. The Demoralization of the Masses: Popular Culture
Germany passed through a dramatic cultural transformation in the two decades
around the turn of the twentieth century, characterized among other things by
the emergence of a whole range of new forms of entertainment and socialization, particularly in large cities.1 Those new media and new cultural forms were
enabled by new technologies, new marketing techniques, rising real incomes
among skilled workers and the white-collar middle class, universal literacy, and
urbanization. They were also encouraged by liberal legislation of the 1870s that
reduced interference by censors in all kinds of cultural production.
Of particular importance was the massive expansion of the print media,
enabled by the development of wood cellulose paper, the high-speed rotary
press, cheap methods of photographic reproduction, and innovations in marketing and advertising from the 1870s onward. The number of periodicals
published in Germany more than tripled between 1880 and 1914, as did the
number of books published annually between 1870 and 1914. The number of
newspapers published in Germany almost tripled between 1862 and 1885 and
then rose by a further 40 percent by 1914; and the average circulation rose by

1

See Lynn Abrams, Workers’ Culture in Imperial Germany: Leisure and Recreation in the Rhineland and Westphalia (New York: Routledge, 1992); Kaspar Maase, Grenzenloses Vergnügen:
Der Aufstieg der Massenkultur, 1850–1970 (Frankfurt: Fischer, 1997); Kaspar Maase and
Wolfgang Kaschuba, eds., Schund und Schönheit: Populäre Kultur um 1900 (Cologne: Böhlau,
2009); Dagmar Kift, ed., Kirmes–Kneipe–Kino: Arbeiterkultur im Ruhrgebiet zwischen Kommerz und Kontrolle (1850–1914) (Paderborn: Ferdinand Schöningh, 1992); Robin Lenman,
“Mass Culture and the State in Germany, 1900–1926,” in Ideas into Politics, ed. Roger
Bullen, Hartmut Pogge von Strandmann, and Anthony Polonsky (London: Croom Helm, 1984);
Andrew Lees, Cities, Sin, and Social Reform in Imperial Germany (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 2002).

30

“A Spirit of Insubordination”

31

230 percent.2 For middle-class Germans who had long regarded print culture
essentially as their own cultural preserve, both the extent and the tone of the
new mass market print media were an awful shock; they were “popular” not
only in that they achieved a new level of penetration of the potential market but
also in that they appealed to less refined tastes and interests. Among cultural
conservatives, much of popular print fiction, in particular, came to be labeled
“smutty and trashy” literature – Schmutz- und Schundliteratur.
The term “Schmutz” or “filth” was often used to refer to print pornography.3 But conservative Christians were actually more concerned about the
rapid rise and much greater extent of sales of cheap serialized popular novels
and serial stories in pamphlet form – which the they called “Schund” or “trash”
(in English, pulp fiction). The term was used to describe detective stories,
romances, cowboy-and-Indian stories, colonial tales, and adventure literature
in general, which appear to have made up the bulk of popular reading in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, just as they do today. Often these
works appeared in serialized form; they were sold not only in bookstores but
in barbershops, street kiosks, and railway station newsstands, and by door-todoor salesmen (Kolporteure). By the turn of the century, Der Volkswart put
the total number of readers of “trash” at about 20 million – the great majority
of the reading public.4
Also of concern, however, were the popular and middle-brow humoristic
weeklies that proliferated from the 1890s onward. The most notorious and
well-known of these were Simplicissimus and Jugend; but there were scores of
less well-known regional and local examples – by one count in 1913, in fact,
there were no fewer than 250.5 Sensationalist reporting in mass-circulation
dailies, particularly on lurid crimes and public sex scandals, was also regarded

2

See Jürgen Wilke, “Die periodische Presse im Kaiserreich,” Archiv für Geschichte des Buchwesens 31 (1988): 225; Hans-Ulrich Wehler, Deutsche Gesellschaftsgeschichte, vol. 3 (Munich:
Beck, 1995), p. 1233; Corey Ross, Media and the Making of Modern Germany (London: Oxford
University Press, 2008), p. 31.
3 Gary D. Stark, “Pornography, Society, and the Law in Imperial Germany,” Central European
History 14 (1981): 202–203. On the struggle against Schund, see Gideon Reuveni, “Der Aufstieg
der Bürgerlichkeit und die bürgerliche Selbstauflösung,” Zeitschrift für Geschichtswissenschaft
51 (2003): 131–143; Mirjam Storim, Ästhetik im Umbruch: Zur Funktion der “Rede über
Kunst” um 1900 am Beispiel der Debatte um Schmutz und Schund (Tübingen: Max Niemeyer,
2002); Gary D. Stark, Banned in Berlin: Literary Censorship in Imperial Germany, 1871–
1918 (New York: Berghahn, 2012); Ross, Media, esp. pp. 61–86; Patrick Major, “‘Smut and
Trash’: Germany’s Culture Wars against Pulp Fiction,” in Mass Media, Culture, and Society in
Twentieth-Century Germany, ed. Karl Christian Büttner and Corey Ross (Basingstoke: Palgrave
MacMillan, 2006), pp. 234–250.
4 “Verschiedenes,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 156–158; B. B.-C., “Zum Kampf gegen die Schundliteratur,” KB 18 (1904): 13–14; Franz Weigl, Die interkonfessionellen Männervereine zur
Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Unsittlichkeit (Hamm: Breer & Theimann, 1910), p. 132.
5 Jean Bornträger, “Die Bedeutung der öffetnlichen Sittlichkeit für die Zukunft unseres Volkes,”
Volkswart 11 (1918): 39.

32

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

as a threat to moral discipline, as was the content of much of the advertising
that helped fuel the expansion of the daily and weekly press.6
As the popular print media expanded, the campaign against such “trashy”
literature was an increasingly central concern for the morality movement.
Teachers in particular were active in local committees established to vet books
targeted at the youth audience; but trade unions, charitable associations, and
religious groups also played a role. Already in 1891, the poet, novelist, and critic
Otto von Leixner established the Association for Popular Literature (Verein
für Volksliteratur) to encourage distribution of “good” reading matter; and in
1904 he and leading figures in the morality movement established the Popular
League for Combating Filth in Word and Image (Volksverein zur Bekämpfung
des Schmutzes in Wort und Bild) as a clearinghouse for such efforts.7
Of almost equal concern, particularly to Catholics, was the proliferation of
“indecent” images, particularly from the middle of the 1890s onward. The use
of mildly off-color cartoons and photographs in the humoristic weeklies, for
example, was particularly abhorred by conservatives; but still more maddening was the development of a mass market for photographic nudes, called in
German Aktphotos. Again, the number of such images sold was, by the standards of the day, enormous. The Munich police reported having confiscated
18,000 Aktphotos between July 1904 and July 1905 and believed that this was
a tiny proportion of production and sales in the city.8
The single most striking example of the expansion of commercial popular
culture was the development of the cinema. Starting with a few traveling shows
in the 1890s, by 1914 there were some 2,500 to 3,000 cinemas in Germany,
and an estimated 1.4 million to 2 million people went to the movies daily.
Karl Brunner, a leading campaigner against Schmutz and Schund in all forms,
characterized the growth of the cinema as a cultural revolution unique “in the
whole cultural history of the human race.”9
6

See, e.g., “Gegen die sensationellen Gerichtsberichte,” KB 25 (1911): 90–92.
See Major, “Smut and Trash,” p. 239. On von Leixner, see “Leixner von Grünberg, Otto,”
Österreichisches Biographisches Lexikon 1815–1950, vol. 5 (Graz: Hermann Bohlaus Nachfolger, 1970), p. 122.
8 Ludwig Kemmer, Die graphische Reklame der Prostitution: Nach amtlichem Material und nach
eigenen Beobachtungen geschildert (Munich: Beck, 1906), p. 10; Franz Weigl, “Das gegenwärtige
Hervordringen des Nackten in die Öffentlichkeit,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 19; Weigl, Die interkonfessionellen Männervereine, pp. 135, 136.
9 Karl Brunner, Der Kinematograph von heute–eine Volksgefahr (Berlin: Vaterländische Schriftenverband, 1913), pp. 8 (1,392,000 and 2,900 cinemas), 3 (quotation); Lynn Abrams, “From
Control to Commercialization: The Triumph of Mass Entertainment in Germany, 1900–1925?”
German History 8 (1990): 282 (2 million and 2,500 cinemas); Emilie Altenloh, Zur Soziologie
des Kino: Die Kino-Unternnehmung und die sozialen Schichten ihrer Besucher (Leipzig: Spamer,
1914), p. 33 (3,000 cinemas); Kaspar Maase, “Massenkunst und Volkserziehung: Die Regulierung von Film und Kino im deutschen Kaiserreich,” Archiv für Sozialgeschichte 41 (2001):
39–77; David Welch, “Cinema and Society in Imperial Germany, 1905–1918,” German History
8 (1990): 28–45.
7

“A Spirit of Insubordination”

33

These new cultural forms were, however, only those that were most obviously the product of technological innovation. Conservative observers found
other forms profoundly unsettling, even if less spectacularly and obviously
“modern.” Of particular importance was the emergence of what might broadly
be called a modern urban nightlife, centered on a whole range of new institutions offering commercial entertainments and new sites for socialization and
enabled by the growth of the urban infrastructure – in particular mass transit
and electric lighting. These included “night-cafes,” bars offering live music and
entertainment (often referred to as Tingel-Tangel), dance halls, restaurants,
variety and cabaret theaters, and so forth.10 The mixture of sometimes crude
or racy entertainment with alcohol in these settings was particularly disturbing
to conservatives; but the new musical culture they fostered and fed off of –
centered around new musical forms such as jazz and tango, fueled by the marketing of “hits,” and sustained in part by a new technology, the phonograph –
also seemed problematic. More traditional forms of entertainment, however,
were also flourishing in this period; there were, for example, three times as
many theaters in Germany at the end of the 1890s as there had been in
1870.11
The content of many of these new forms of entertainment and socialization
disturbed cultural conservatives. In some cases, again, the term “Schmutz” was
applied to works that appear to have been more or less pornographic.12 In the
1890s, for example, Berlin publishers advertised such titles as French Delicacies, The Female Model in Its Historical Development, Amor in the Harem, and
Jesuit Affairs.13 Actual pornography was, however, of far less concern to conservative cultural critics than Schund – publications that, without actually being
explicitly pornographic, were nonetheless sexually suggestive, sensationalistic,
and lurid. Individual titles listed in Karl Brunner’s classic study of Schund (Our
Nation in Danger, 1911), included “The Murdered Chansonette,” “The Battle
over the Harem Girl,” “The Mysterious Coffin,” “The Butcher of Girls,” “Dr.
Quartz, a Devil in Human Form,” “The Adventured of a Hanged Man,” and so
on.14 Many such works offended because they presented fundamentally asocial
and exaggerated sexual fantasies – as, for example, in the case of one passage,
10

“Die Schäden der Animierkneipen un ihre Bekämpfung,” Abolitionist 8 (1909): 21; Friedrich
Oldenburg, “Die Quellen der Sittenlosigkeit in Berlin,” Fliegende Blätter 40 (1883): 246, 248;
Hermann Roeren, Die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit und ihre Bekämpfung (Cologne: J. P. Bachem,
1904), p. 13.
11 Peter Jelavich, Munich and Theatrical Modernism: Politics, Playwriting, and Performance,
1890–1914 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985), p. 102.
12 Pamphlet, “3. Apologetischer Instruktionskursus zu Berlin (6. bis 15. Oktober 1908): Grunzüge
einer Sexualethik,” ADW, CA 528, Band IV.
13 Zur Erheiterung in müssigen Stunden: Verzeichnis amüsanter und populärer Schriften (Berlin:
Hermann Schmidt, n.d.), ADW, CA 528/I.
14 Karl Brunner, Unser Volk in Gefahr! Ein Kampfruf gegen die Schundliteratur (Pforzheim:
Verlag der Volkstümlichen Bücherei, 1911), pp. 5–8.

34

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

in a publication of 1890, in which when two lovers held hands it was “like
fire . . . , an electric current, a magnetic fluid!”; they “fancy themselves free of all
rules” and proceed to enjoy “all the highest earthly happiness.”15 One speaker
at a Saxon conference of the Inner Mission in 1904 focused particularly on
sexually sensationalistic Schmutz, citing titles such as “Sexual Aberrations!,”
“Crimes Against Morality throughout Ages, with Many Illustrations,” “The
Urge to Sin,” and “Memoirs of a Bachelor.”16
But critics were even more disturbed by the seeming obsession of popular literature with violence. As Karl Brunner put it in 1911, trashy literature
consisted generally of nothing more than “murder and homicide, dynamite
explosions, revolver-shots, stabbings, arson, mistreatment of women, skulls,
robbery, break-ins,” and their action included little more than “beating, fighting, shooting, stabbing, killing, robbing . . . seducing women etc.” And Der
Volkswart found a Karl May novel to be the “pinnacle of trash” not because it
depicted one rape and four seductions but because it included 2,293 murders
and two cases in which men were tickled until they went mad.17 Still worse
were publications that combined sex and violence – “blood and lust,” as Der
Volkswart put it in 1908, or, in the words of the leading Protestant anti-Schund
campaigner Ernst Schultze a year later, “sensuality and blood-lust.”18 Stories
that combined violence, misogyny, and racism were the absolute nadir. Brunner
singled out, for example, a Sherlock Holmes story in which the detective, tracing the missing wife of a college professor, discovers that she has been served
up to patrons of a restaurant renowned for its delicious sausages. The story
closed with Holmes’s remark that, since she was a lesbian, the woman had been
worthless in life but had at least become useful to humanity by the manner of
her death and disposal. In another story, concerning the Boxer Rebellion, Brunner objected to the implicit racism of scenes in which a prisoner receives twenty
blows of the rod on the lips (“but he was just a Chinaman,” was Brunner’s
sardonic aside), Holmes sinks a knife into the throat of a criminal (again “just
a Chinese”), and two crowds are blown up with bombs (“– just Boxers”).19
Conservative critics objected to precisely the same aspects of popular cinema as it emerged after the turn of the century: popular film was violent, salacious, sensationalistic, and crude. Critics were particularly concerned about
15

“Aus der modernen Literatur,” KB 4 (1890): 31.
Justus Pape, “Gedruckt als handschriftliche Beigabe zu einem auf der Ersten Jahresversammlung
des Landesvereins für Innere Mission im Grossherzogtum Sachsen in Jena am 1. Juni 1904 zu
haltenden Vortrag,” ADW, CA-526.
17 Brunner, Unser Volk, p. 13; “Der Gipfel der Schundschreiberei,” Volkswart 5 (1912): 76. See
also B. B-C., “Zum Kampf gegen die Schundliteratur,” KB 18 (1904): 14.
18 “Verschiedenes,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 157; Ernst Schultze, Die Schundliteratur: Ihr
Vordringen–Ihre Folgen–Ihre Bekämpfung (Halle: Buchhandlung des Waisenhauses, 1909),
pp. 11, 24.
19 Brunner, Unser Volk, pp. 9, 18.
16

“A Spirit of Insubordination”

35

the impact of such fare on children.20 Such fears were not stilled by titles like
“The Man with Two Wives,” “The Whore,” “The Red Light Quarter,” “Slave
of Love,” “Sinful Love,” “Express Train of Love,” and “Adultery, Decently
Depicted.”21 But the combination of prurience and violence was again the
focus of critics’ concern. In a 1914 work summarizing criticisms of the cinema, for example, Albert Hellwig cited a Swiss survey that found that Bern’s
schoolchildren had, in the course of the year, seen in the cinema scenes of men,
women, and children beating each other; of people being shot, stabbed, strangled, beheaded, poisoned, bombed, cast from high places, ground up, hanged,
burned, buried alive, tortured, suffocated, and bound to railroad tracks; of
arson, dueling, suicide, drowning and starvation; and of seduction and adultery. This, Hellwig felt, was too much sex and violence.22
Other visual media were almost equally objectionable. For example, in
1906 Ludwig Kemmer, one of the founders of the men’s morality association in Munich, was especially outraged by a series of photographic images
depicting sexual acts involving three children and a man in priest’s robes,
and by series depicting “Schoolgirl Gymnastics,” “Precocious Girls,” “Ruined
Youth,” “Boarding-School Girlfriends,” and pregnant women climbing out of
champagne cases.23 The morality campaigners were also annoyed by the sale
of reproductions, in postcard form, of Renaissance and modern nudes, and
by humorous postcards with erotic themes.24 And cultural conservatives were
repelled, too, by the prevalence of erotic and violent themes in daily newspapers. Already in 1889, for example, the Korrespondenzblatt was objecting to
headlines such as “Love-Drama with a Tragic End,” “Attacked by Pimps,” and
“Berlin’s Night Life.”25
At least as bad as the stories newspapers carried, however, were the advertisements they relied on. Conservative Christians found scandalous personals advertisements seeking “marriage” partners – for example, advertisements
seeking an “older, affluent gentleman, high civil servant or doctor” or even a

20

Albert Hellwig, Kind und Kino (Langensalza: Beyer & Söhne, 1914), p. 32. See also Albert
Hellwig, “Die Beziehungen zwischen Schundliteratur, Schundfilms und Verbrechen,” AKAK
51 (1913): 1–32.
21 From Brunner, Der Kinematograph, pp. 4–6; “Was die Kölner Plakatsäulen im Jahre 1909
erzählten,” Volkswohl 3 (1910): 140–141; and Emil Hammelrath, Teutonenkraft und sexuelle
Frage: Deutsche Worte zur Beherzigung (Trier: Paulinus-Druckerei, 1917), p. 110.
22 Hellwig, Kind und Kino, pp. 54–64; “Kino und Schuljugend,” Zeitschrift für Kinderforschung
23 (1918): 171.
23 Kemmer, Die graphische Reklame, pp. 12, 13, 28; “Catalog über deutsche und ausländische
Picanterieen für Sammler,” ADW, CA 528/I. See Michael Meyer, Theaterzensur in München
1900–1918 (Munich: Kommissionsverlag UNI-Druck, 1982), p. 311.
24 Weigl, “Das gegenwärtige Hervordringen,” p. 20; “Konfiszierung der ‘Sternberg-Postkarten,’”
KB 15 (1901): 7.
25 “Die Tagespresse und die Unsittlichkeit,” KB 3 (1889): 10.

36

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

pastor, or a “ballerina bride” or a “really pretty, if poor girl, aged 17–21.”26
Advertising for contraceptives and abortion services, massage parlors, and
“educational” influences – a code word for sadomasochistic sexual services –
were equally bad.27 The morality campaigners frequently expressed outrage,
too, at the use of erotic, immoral, and cynical themes in advertising more
generally. The emergence of display windows as a key medium of marketing
in the last third of the nineteenth century was a nagging but important irritant for morality campaigners, who deplored the “impudence of the shameless
displays” (in the words of Hermann Roeren) they often contained.28
Furthermore, the whole apparatus of urban nightlife seemed to moral conservatives to be positively dripping with eroticism. “Beauty contests,” for example,
were widely regarded by educated Christians as profoundly immoral because
they “make of woman a display for lustful men’s eyes.”29 Popular music,
increasingly spread by the gramophone, could also give offence – as did one
song of 1912 that included the lyrics “I am a tyrant, almost a sadist / That’s
why I’m of such interest!”30 Cabaret and variety theaters, too, appeared to
cultural conservatives to offer a great deal of cynical and immoral entertainment, including among other things lewd songs, jokes and double entendres,
skits, and even reproductions of classical sculpture by actors clad only in a
layer of bronze paint.31 Of particular concern to moralists were the so-called
Animierkneipen, bars with female waiters who drank with the customers and
were often paid only a commission on the price of the alcohol consumed. Such
establishments, the Korrespondenzblatt remarked, were the “greatest markets
of vice in Berlin”; Der Volkswart called them “notorious dens of iniquity.”32
And conservative Christians regarded the modern commercial dance hall with
profound skepticism, particularly because modern social dances encouraged
people to, as one put it, “mimic . . . the unspeakably saucy motions of the body
used until now only as a form of advertising by whores.”33
All in all, it seemed to the morality campaigners that – as Joseph Mausbach
put it in a speech to the Katholikentag in 1912 – “today a lustful, exploitative
eroticism permeates all the pores of social life”; or, as the AKDS journal held

26

“Immer frecheres Gebahren auf dem sexuellen Verkehrs-Markte,” AKAK 11 (1903): 344,
P. Näcke, “Unverschämte Heiratsgesuche,” AKAK 55 (1913): 368; “Der Berliner LokalAnzeiger,” KB 8 (1894): 53–54.
27 J[osef] P[appers], “Zum Kapitel der Schund-und Schmutz-Annoncen,” Volkswart 3 (1910):
117–119, and J. R. Spinner, “Periodenstörungsmittel: Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis des kriminellen
Kurpfuschertums,” AKAK 54 (1913): 226–236.
28 Roeren, Die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit, p. 11.
29 “J.N.J.,” Korrepondenzblatt 3:1 (1889): 2.
30 Otto Spiegel, “Schund und Schmutz im Lied,” KB 26 (1912): 2.
31 Weigl, “Das gegenwärtige Hervordringen,” p. 21.
32 “Oeffentlicher Sittenlosigkeit,” KB 3 (1889): 23; “Lokale mit weiblicher Bedienung,” KB 4
(1890): 70; Ernst Lennartz, “Die Animierkneipe,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 37, 83.
33 Anton Haidorfer, “Aus dem Tanzsaal,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 168–171.

“A Spirit of Insubordination”

37

in 1911, all of society was suffering an “epidemic” caused by the “sexual
bacillus,” by the “cult of the sensual.”34
It was this universal eroticization of public life that explained, in the eyes of
the morality campaigners, the prevalence of sexual indiscipline. The emergence
of the modern, informal “couple” or “relationship,” formed often within the
new informal and commercial public sphere, was one more sign of moral decay
for those who saw formal courtship as part of the serious business of founding
a family and getting on with life. And the “relationship” was made possible,
of course, by the spread of effective methods of contraception – the wares
offered in all those “rubber goods” advertisements the morality campaigners
deplored.35 But even within marriage, conservative Christians saw contraception as abhorrent and unnatural. God, they believed, intended sex to lead to
conception; sex for any other purpose was immoral. As one critic put it in the
AKDS journal in 1894, “sexual intercourse serves exclusively the purpose of
conceiving children; that is simple, natural, and biblical.”36 Using one’s reproductive capacity “arbitrarily,” for mere “pleasure and enjoyment,” another
held in 1899, was “a disgraceful abuse of God’s gifts” equivalent to masturbation, child abuse, and whoring; it was “not love, but animalistic and devilish
instinct.”37 Catholics were even more vehement. In August 1913, the annual
conference of the German Catholic episcopate blamed “unbridled lust, coldly
calculating selfishness and greed, cowardly fear of effort and sacrifice” for the
spread of contraception, which they held “sacrilegiously resists the will of the
Creator, does violence to nature, frustrates the primary purpose of marriage,
desecrates it, disfigures it, strikes it barren.”38
But again, the morality campaigners were concerned as much with violence
as with sex in cinema and popular literature; and they were convinced that
reading or watching such stories produced real-life violence, as well as reallife sex. Thus, for example, Karl Brunner believed that Schund and Schmutz
in print and film induced young people to imitate their heroes, committing
robberies and assaults, running away, seducing girls, and even forming criminal
gangs.39 Ernst Schultze, a prominent anti-Schund campaigner, believed that
trashy literature inspired sex crimes, arson, murder, and theft, and that some
34

Joseph Mausbach, “Der Kampf gegen die moderne Sittenlosigkeit–eine Kulturaufgabe des
deutschen Volkes,” Volkswart 5 (1912): 133; Theodor von Sosnosky, “Der Sexualbazillus,”
KB 25 (1911): 27–28.
35 On contraception in Germany, see James Woycke, Birth Control in Germany, 1871–1933
(London and New York: Routledge, 1988) and Anna Bergmann, Die verhütete Sexualität:
Die Anfänge der modernen Geburtenkontrolle (Hamburg: Rasch & Röhrig, 1992), esp.
pp. 168–198.
36 “Neumalthusianismus,” KB 8 (1894): 97.
37 G. Közle, “Der Mann als Familienvater,” KB 13 (1899): 61.
38 “Hirtenbrief der deutschen Bischöfe vom 20. August 1913 über christliche Ehe, christliche
Familie und christliche Erziehung,” in Des Deutschen Volkes Wille zum Leben, ed. Martin
Fassbender (Freiburg: Herder, 1917), pp. 815, 816.
39 Brunner, Unser Volk, p. 23.

38

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

readers committed suicide when they discovered that they were not as invincible
as their fictional role models.40
In fact, the fear that popular culture undermined its audience’s sense of reality, that it was generating a generalized loss of a simple grasp of the real potentials and possibilities of life, underlay more specific fears that it was encouraging
sexual disorder, crime, and violence. The cultivation of an aesthetic of the sensational and fantastical, the morality campaigners feared, fostered a fundamentally amoral and adventurist ethic. Thus the Bavarian Ministry of the Interior
reported in 1910 that, according to teachers’ experience, trashy literature “over
stimulates the imagination . . . takes away [pupils’] sense of truth and reality,
makes them inattentive and idle, coarse, and violent.”41 Karl Brunner observed
that Schund was nurturing a generation with “overheated imagination . . . that
has lost all sense for sober reality, that no longer has enough healthy good sense
to distinguish between good and evil.”42 Indeed, cultural conservatives were
convinced, as the teacher and Schund-critic Heinrich Wolgast put it in 1899,
that “the sense of reality . . . has a very considerable moral side to it,” because
“truthfulness has one of its chief supports in the sense of reality.”43 Good taste,
realism, and morality were inextricably bound up with one another.
The forms of modern popular culture were, however, as disturbing as its
content. For one thing, many of the new commercial entertainments were
heterosocial – they brought men and women together, in anonymous, public,
and informal settings. For the upper and middle classes of the period, who were
accustomed to a very high degree of segregation of the sexes, this simple fact
was itself profoundly troubling. The cinema was the apotheosis of this kind of
invitation to immorality: young men and women, girls and boys, came together
to sit in close proximity, in the dark, and watch immoral stories unfold.
More important, however, was the fact that so much of modern popular
culture was commercial – that its producers and distributors were motivated
not by any higher aesthetic, moral, intellectual, or educational purpose or inspiration but simply by the desire to make money.44 In fact, critics held that it
was because modern popular culture took the form of a business activity that
its producers resorted to erotic and sensational content – simply because it
sold. The entrepreneurs who created and organized modern commercial entertainments were merely “speculating” on the sensual “instincts” or “desires”
of their buyers. Thus the Korrespondenzblatt observed in 1887 that the publishers of Schmutz were selling “immorality in the service of Mammon”; in
1908 Hermann Roeren deplored the “doings of business speculators without
40

Ernst Schultze, “Selbstmord und Schundliteratur,” Volkswart 2 (1909): 46–48.
Quoted in Lenman, “Mass Culture,” p. 52.
42 Brunner, Unser Volk, pp. 13, 21.
43 Heinrich Wolgast, Das Elend unserer Jugendliteratur (Leipzig: Fernau, 1899), p. 47.
44 There is a particularly insightful discussion of this point in Georg Jäger, “Der Kampf gegen
Schmutz und Schund: Die Reaktion der Gebildeten auf die Unterhaltungsliteratur,” Archiv für
Geschichte des Buchwesens 31 (1988): 176–178.
41

“A Spirit of Insubordination”

39

conscience” who were ruining Germany’s youth by selling pornography; in
1910 the Protestant and Catholic morality associations of Cologne submitted
a protest against the “profit-hungry speculators” who organized “beauty contests”; and in 1913 Ernst von Wolzogen deplored the “base exploitation of
lasciviousness” by “industrial barons of the worst sort.”45
The morality campaigners believed, finally, that the new popular culture
market made immorality obvious and ubiquitous in a way it had not been
in their own youth. People were no longer ashamed of immorality, trashy
taste in literature, or low-brow entertainments; standards and codes that had
once moved people to engage in such activities furtively were being swept
away by the conditions of the mass market, in which, so to speak, everyone knew that everyone was doing it. Thus Adolf Henning observed in 1889
of prostitution that “whereas this plague used to creep around in the dark,
it now comes out of its dark dens boldly. . . . That’s the real scandal of the
century!”46 And for the Protestant theologian Ludwig Lemme, speaking before
the AKDS fifteen years later, the modern city was a place where “depravity goes
openly” on posters, in display windows, in bars, in amusement halls, and so
on.47 In the same year, the journal of the Catholic charities, Caritas, complained of the “ever more shameless public presence of immorality”; and in
their 1909 pastoral letter on immorality, the Catholic episcopate warned that
“one is reminded of heathen times . . . , when one sees how vice ventures into
the light of day with unconcerned manner, as if it were something completely
natural and obvious.”48 In fact, some cultural conservatives conceived of the
morality movement fundamentally as a movement of self-defense against a
new public sphere that was not merely corrupt but aggressively so. In 1892,
for example, one morality campaigner in Leipzig characterized the display windows of stores in his city as a form of “ocular rape.”49 Franz Weigl, one of
the organizers of the men’s morality movement in Munich, deplored the new
“milieu of aggressive mass journals, brochures, albums, books” about sexual
topics and insisted that the aim of the Catholic men’s associations was not
“to attack personal freedom” but rather to defend “the freedom of those who
45

“Die Unsittlichkeit im Dienste des Mammon,” KB 1 (1887): 45; Hermann Roeren, “Aktbilderunfug,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 4; “Selbstschutz gegen den Schmutz,” Volkswart 2 (1909):
85; Münchener Neueste Nachrichten, quoted in Weigl, “Das gegenwärtige Hervordringen,”
p. 20; Wolzogen, quoted in Weigl, Die interkonfessionellen Männervereine, p. 144.
46 Adolf Henning, “Die öffentliche Sittenlosigkeit und die Arbeit der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine:
Eine Denkschrift,” Fliegende Blätter 54 (1897): 377.
47 Ludwig Lemme, “Der Einfluss der verschiedenen Weltanschauungen unserer Zeit auf die
öffentliche Unsittlichkeit,” in AKDS, Die XVI. Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine in Köln vom 2. bis 4. Oktober 1904 (Berlin: Verlag der Geschäftsstelle der
deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine/A. Dartsch, 1904), p. 44.
48 “Die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit und ihre Bekämpfung,” Caritas 9 (1904): 149; Mausbach, “Der
Kampf gegen die moderne Sittenlosigkeit,” p. 129.
49 Max Oberbreyer, Die Leipziger Sittlichkeitsbewegung (Leipzig: Reinhold Werther, 1892),
p. 17.

40

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

want to raise their sons and daughters . . . in the spirit of traditional notions of
discipline and honor, morality and respectability.”50
Ironically, of course, the agenda of the morality movement was not to cover
up immorality again but rather to eradicate it, precisely by making it more
visible. The morality associations were agitational organizations; their goal
was to talk about immorality, to point it out, and precisely to bring it to
people’s attention and make them think about it. The position of the morality
campaigners was – as the BMBU’s Korrespondenzblatt announced in its first
issue – that it was only due to the “foolish reluctance to call dirty things by
their proper names” that the moral problem had “become so great that even
the bravest almost lose heart.”51 Ten years later Adolf Henning argued that the
task of the AKDS was “to bring light into the darkness . . . by way of publicity”
by “ever and again pointing to the danger of growing immorality for the whole
of our nation.”52 And in some cases the practices the morality campaigners
decried were in fact not new at all. In 1909, for example, the church council
(Oberkirchenrat) of Prussia remarked on the “bitter struggle” of rural pastors
against the “prevailing opinion . . . that premarital sexual intercourse is not
disgraceful, as long as in case of pregnancy the girl is taken to bride” – a
traditional practice apparently some centuries old.53 Regulated prostitution
too had a long history; so did the artistic nude. The morality campaign, in
other words, was a self-consciously modern movement, using modern tools –
in some cases to fight quite entrenched or traditional practices.
Modern – but not democratic. The morality campaigners were determined
to defend the cultural authority of Germany’s social elite – that is, themselves.
In fact, they often thought of themselves as the protectors of a broad category
of persons they believed to be vulnerable to the seductions of immorality, as
not fully developed moral subjects. That category included the young, women,
and also the working classes generally, who were regarded as “uncultured”
(ungebildet). Thus Ernst Schultze, for example, sought to protect “the souls
of children and the intellectually immature” and deplored the fact that trashy
literature sold door to door was “very often read by wives not only without, but
even against the will of their husbands.”54 In 1911, the Korrespondenzblatt
found it right and proper that the police should have enforced the removal
of a replica of the Venus de Milo from the facade of a respectable house in
Spandau, because such statuary should not be exposed to “the view of the
street mob.”55 In 1909 the editors of Der Volkswart found it disturbing that
50

Weigl, Die interkonfessionellen Männervereine, p. 140; Weigl, “Das gegenwärtiege Hervordringen,” p. 20. See Meyer, Theaterzensur in München, p. 311.
51 “Auf zum Kampf!” KB 1 (1887): 10.
52 Henning, “Die öffentliche Sittenlosigkeit,” p. 369.
53 “Sittlichkeit in Landgemeinden,” KB 1:2 (1887): 13; “Die Evangelischen im Kampfe gegen die
öffentliche Unsittlichkeit,” Volkswart 2 (1909): 183.
54 Schultze, Die Schundliteratur, pp. 9, 22.
55 “Schutz für die Liebe Frau von Milo,” KB 25 (1911): 31.

“A Spirit of Insubordination”

41

medical texts treating sexual perversions were published in German, not Latin,
because that meant that even “the man in working-class dress” could read
them.56 Catholics in particular did sometimes argue – as one did in 1908 –
that “poison is poison, for the educated as for the uneducated.”57 The more
common assertion, however, was that uneducated and unrefined people were
particularly at risk.
In fact, in many instances it becomes clear that fundamentally the morality
campaigners believed that the thoughts and feelings of the uneducated were
by definition of no value. Only one thing was of positive value in their world:
Bildung – by which they meant the cultivation of aesthetic and moral refinement and of intellectual “individuality” (Persönlichkeit). The culture of the
uneducated, in contrast, was not culture at all. It was crude, ugly, out of control, irrational, animalistic, wrong, and not legitimate. And so were popular
entertainments. Joseph Mausbach deplored the “frightful crudity and thoughtlessness” of the audience for popular entertainments.58 Another Catholic critic
observed that movie theaters were “places of entertainment. And of institutions of entertainment in which those whom one generally calls ‘the people’
amuse themselves, and that turn a profit . . . , one can, these days, be a little
bit suspicious.”59 And Otto von Leixner remarked, in 1891, that in all his
reading of popular literature, “I have never once found a character that sought
happiness in the quiet consciousness of pure intentions and inner, intellectual
riches.”60
The morality campaigners were unwilling to allow standards of decency and
morality to be governed by the market, then, because the market was made
up of people whose “demand” was not legitimate. The market was unrefined,
uncultured, common, stupid, and primitive. And those who catered to it deliberately played on and exacerbated those characteristics. As Karl Brunner put
it, the market for trashy film was merely an expression of “cleverly stirred-up
mass instincts.”61 Ernst Schultze saw popular culture as nothing but “repulsive speculation on the lowest instincts of humanity.”62 One Catholic critic,
writing in Der Volkswart in 1909, argued that the profits of the commercial
entertainment industry depended on “awakening the ‘beast’ in man.”63
By the turn of the century, the development of “moral statistics” (the statistical investigation of social phenomena relating to crime and sexuality) gave
the morality campaigners what seemed to be an increasingly solid scientific
56

Cato, “Sittenruin aus der Medizin,” Volkswart 2 (1909): 99.
“Freigesprochen! Ein neuer Beleg für die Umwertung sittlicher Begriffe,” Volkswart 1 (1908):
58.
58 Mausbach, quoted in Emil Hammelrath, Teutonenkraft, p. 104.
59 Fritz Wächter, “Zur Kinematographenfrage,” Volkswart 2 (1909): 49.
60 Otto von Leixer, Zur Reform unserer Volkslitteratur (Berlin: Drewitz, 1891), pp. 27–28.
61 Brunner, Der Kinematograph, p. 3.
62 Schultze, Die Schundliteratur, p. 107.
63 Wächter, “Zur Kinematographenfrage,” p. 51.
57

42

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

foundation for this fear. The rate of venereal infection was shockingly high;
the fertility rate fell by a quarter between 1891 and 1914; the rate of criminal
offenses against morality rose by 60 percent; and the rate of divorce tripled.64
What was particularly terrifying for the morality campaigners, however, was
that it appeared by the 1890s not only that their values were losing purchase
on the masses, trumped by plebian, market-driven commercial culture, but
also that they faced a self-conscious intellectual and political revolt within
Germany’s social elite – in high culture and among a middle class increasingly
itself oriented not toward the values of the conservative social order but toward
those of a commercial, technical, and democratic age.
II. Christianity, the Arts, and the Intellectuals
In some cases high culture no less than popular culture seemed to the morality
campaigners to be veering toward the lewd and semi-pornographic. A particularly illustrative case is the craze for nude or semi-nude dance as a spectator entertainment, which started with Isadora Duncan’s early appearances in
1903 and 1904 and steadily gained momentum over the next decade. Conservative Christians saw Duncan’s success, as one commentator remarked, as
“notarized proof of [moral] decline.”65 The performances of “She,” “Mata
Hari,” Mary Wigman, Adorée Villany, Gertrud Leistikow, Olga Desmond,
Maud Allan, and others, all in various states of undress or half-dress, were
greeted with escalating outrage, and there were repeated scandals surrounding
various performers between 1907 and 1912.66 The audience for modern dance
was clearly affluent; one critic even argued that ticket prices were affordable
only for the “upper ten thousand.”67 In other cases, the immorality of the wellto-do took less self-consciously sophisticated forms: for example, more
“refined” and expensive pornographic images and texts – sometimes dressed
up as pseudohistorical or pseudoanthropological studies, or as limited publications of erotic “classics” of Western European literature – or the middle-brow
64

P. Krautwig, “Geschlechtskrankheiten und Prostitution,” Centralblatt für allgemeine Gesundheitspflege 25 (1906): 211–229; B. R. Mitchell, European Historical Statistics 1750–1970,
abridged edition (New York: Columbia, 1978), pp. 4, 21, 28; Peter Rixen, “Zur Statistik der
Fruchtabtreibung,” AKAK 23 (1906): 327; Dirk Blasius, “Scheidung und Scheidungsrecht im
19. Jahrhundert: Zur Sozialgeschichte der Familie,” Historische Zeitschrift 241 (1985): 348;
Richard Bessel, Germany After the First World War (Oxford: Clarendon, 1993), p. 231; Roderick Phillips, Putting Asunder (London: Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 517–518; “Eine
starke Zunahme der Ehescheidungen,” Volkswart 5 (1912): 124.
65 Weigl, Die interkonfessionellen Männervereine, p. 144. On nude dance, see Karl Toepfer,
“Nudity and Modernity in German Dance, 1910–1930,” Journal of the History of Sexuality 3
(1992): 55–108.
66 See Edward Ross Dickinson “‘Must We Dance Naked?’ Art, Beauty, and Politics in Munich
and Paris, 1911 and 1913,” Journal of the History of Sexuality 20 (2011): 95–131.
67 Ernst Lennartz, Duncan – She – Desmond: Beiträge zur Beurteilung und Geschichte der NacktKultur (Cologne: Benziger, 1908), pp. 5, 7, 60, 7, 26.

“A Spirit of Insubordination”

43

humorous journals marketed to a “sophisticated” middle-class audience, in
which, Otto von Leixner claimed, “mindless, dull lustfulness rules all.”68
Of deeper concern than such entertainments, however, was a broader shift
in German aesthetic codes in this period. The fascination with sexuality and
gender conflict that suffused realist and naturalist literature before World War I
was particularly frightening. The prominent and provocative playwright Frank
Wedekind in particular conducted a drawn-out battle with censors in Munich
over his various plays focused on themes of sexual perversity, obsession, suicide, murder, and general moral turpitude. Other objectionable works included
those of Gustav Strindberg, Henrik Ibsen, Emile Zola, Oscar Wilde, Gerhardt
Hauptmann, Hedwig Dohm, Hermann Sudermann, and Leo Tolstoy, to name
only the most prominent. As one critic put it at a decency trial in Munich
in 1909, many modernist plays seemed to be mere “pornodrama” that “aims
at nothing more than to stimulate lust” in order to sell tickets.69 Modernist
literature, in short, was for conservative critics effectively glorified Schmutz.
The development of modern painting and sculpture was no less disturbing.
The morality campaigners for the most part did defend the nude in what they
felt was “true art”; but the modern art market made it increasingly difficult to
determine what was true art and what was mere commercial speculation on
sensual impulses. Thus the editor of Der Volkswart wrote in 1908 that “we fight
the nude not as such” but only where it “appears likely to affront the sense of
shame of a large proportion of the people and to have a demoralizing influence
on the youth.”70 But as the influential journal Die Grenzboten had observed
four years earlier, in fact, there was in all nudity a “dangerous proximity to
sensuality.”71 Protestants too sometimes found the modernist obsession with
nudity exaggerated – as when one critic, scandalized by an exposition of works
from the art colony in Darmstadt in 1901, remarked that “that was all we
were lacking – that the upper classes take pleasure in ugly displays, and so
undermine the foundations of their own authority and of their own work for
the moral elevation of the people.”72
Fundamental to this response to the content of modern art was a philosophical disagreement regarding the proper function of art more broadly. Many
cultural conservatives believed that aesthetic realism, which addressed social
problems, ethical dilemmas, and human failure with depressing consistency,
was by its very nature immoral. A deeply engrained belief in the direct relationship between aesthetic beauty and ideal truth – as opposed to mere earthly
68

“Die Liebhaber-Ausgaben der erotischen Literatur,” KB 22 (1908): 73–74; Otto von Leixner,
quoted in Roeren, Die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit, p. 15.
69 Joseph Will, “Ein Strafgericht über die Pornodramatik der Brettlbühnen,” Allgemeine Rundschau 6 (1909): 324.
70 Josef Pappers, “Unter dem Deckmantel der Aesthetik,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 5.
71 Quoted in Dr. P., “Zum Kapitel des Nackten in der Kunst,” Historisch-Politische Blätter
(hereinafter HPB) 133 (1904): 231–232, 230.
72 “Die Ausstellung der Künstlerkolonie in Darmstadt,” KB 15 (1901): 68.

44

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

and quotidian truths, which were regarded as inessential and ephemeral – was
central to conservative Christian thought in this period. Equally central was
the belief that it was the proper function of art to communicate ideal truths,
sublime and transcendent truths, to the viewer (or reader) through the medium
of the beautiful – as one critic put it in 1891, “to preserve through their art the
ideal values from which the nation derives strength and vigor and greatness.”73
By focusing on adultery, conflict, divorce, suffering, sickness, failure, corruption, suicide, and the general squalor of the human condition, the moderns
were betraying this proper role of art in the economy of the human spirit and
thereby contributing in a much more fundamental and damaging way to the
general demoralization of society than mere popular Schmutz ever could.
Of course, the champions of artistic modernism did not share this view at all.
They were convinced that they, too – or rather they particularly – were engaged
in a serious quest for the refinement of the human spirit and the betterment
of the human condition. In fact, many of the artistic moderns were pursuing a
strategy that should have sounded familiar to the morality campaigners: as one
group of booksellers put it in a petition of 1893, to “lead people to a better
life” by “holding up a mirror to the times” to reveal the “ugly and bad.”74 As
the Christian morality movements stepped up their attacks on “immoral” art
in the 1890s, therefore, they increasingly came into conflict not merely with
the stubborn logic of the market also but with an opposing intellectual system
and the social organizations and cultural networks that sustained it.
Even more shocking, after the turn of the century the morality movements
were increasingly opposed by a growing set of organizations that sought to
restructure sexual life in Germany in accordance not with Christian teaching
but with a new scientific worldview. The Scientific Humanitarian Committee
(Wissenschaftlich-humanitäre Komitee [WHK], formed in Berlin in 1897 by
Magnus Hirschfeld and others) agitated for the repeal of §175 of the RStGB,
which penalized homosexual acts between men – a campaign that Wilhelm
Philipps of the BMBU, for example, dismissed in 1903 as “an assault on
the morality of our nation.”75 The Society for Combating Venereal Diseases
(Deutsche Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten [DGBG],
formed in 1902) argued for a new, medicalized approach to the regulation of
prostitution. Worst of all, the League for the Protection of Motherhood (Bund
für Mutterschutz [BfM]), formed in 1905, agitated for a more permissive sexual “New Ethic” and such innovations as sex education, the abolition of laws

73

Hermann Dalton, “Was uns in den Kampf wider die Unsittlichkeit treibt,” Korrespondent 7
(1891): 32.
74 Berliner Sortiments-Verein, “An einem hohen Reichstag,” 5 May 1893, Geheimes Staatsarvhiv
Preussischer Kulturbesitz (hereinafter GSAPKB), Rep. 84a, no. 8096, fol. 143–146.
75 Quotation from CAIM, Verhandlungen des 32. Kongresses für Innere Mission in Braunschweig
vom 21. bis 24. September 1903 (Braunschweig & Leipzig: Hellmuth Wollermann, 1903),
p. 104.

“A Spirit of Insubordination”

45

against unmarried cohabitation, divorce law reform, the legalization of abortion, and so on. But Christians were often horrified too by the ideas advanced
by the more amorphous new discipline of sexology, whose exponents advanced
conflicting and at times quite bizarre proposals for the revision of the German
sexual order.
To make matters worse, there were clear and direct connections between
artistic modernism, the scientific (or scientistic) philosophical position that
underlay the various sex-reform movements, and a much broader popular
health and “wellness” movement. Many on the political and cultural left in this
period argued that the nude in art was the embodiment of aesthetic and moral
truth freed from stifling and hypocritical prudery and prurience. It was prudery
and shame that made people immoral; a forthright, honest, and unproblematic
appreciation of the natural, aesthetic qualities of the human body was therefore
the best medicine against lustful thoughts. As one advocate put it, chaste and
natural nudity would have an “ennobling influence on every person . . . who
has even a trace of aesthetic sensibility and takes even just a little pleasure in
beauty.”76 The German nudist movement – yet another emerging movement
explicitly opposed to conservative Christian moralism – was aggressive in advocating such views; but they were central too to the appeal of modern dance, and
of the “life reform” (Lebensreform) movement more generally (including vegetarianism, dress reform, natural healing, fitness, and various self-help regimes).
Such ideas appealed in particular to a significant segment of the lower-middle
class: of the 450 members of one nudist organization in 1911, for example,
more than half were businessmen, artisans, engineers and architects, or whitecollar employees; only 14 percent were public officials or military officers, and
another 10 percent were teachers.77
But of course it was not only in nudist circles that a “natural” relationship
to the body was advocated. The years before World War I saw a lively debate
among German educators, for example, over sex education in the schools.
Supporters argued, as one article in the Zeitschrift für Schulgesundheitspflege
( Journal for School Medical Care) of 1907 held, that the existing “repressive
system” (Vertuschungssystem) forced young people to gain “half-knowledge
from impure sources” and contributed to sexual immorality and sexual endangerment through ignorance.78 By the years immediately prior to World War I,
76

Quoted in Wolfgang R. Krabbe, Gesellschaftsveränderung durch Lebensreform: Strukturmerkmale einer sozialreformerischen Bewegung im Deutschland der Industrialisierungsperiode
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1974), p. 99.
77 “Der Triumphzug der Unzucht, oder deutschfühlende Deutsche,” Augsburger Postzeitung 121
(27 May 1911).
78 Therese Oppler, “Zur Frage der sexuellen Aufklärung der Jugend,” Zeitschrift für Schulgesundheitspflege 20 (1907): 25; Max Enderlin, “Die Frage der sexuellen Jugenderziehung auf dem
dritten Kongress der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,”
Zeitschrift für Schulgesundheitspflege 20 (1907): 421; D. Sarasan, “Zum Problem der Sexualbelehrung,” Zeitschrift für Schulgesundheitspflege 20 (1907): 733.

46

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

some cautious experiments were in fact being made with sex education in the
schools. There was a growing body of popular literature for adults concerning “sexual hygiene” or “the hygiene of married life”; and public lectures by
traveling speakers, often accompanied by anatomical models and slides, were
another primary method of popular sex education.79
The loosely organized “neo-Malthusian” movement, which argued that the
use of contraception was a necessary and entirely laudable means of avoiding individual poverty and social immiserization, offered probably the largest
number of such lectures. The neo-Malthusians produced a flourishing popular
literature on contraception and sexuality, under such titles as “Fewer Children
and Happier Marriages: A Cry of Humanity,” “Secrets of Marriage,” or “The
Physiology of Love.”80 There was a lively market for such ideas: Anna FischerDückelmann’s guide to “The Sexual Life of Woman,” which advocated the use
of contraception to avoid the relentless cycle of pregnancy and childbirth, sold
600,000 copies in its first year in print.81
Such views were of course seconded by the producers and distributors of
contraceptives – for example, in the professional journal of German apothecaries, which published a letter in 1908 arguing that condoms were a “blessing
for the nation” because they helped prevent poverty, venereal disease, and
abortion.82 By the eve of World War I, the idea that the use of contraceptives
was simple common sense appears to have been widespread in German society,
and even quite mainstream organizations were willing to support it openly. In
1913, for example, the journal of the liberal Hirsch-Duncker trade unions told
its readers that the use of contraceptives was “not an immoral action per se,
but rather the result of a great sense of responsibility toward the children one
has already brought into the world.”83
For conservative Christians, again, such ideas were anathema. The German
episcopate, in its pastoral letter of 1913, excoriated those who recommended
such a “behavior counter to God and nature” and the “accursed industry” that
“lends them criminal assistance.”84 Protestants concurred: the Protestant theology professor and morality campaigner Friedrich Mahling insisted in an article
in the Korrespondenzblatt in 1909 that contraception no less than prostitution
or sexual perversion was “an expression of the dominion of sensuality over the
79

Josef Pappers, “Regenerator oder Degenerator?” Volkswart 2 (1909): 54–55; “Volksaufklärung
oder Volksverseuchung,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 7–8.
80 “Aus der höchsten Instanz,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 30–31; ADW, CA 528/I.
81 Ernst Lennartz, “Die unerbotene Zusendung von Prospekten über Vorbeugemittel,” Volkswart
3 (1910): 115–117.
82 Quoted in “Zur Würdigung des präventiven Geschlechtsverkehrs,” Zeitschrift für Socialwissenschaft 11 (1908): 120.
83 Quoted in Göz Forberg, “Die Behandlung des Geburtenrückgangs in gewissen ‘neutralen’
Fachblättern,” Volkswart 7 (1914): 28.
84 W., “Sexuelle Massenaufklärung,” Volkswart 2 (1909): 9–10; “Hirtenbrief der deutschen
Bischöfe vom 20. August 1913,” pp. 815, 816, 817, 818, 817.

“A Spirit of Insubordination”

47

spirit, and therefore degradation of humanity . . . , therefore a contradiction of
God’s will . . . therefore a sin.”85
Conservative Christians in the morality movement were convinced that all
these ideas and initiatives had common roots in modern philosophical materialism and rationalism and in the growing faith in the natural sciences as the
source of truth and of moral precepts. The morality campaigners frequently
referred to this complex of ideas as “Naturalismus” (naturalism). They sometimes traced its intellectual origins back to the Enlightenment, but more frequently they blamed two key nineteenth-century figures for its prevalence:
Friedrich Nietzsche and Charles Darwin. Both the idea of the struggle for survival and the idea(l) of the “will to power,” they believed, were marvelous
excuses for people to seek gratification and gain without consideration of the
good of others. As Der Volkswart put it in 1911, in consequence of Nietzsche’s “superman nonsense” (Herrenmenschdünkel), “every no-good punk
who breaks the bounds of common decency in the heat of sexual passion thinks
himself a titan and is . . . seen by many as a banner-carrier for a wonderful new
age, a new culture.”86 More important, some feared that the anti-Christian,
Nietzschean, and Darwinist forces in their society were engaged in a concerted
struggle against Christian values. As the Korrespondenzblatt put it in 1900,
“the struggle rages between the divine-moral and the human-immoral worldviews,” and “unconscious anti-Christianity and self-conscious enmity toward
the moral principles of the Christian view of life” had formed an “armed
alliance” against Christianity.87
Despite such fears of cultural Armageddon, however, cultural conservatives
were most uncomfortable precisely with the plurality of opinions in modern
society. They were accustomed to thinking of the truth as unified and timeless, and of the social order as founded on that unified and eternal truth.
The extraordinary intellectual and cultural creativity of their society looked to
them merely like a chaotic and confusing proliferation of deviationisms. They
often described it by using the term “ferment” (Gärung) – which for them
had negative connotations of decay, disorder, and the danger of explosion.
Thus Ludwig Weber, for example, wrote in 1901 of the need to reestablish a
“unified and constructive” public opinion in place of the existing “fragmented
and fragmenting” one, by bringing “a Christian national spirit” once again “to
dominance” in the face of “materialism, pessimism, humanism, aestheticism,
Romanism and evangelical Christianity.” Ludwig Lemme, speaking before the
AKDS three years later, presented a similar catalog, and a similar program.
Looking around him, he saw socialists, communists, aesthetes, “humanitarian fantasists,” social theorists, materialists, “every architectural style from
85

Friedrich Mahling, “Grundzüge einer evangelischen Sexualethik,” KB 23 (1909): 51.
“Ein Skandal auf der hygienischen Ausstellung Dresden 1911,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 179.
87 “Pressstimmen,” KB 14 (1900): 59; Stölzle, “Zum monistischen Kriegsschauplatz,” HPB 142
(1908): 133, 139.
86

48

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

Roman to the most complex Jugendstil,” jewelry in every design “from Egyptian tomb-art up to the newest product of the hunger for novelty,” and, as
for Weltanschauungen, “the whole evolution since the ancient Greek philosophers. . . . In this chaotic confusion,” he concluded, “the Christian world-view
alone provides a firm standard.”88
The philosophical horizons of the Catholic morality campaigners were narrower than those of their Protestant counterparts, and Catholics were of course
always aware of the fact that they were themselves in the minority in Germany.
But quite similar judgments were common in the broader Catholic intellectual
milieu. Thus, for example, the Austrian Jesuit pedagogue Robert von Nostitz, in 1900, deplored the “jungle darkness of chaotic world-views” of the
present age.89 Others deplored the “alienation from God in our century,”
as expressed in “French liberalism, socialism, communism and anarchism,”
Nietzscheanism, “rationalism and atheism, hedonism and suicide-mania, precociousness and jaded spirits, perversity and madness, male decadence and
female emancipation.”90
The central problem, as moral conservatives saw it, was that intellectual
variety militated against the beneficial effects of moral authority. Already in
1889 one Protestant commentator had remarked in the journal of the Inner
Mission that the “waves of daily reading” to which people were now exposed
“wash away so many tried and true principles, sacred truths!” Increasingly,
“eternal truths” appeared to be merely “views just as open to discussion as the
hypotheses of the natural scientists and the political opinions of the parliamentarians . . . the press teaches us to interest ourselves for everything thinkable
and unthinkable, to find that most interesting which is least our business.”91
Two decades later, the pedagogue and moral philosopher Friedrich Wilhelm
Foerster, whose essay on sexual ethics and sexual pedagogy became one of the
key texts of the morality movement after its publication in 1907, complained
that “today every Tom, Dick and Harry thinks himself called upon to establish
his own theory regarding the most difficult questions of human life. . . . [T]he
ethical realm is, so to speak, free game – a playground for the most unprincipled dilettantism and superficial conceits.”92 Jean Bornträger, who in 1912
88

Ludwig Weber, “Thesen zu den Vortrag, ‘Die öffentliche Meinung und der christlichen Volksgeist,’” KB 15 (1901): 46–47; Lemme, “Der Einfluss,” pp. 44, 46.
89 Robert von Nostitz, “Die Weltanschauung der Gegenwart und die Zukunft des Katholicismus,” HPB 125 (1900): 33. See “Nostitz-Rieneck, P. Robert Graf von, SJ,” in Österreichisches
Biographisches Lexikon, vol. 7 (Graz: Hermann Bohlaus Nachfolger, 1976), p. 157.
90 “Gefahrdrohende Erscheinungen,” HPB 145 (1910): 406, 407, 425.
91 Pastor Nelle, “Die Innere Mission und die Presse, mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der
Begründung einer evangelischen Arbeiter-Tagespresse,” Fliegende Blätter 46 (1889): 141.
92 Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster, Sexualethik und Sexualpädagogik (Munich: Josef Kösel, 1907),
pp. 3–4. On Foerster, see Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster, Erlebte Weltgeschichte, 1869–1953
(Nurember: Glock & Lutz, 1953); Maria Hoschek, Freidrich Wilhelm Foerster (1869–1966)
(Frankfurt: Lang, 2002); and Tracie Matysik, Reforming the Moral Subject: Ethics and Sexuality

“A Spirit of Insubordination”

49

published a study of the decline of the German birthrate that was highly influential and widely cited within the morality movement, objected to the fact that
people were increasingly becoming accustomed to “feeling themselves superior
to the eternally unchanging commandments of morality,” daring to “construct
and act on their own moral judgments according to their own standards.”93
As one Protestant critic put it in the AKDS journal in 1911, then, the sheer
variety of opinion was an expression of the “tendency to insubordination”
that characterized “the whole intellectual tendency” of the times; and because
the spirit of disobedience necessarily extended to disobedience to the ultimate
authority, God, the result could only be moral, intellectual, and political disaster. The “subjectivism” of the age, the idea that “there are no universal truths
and no universal moral norms,” turned “public life . . . into a playground for
arbitrariness, selfish pursuit of interests and chaotic passions.”94
Again, there is a certain irony here, because the morality campaign was
itself one instance of the broader proliferation of nongovernmental organizations, philosophical currents, and “movements” in Germany in this period.
The formation of the morality movement in fact falls squarely into the period
of takeoff in the number of such organizations all across Europe – in the late
1880s and early 1890s.95 More to the point, the morality campaigners themselves quite self-consciously adopted the forms and methods that drove the
growth of the new public sphere and the cultural diversification they deplored.
Thus in 1889 one activist in the Inner Mission suggested that the solution to
the problem of “reading frenzy” and the disintegration of old certainties was
for conservative Protestants to start their own publications, so that the daily
press was not left to “the opponents of the Christian world-view.”96 Ten years
later, the Korrespondenzblatt would remind its readers that “if one wants to
gain any influence at all over the great masses of the people in our times, when
everything is hashed out in public,” then they must themselves enter the public
sphere and use its forms and potentials. “The daily press and mass meetings,
public discussion and agitation, these are in our times the necessary means of
gaining influence over popular opinion.”97
For the morality campaigners, then, it was only the mobilization of some
people that was desirable; only one kind of “public opinion” was acceptable.
There were large groups of people whom the morality campaigners thought
in Central Europe, 1890–1930 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2008), pp. 98–102, 106–
115.
93 Jean Bornträger, “Die Bedeutung der öffentlichen Sittlichkeit für die Zukunft underes Volkes,”
Volkswart 11 (1918): 36.
94 W. Kuhhaupt, “Die moderne Moral und ihre Folgen,” KB 25 (1911): 70.
95 See particularly Stefan-Ludwig Hoffmann, “Democracy and Associations in the Long Nineteenth Century: Toward a Transnational Perspective,” Journal of Modern History 75 (2003):
269–299.
96 Nelle, “Die Innere Mission,” p. 142.
97 N., “Die deutsche Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” KB 12 (1898): 4.

50

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

should not be active in public in any degree or capacity at all. Those groups
were the same groups that they categorized as “intellectually immature” and
therefore at risk of moral corruption: youth, women, and workers. In fact,
although the publications and speeches of the morality campaigners bristled
with broad-gauge denunciations of rationalism, materialism, and individualism, in practical terms they focused on two threats to what they conceived of
as the proper social order: Social Democracy and the women’s movement.
And yet, the morality campaigner’s analysis of the threat posed by these two
movements was hardly simple minded. In fact, they embedded their critique
precisely in a vehement rejection of masculine privilege and of capitalism.
Eerily, on occasion they reached what must have been, for them, a rather
frightening conclusion: that the insurrection of subaltern groups in their society
was in fact caused, perhaps even justified, by the moral turpitude of their
superiors.
Chapter 3 turns to this analysis.

3
The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

I. Christian Men and the Politics of Gender
Even by the standards of the time, the great majority in the men’s morality
organizations had a profoundly conservative vision of women’s proper role in
society, and of the proper relationship between the sexes. Indeed, the Christian
men’s morality organizations rejected women’s agitation for equal rights with a
vehemence that sometimes seemed to border on rage. This was particularly true
of Protestant men, whose intellectual traditions legitimated almost no female
roles other than that of housewife. Even the existence of the Protestant orders
of deaconesses, which did much of the day-to-day caregiving work in Protestant
charitable institutions, only just registered as a second-best alternative in their
rhetoric. Their position throughout the period before World War I was simply –
as the Korrespondenzblatt put it already in 1889 – “that woman belongs
in the house.”1 And these men had a profoundly patriarchal understanding
of what it meant for a woman to be “in the house.” A wife was not her
husband’s partner but his helpmeet (Gehülfin). This role was understood to
be the precondition for the very existence of the family. As one author put it
in the Korrespondenzblatt in 1899, “if woman as mother does not give her
children an example of obedience, the father cannot be head of the family. The
family disintegrates. It must be a fact in the home: the man rules woman and
the household.”2
The male Protestant morality campaigners did understand that some women,
at least in some stages of their lives, would not be completely occupied with
child rearing and homemaking. A commission established by the Inner Mission
in 1885 even went so far as to concede that it was “a necessary and in itself
1
2

“Vermischtes,” KB 3 (1889): 54.
G. Közle, “Der Mann als Familienvater,” KB 13 (1899): 69.

51

52

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

not objectionable result of modern economic development” that more and
more women worked outside the home. It insisted, however, that the state,
employers, and the charities had an obligation to ensure that the associated
moral and social dangers were counteracted – by protecting women’s morality,
banning them from jobs that were not compatible with their alleged physical
capacities and inner “nature,” and giving them “opportunity . . . to prepare
themselves for their calling as housewives.”3 And many men in the morality
movement in fact regarded even conventional forms of women’s work outside
the home not only as a moral danger but as itself essentially immoral. An
article in the Korrespondenzblatt in 1890 summed up this view well, arguing
that “woman must never seek to go beyond the boundaries of the calling
established for her by God.”4 Again, the morality campaigners did sometimes
argue explicitly that women should get equal pay for equal work; but they did
so, as the leading conservative Protestant theologian Reinhold Seeberg put it
in 1907, in part because this “appears to be the best, indeed probably the only
means of getting the woman, especially the married woman worker, out of
the factory again and returning her to her family and her duties as wife and
mother.”5
Catholics generally took a more pragmatic view of women’s work, but they,
too, often believed that anything but the single-earner family was not really
normal. Many demands of the women’s movement might be “justified” by the
prevailing social conditions, one Catholic commentator believed in 1901; but
those conditions themselves reflected a “sickness of society,” and the radical
emancipatory women’s movement was a “degeneracy” that threatened the
“basic cell of the social organism, the family.”6
Even where the male morality campaigners were willing to imagine women
working, their understanding of women’s roles outside the family was hardly
less restrictive than their understanding of what was required of them in it.
Ludwig Weber summed up this understanding of women’s broader social role
in an article in the Korrespondenzblatt in 1903. He conceded that “the demand
for the subordination of woman under man in the gospels is relevant only
within the marital relationship.” But he also insisted that “Christian morality
establishes limits for the activity of woman in social life, over and above the
moral commandments that are valid for both sexes.” These limits made it
“completely hopeless and downright harmful for woman” to try to impose
equal rights and equal participation for women in “all areas of professional,
3

CAIM, Frauenarbeit und Familienwohl: Ein Nachwort des Central-Ausschusses für die innere
Mission (Berlin: Stadtmission, 1885), pp. 5, 7, 8. See Sabine Schmitt, Der Arbeiterinnenschutz im
deutschen Kaiserreich (Stuttgart: Metzler, 1995); Walter Müller, Angelika Willms, and Johann
Handl, Strukturwandel der Frauenarbeit 1880–1980 (Frankfurt: Campus, 1983).
4 “Frauen und ärztliches Studium,” KB 4 (1890): 42, 43.
5 Reinhold Seeberg, Probleme der modernen Frauenbewegung (Hamburg: Rauhes Haus, 1907),
p. 63.
6 “Die Frauenfrage,” HPB 127 (1901): 333.

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

53

social and political life.” Christianity required “loving service” of women “not
just within the home but also outside the home.”7 This was, of course, also the
Protestant men’s understanding of the role of women in the morality movement
itself – “silent service in the rescue of her fallen, and the protection of her
endangered sisters.”8
Many of these men, therefore, regarded the women’s movement as a product
of the moral decay of the age, of individualism, selfish pleasure seeking, materialism, and the spirit – as Seeberg put it in 1913 – of “rebellion against . . . the
order of nature.”9 Der Volkswart, in 1911, even saw it as an expression of
“the most brutal egotism” among women.10
And yet, at least within the Protestant men’s morality movement, such
denunciations were in fact less common than denunciations of arrogant, shameless, and immoral men. The leaders of the Protestant men’s morality association explicitly, consistently, and vehemently excoriated men’s behavior; and
they quite clearly believed men to be the primary authors of the sexual misery
of the age. Indeed, the single most important theme in the discourse of the
Protestant men’s morality movement, from its very outset, was the denunciation of the double standard of sexual morality. As the first pamphlet of the
WSV put it in 1885, the double standard “makes a mockery of all justice and
morality, and has to go. Whether it’s professional vice in the woman’s case or
habitual vice in the man’s, both are equally damnable.”11 From that moment
forward, with almost numbing frequency, the Protestant men’s morality movement denounced the double standard as unjust, illogical, and counter to God’s
commandment. Samuel Keller, first general secretary of the AKDS, was particularly vehement in a speech in 1892: “We’re still Christians, after all. . . . There
is after all only one savior for all human beings, only one grace. . . . The sins of
man and woman are equal before God.” Anything else was an “injustice that
cries out to heaven.”12 Again, an important part of this view was an explicit
rejection of the idea that men could not control their sexual urges; as Keller
put it, “that which one would gladly believe to be true, one believes most
easily.” Those who made this argument were secretly motivated simply by the
desire to continue exploiting prostitutes for their own pleasure – indeed, “the
economic interests of the slave-owners of North America were not so pervasive, not so effective, as the sensual interest of men are among our opponents
7

Ludiwg Weber, “Was verdankt die Frau dem Christentum?” KB 17 (1903): 56.
“Unsere Frauenvereine,” KB 1 (1887): 33–34.
9 Reinhold Seeberg, Der Geburtenrückgang in Deutschland: Eine sozialethische Studie (Leipzig:
Deichert, 1913), p. 34.
10 Karl Waldorf, “Vom Sturm auf die Ehe,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 89–90.
11 “Eine Pestbeule am Leibe unseres Volkes,” in Quellenbuch zur Geschichte der Inneren Mission,
ed. H. Hennig (Hamburg: Rauhes Haus, 1912), p. 456.
12 Samuel Keller, “Gleiches Recht für Mann und Weib,” AKDS, Verhandlungen der Allgemeinen
Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine vom 14. und 15. Oktober 1891 zu Dresden (Berlin:
AKDS, 1892), pp. 70–71, 73.
8

54

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

here.”13 He could only agree to the continuance of regulated prostitution, he
observed, on the condition that men be subject to compulsory medical examination and treatment, just as women were.
Keller’s suggestion was not unique. Friedrich Bohn observed in 1914 that
even after the abolition of the system of regulation, effective control of venereal
disease would require the “long-term internment” of incorrigible prostitutes,
and that “the same measure will be called for also for men who are known
to be . . . spreading disease.”14 Even the Catholic Volkswart, which took an
ambivalent position on regulation, did quote approvingly a leading Protestant
activist’s demand (in 1911) that men as well as women should be subject to
examination.15
The Protestant morality campaigners further asserted that seduced and abandoned girls made up a large proportion of all prostitutes, and that the men who
hired prostitutes therefore were merely cynically taking advantage of women
first plunged into misery by the lies and heartlessness of still worse men. As the
Korrespondenzblatt put it in 1890, “people speak today often of the Woman
Question. But the Woman Question is actually the Men Question. It’s men who
cast women down into misery.”16 In the early years of the Protestant morality
movement, its spokesmen imagined all sorts of ways to punish such characters – for example, by imprisoning for not less than one month anyone who
“causes a female person to permit immoral actions . . . by exploiting her material need.”17 And regardless of what the law said, the morality campaigners
continually insisted that respectable society must shun sexually predatory men.
Keller, as usual, was particularly fiery, demanding that the proper response to
a man boasting of his “conquests” would be to “throw these words in his face:
‘Scoundrel! Miserable cad!’”18
“Whoring” (Hurerei) and seduction were not the only male behaviors
that the Protestant men’s organizations denounced, however. The Korrespondenzblatt regularly carried articles excoriating the full range of male misdeeds,
reporting on both national scandals and “trivial” instances of men’s vulgarity
and sexual aggression. In 1904, for example, it welcomed the introduction of
the first plainclothes police detail in Berlin dedicated to catching men who persecuted women with indecent advances. Later that year it reported on the case
of a man who harassed two young women on a train so relentlessly that they
tried to pull the emergency brake and leaped from the train – concluding that
13

S. Keller, Wird die Sittlichkeitsbewegung siegen? Vortrag, gehalten im Architektenhause zu
Berlin am 1. April 1892 (Berlin: Selbst-Verlag der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine, 1892), pp. 9,
10.
14 Friedrich Bohn, Was dann? Positive Vorschläge zur Lösung der Prostitutionsfrage (Berlin:
AKDS, 1914), p. 8.
15 “Zur Prostitutionsfrage,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 103 (citing Paula Mueller).
16 “Aus dem Berliner Männerbund,” KB 4 (1890): 21.
17 Klose, “Zu §182 St.-G.B.,” Streitfragen 3 (1892): 14.
18 Keller, “Gleiches Recht,” p. 72.

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

55

there should be women-only compartments on commuter trains.19 In 1891 it
had reported as “devilish!” an employer’s attempt to seduce his sixteen-yearold maid. That same year it also reported with outrage on an instance in which a
crowd of men disrupted a meeting of waitresses who were trying to organize to
secure better wages and conditions.20 The next year Ludwig Weber remarked
with horror on a case of child prostitution, confessing himself ashamed “that
there are such men in Germany.”21 Wilhelm Philipps saw infanticide as “a
terrible accusation against men.”22
Protestant men were also horrified by what they saw as the prevailing contempt for women. Men were, of course, the primary consumers of pornography; and although the morality campaigners mostly deplored the effect of
such images on the men, whose lust and misdeeds they allegedly incited, at
times they also expressed their shame at the fact that pornography objectified
and denigrated women – it was “an impudent insult to the female sex,” as
Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster put it.23 Others objected to variety theaters on the
grounds that “respect for woman” was “quite systematically annihilated in
these venues,” or to modernist literature because it caused “countless readers”
to lose “their sacred awe of woman.”24
The Protestant morality campaigners were also aware that the consequences
of all this objectification of women were not born only by women working in
the sex trade. One held in 1908, for example, that “anyone who recognizes that
men and woman have equal rights will not belong to the many unreasonable
men who think that they can demand sexual favors of their wives.”25 The
Protestant morality campaigners in particular sometimes asserted that birth
control was objectionable also because it was a means for husbands to avoid
the social and financial consequences of their sexual exploitation of their wives –
because, as the same critic put it, contraceptives reduced the wife to a mere
“plaything of the man.”26 And a particularly heinous sign of male egotism was
19

“Zum Schutz der Frauen und Mädchen gegen Belästigungen” and “Sittlichkeitsverbrechen,”
KB 18 (1904): 15, 37–38.
20 “Teuflisch” and “Die Kellnerinnen,” KB 5 (1891): 117, 93.
21 Ludwig Weber, “Die Unzucht–das Grab der Völker,” AKDS, Verhandlungen der Allgemeinen
Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine vom 19. und 20. Oktober 1892 zu Darmstadt
(Berlin: AKDS, 1893), p. 93.
22 Quoted in Max Oberbreyer, Die Leipziger Sittlichkeitsbewegung (Leipzig: Rheinhold Werther,
1892), p. 9.
23 Quoted in Bruno Meyer, “Zum Kulturkampf um die Sittlichkeit,” Mutterschutz 1 (1905): 438,
445.
24 Hermann Dalton, “Was uns in den Kampf wider die Unsittlichkeit treibt,” Korrespondent 7
(1891): 33; “Die Berliner Kreissynode und die Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” KB 15 (1902): 43; Ludwig Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre der Sittlichkeitsbewegung: Bilder aus der Geschichte des Westdeutschen Sittlichkeitsvereins und der Allgemeinen deutschen Sittlichkeits-Konferenz (Duisburg:
WSV, 1910), p. 138.
25 H. Häberlin, Die Ethik des Geschlechtslebens (Berlin: Franz Wunder, 1908), p. 19.
26 Ibid., p. 22.

56

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

the fact that wives were not infrequently infected with venereal diseases by their
husbands. Not surprisingly, the AKDS supported the proposal to imprison men
who knowingly infected their wives.27
In short, these men were ashamed and outraged at the behavior of their sex.
Indeed, all in all, as Weber put it, “the demoralization . . . of the nation is more
the fault of men than of women”; or, in Wilhelm Philipps’s formulation, men
“bear by far the greater responsibility for the moral ruination of our nation, and
on top of that like to . . . shift the blame onto the weaker sex. . . . A miserable,
despicable way to behave!”28
There was of course a rather narrow and demanding conception of “real”
or “true” manhood implicit in this broad-gauge condemnation of masculine
behavior. Men no less than women had a “natural calling,” with its own
strict demands and duties. At the heart of their understanding of “true” manliness was the concept of moral and social “strength” (Kraft or Stärke), and
of the moral obligation that it created. Real masculinity was expressed in selfdiscipline, in the ability to do one’s moral duty. This ideal of manly self-control
was ubiquitous in the publications and speeches of the male morality campaigners, both Catholic and Protestant, usually in abbreviated form – for example,
in the use of the adjective “manly.” Thus representatives of both confessions
called on their colleagues to show “Christian manliness,” “a proud ideal of
manly strength and vigor,” “real German manly outrage,” “strict and manly
self-discipline,” “manly standing up for piety and love of God, for morality
and justice,” and “the true manly courage” that allows one to “overcome
oneself.”29 As one essay on the sixth commandment put it in 1902, “Christianity does not know of the right, but only of the duty of the strongest.”30
This was, of course, not precisely true; in fact the morality campaigners
held that one gained rights precisely by performing one’s duties. In 1899, for
example, the Korrespondenzblatt explained that it was the “natural right of
any man” to have a family, and “in every man lies the calling and the will to
rule”; but “only he who fulfills his duty has a claim to this right.” A man had
to provide; he had to set an example of Christian faith and lead his family to
God; and he had to be chaste. Men who were not “have no right to a family.”31
27

See Hermann Fischer-Harriehausen, “Geschlechtskrankheitenbekämpfung,” Bundesgesundheitsblatt 23 (1980): 141; Iwan Bloch, Das Sexualleben unserer Zeit (Berlin: Marcus, 1907),
p. 440 (citing Blaschko); undated AKDS petition to the Reichstag, “Einem hohen Reichstag,”
ADW, BP I, 240.
28 Ludwig Weber, “Die Stellung des evangelischen Bundes zur modernen Frauenbewegung,”
Frauenblätter 10 (1901): 62. Ph., “Teuflisch,” KB 5 (1891): 117.
29 See “Ich klage an!,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 38, 41; Friedrich Paulsen, Moderne Erziehung und
geschlechtlche Sittlichkeit (Berlin: Reuther & Reichardt, 1908), p. 60; “Aufruf! Liebe evangelische Mitchristen!” [of the WSV], ADW, CA-526; “Aus dem Berliner Männerbund,” KB 4
(1890): 18.
30 Kähler, “Das Verhältnis von Mann und Weib zum 6. Gebot,” KB 16 (1902): 21.
31 Közle, “Der Mann als Familienvater,” KB 13 (1899): 60, 69, 61, 70.

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

57

Samuel Keller went one step further, insisting that “only chaste men are normal
men”; and Ludwig Weber even determined that unchaste men were not fully
human but rather “dragged down into the filth of animal nature.”32
Denunciations specifically of male misbehavior were far less common and
incendiary in the publications and speeches of the Catholic morality campaigners than in those of their Protestant counterparts. Again, the Catholic movement
was more narrowly focused on the moral dangers posed by immoral images and
texts; prostitution and, particularly, the image of the prostitute as victim played
a much lesser role among Catholics than among Protestants. Fundamentally,
however, Catholics were just as much aware of the widespread abuse of male
privilege and power in their society as were Protestants, and they regarded it
with equal contempt as the source of sexual and social disorder. Two articles
in Der Volkswart in 1913 sum up this view well. The first characterized feminists as “desperadoes” who wished to increase their own numbers by sowing
discord between husbands and wives.33 On the same page, however, a second
article pointed out that whereas misogynists blamed women for society’s ills,
“in thousands and thousands of cases it’s the men who seduce women and
girls, abuse them, buy and sell them, rape and assault them.” Fundamentally,
it held, men had brought feminism on themselves by neglecting their own
moral duties. The only answer was for “both, men and women, to subordinate
themselves to the moral law, and for each to acknowledge the honor of the
other.”34
As Ludwig Lemme put it to the AKDS in 1904, then, the morality campaigners’ ideal was a society of “humility, self-denial, pity, compassion” for all; or, in
Der Volkswart’s phrasing in 1911, of “strictness toward oneself . . . , renunciation . . . loyal fulfillment of duty . . . , selfless love, active sacrifice and heroic selfconquest.”35 The men’s morality movement dreamed of a society governed –
in the words of a speaker at the AKDS’s annual conference in 1892 – by “love
and justice . . . , good will and compassion . . . , honor and consciousness of
duty,” in which there was a place for everyone and everyone was in their place,
and in which everyone understood “that we are all obligated in solidarity as
the conscience of the community, that we bear a common responsibility.”36
32

Keller, “Gleiches Recht,” p. 73; Weber, “Die Unzucht,” p. 91. On the duty to marry and have
children, see Reinhold Seeberg, System der Ethik im Grundriss (Leipzig: Deichert, 1911), p. 96.
33 Von Gerhardt, “Sittlichkeit und Frauenbewegung,” Volkswart 6 (1913): 179–181.
34 Heinrich Pudor, “Gleiches Recht und doppelte Moral,” Volkswart 6 (1913): 181.
35 Ludwig Lemme, “Der Einfluss der verschiedenen Weltanschauungen unserer Zeit auf die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit,” in AKDS, Die XVI. Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine in Köln vom 2. bis 4. Oktober 1904 (Berlin: Verlag der Geschäftsstelle der deutschen
Sittlichkeitsvereine/A. Dartsch, 1904), p. 61; Waldorf, “Vom Sturm,” pp. 89, 90.
36 Brinkmann, “In wie weit beeinflussen die Lebensverhältnisse und Lebensanschauungen der
Gegenwart die Sittenlosigkeit?” AKDS, Verhandlungen der Allgemeinen Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine vom 19. und 20. Oktober 1892 zu Darmstadt (Berlin: AKDS, 1893),
p. 132.

58

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

II. Christianity and Class: The Specter of Socialism
Conservative Christians believed that this ideal of morality, justice, compassion, and solidarity was threatened above all by Social Democracy. Indeed, the
threat of socialism was omnipresent in their analysis of contemporary immorality; for in their view socialism was nothing less than enslavement by choice and
principle to anarchic, selfish sensual lust. Socialism was moral crisis turned into
a self-conscious political movement. This conviction rested on the fundamental philosophical difference between the two groups. The SPD, committed to
historical materialism, was in a sense the organization that best represented
the materialist spirit of the age – which conservative Christians regarded as the
root of the moral crisis of their time. The two groups were critical of many of
the same things – for example, regulated prostitution, the triviality of popular
entertainments, and the predatory sexual behavior of men. But their analyses
of the origins of such deplorable phenomena were diametrically opposed. One
Protestant observer summed up the disagreement succinctly in 1895: while
Social Democrats argued that the origins of the widespread sexual disorder
of the day lay “solely in the existing system of private property,” conservative Christians insisted that it was “actually rooted in the lack of Christian
conviction and religious-moral seriousness.”37
The connection in conservative Christian minds between materialism and
immorality was in fact so close that before the turn of the century the morality
campaigners appear at times to have been unable to imagine that socialists
would not support regulation. Thus in 1892 Samuel Keller argued that if it were
true that men had to have sex or their health would suffer, “then that party
that wants to create free love in its future state is right.”38 In the following year,
the journal of the WSV made the same connection: Social Democratic ideas
about love and marriage “undermine the most elementary structures of social
and political life,” it observed; “but the exceptional legislation on prostitution
is already doing that.”39 And as late as 1910 Der Volkswart referred to Erich
Wulffen, a district attorney, prominent criminologist in the field of sex crimes,
and defender of regulation, as “the DA with the Red Flag.”40
In fact, the morality campaigners were convinced that Social Democracy was
rooted in sexual immorality. This was particularly true in the early years of the
morality movement; as the SPD was gradually integrated into the political life
of the Empire, the rhetoric moderated, and the – later – Catholic movement
generally did not make the connection between sexual license and socialism as
explicitly as did the leadership of the Protestant movement in its early years.
And yet, the idea did persist. Thus the first pamphlet published by the WSV in
37

Sachs, “Die Stellung der Sozialdemokratie zur Ehe und Familie,” KB 9 (1895): 6–7.
Quoted in Oberbreyer, Die Leipziger Sittlichkeitsbewegung, p. 14.
39 “Zur Kontrolle,” Korrespondent 9 (1893): 50.
40 Cato, “Der Staatsanwalt mit der roten Fahne,” Volkswart 3 (1910): 162.
38

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

59

1885 argued “that Social Democracy and anarchism, which threaten the whole
political order, have their roots in this mire” of prostitution; and in 1913 Der
Volkswart was still asserting that the “growth of Social Democracy and its
allies, the enemies of Christianity, and the frightening spread of immorality”
were all part of the same “moral abyss” into which Germany was falling.41
At the root of this association was a particular understanding of the relationships between and among desire, morality, and authority. Both socialism
and fornication, the morality campaigners believed, were expressions of unconstrained, uncontrolled desire for purely selfish and straightforwardly material,
or physical, gratification. It was this uncontrolled desire that led to the revolt
against authority; for authority – moral in the individual, political in social life –
was what constrained selfish desire. Thus, the Christian morality campaigners
were literally authoritarians; they believed that moral, political, and social
order is made possible only by legitimate authority. Indeed, the authority of
moral law and its representatives and agents in church and state was what
made human beings truly human, and truly social. Without legitimate authority, explicitly acknowledged and freely obeyed, people were merely a bundle
of animalistic passions and desires and were capable only of creating a chaotic
dog-eat-dog world of limitless selfishness.
Christian conservatives expressed this belief in a formula that appears over
and over again in their publications and speeches: that morality can be defined
as the dominion of the spirit over the flesh. The body, in their view, is the
seat of amoral instinctual drives; as Ludwig Lemme put it in 1904, “selfishness
resides in the flesh.”42 Moral behavior is the product of the triumph of the law
(human and divine) over the animal instincts, of spiritual order over material
chaos. Thus Friedrich Mahling asserted in 1907 that man’s essential human
task was to “master with the spirit the body in all its expressions and drives.
That is moral living. That man lives a moral life whose spirit rules his flesh.”43
In an influential essay on “Modern Education and Sexual Morality” in the
following year, Friedrich Paulsen, professor of philosophy and pedagogy in
Berlin, made the same argument: a human being was not simply “a system of
natural drives . . . a unique species of animal” but a spiritual being; to fail to
recognize that would be to “subject oneself to the contempt that mankind has
always felt for regression into merely animal existence.”44
Catholics used precisely the same terminology, albeit more sparingly. The
most influential statement on the Catholic side was probably a 1907 essay by
41

“Eine Pestbeule,” p. 454; Gerhardt, “Frauenbewegung und Sittlichkeit,” Volkswart 6 (1913):
179.
42 Lemme, “Der Einfluss,” p. 52; Reinhold Seeberg, “Alte und neue Moral,” CAIM, Verhandlungen des 35. Kongresses für Innere Mission in Stuttgart, vom 4. bis 7. Oktober 1909 (Hamburg:
Rauhes Haus, 1910), p. 273.
43 Friedrich Mahling, Probleme der modernen Frauenbewegung (Hamburg: Rauhes Haus, 1907),
pp. 71, 72.
44 Paulsen, Moderne Erziehung, pp. 56–57.

60

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster – who was not Catholic himself but was highly
sympathetic to Catholic intellectual traditions and influential in the Catholic
morality movement. On this matter Foerster asserted “that nature is less than
human,” and that our mere physical nature “does not contain within itself
it own proper boundaries, awaiting them instead from the spirit.”45 Joseph
Mausbach, too, in his speech to the Katholikentag of 1912, explicitly spoke of
“moral self-control, the dominion of the spirit over the flesh.”46
Conservative Christians believed that it was the function of social and political authority and institutions to safeguard this dominion of the spirit over the
flesh. The state, the law, the churches, and the social order represented and
embodied a higher law and the common good, above and beyond the selfish
desires of the individual. The political order, in short, was not distinguishable
from moral order; the former embodied and enforced the latter. The foundation of morality was therefore the ability to obey. Friedrich Paulsen summed
up this belief economically, arguing that one of the “great imperatives” of
education must be “learn to obey! Obey, that is, not submit superficially to
outward coercion, but rather to freely take up into your own will the will of
those better and more insightful than you.”47 Joseph Mausbach made the same
point: the individual could only achieve “unshakable firmness” of the spiritual
self “against the temptations of sensuality . . . if it honors the laws of moral and
social order as the expression of the divine will.”48
The problem with Social Democracy was that it was self-consciously both
materialist and democratic. Because it taught the centrality and legitimacy
of material needs and aspirations, in socialism – as Der Volkswart put it in
1913 – “the animal instincts are not repressed but rather cultivated”; and
its political teachings “undermine respect for the authorities established by
God.” The result was moral disaster: “Whoever does not respect laws, whoever
acknowledges neither an earthly nor an eternal judge, falls victim to his own
passions.”49
Revolutionary socialism undermined morality, then; but immorality likewise encouraged revolutionary sentiment. As the Korrespondenzblatt argued in
1887, sin was the origin of “revolutionary tendencies . . . against all human and
divine order.” Hence “vice . . . undermines the foundations of the state. . . . If
a man rebels in such impudent manner against God’s explicit commandment, how should he have respect for [merely] human order?”50 As Ludwig
Weber put it in 1892, “we are in a condition of creeping revolution”
45

Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster, Sexualethik und Sexualpädagogik: Eine Auseinandersetzung mit
den Modernen (Munich: Josef Kösel, 1907), p. 46.
46 Joseph Mausbach, “Der Kampf gegen die moderne Sittenlosigkeit–eine Kulturaufgabe des
deutschen Volkes,” Volkswart 5 (1912): 130.
47 Paulsen, Moderne Erziehung, p. 88.
48 Mausbach, “Der Kampf,” p. 130.
49 Gerhardt, “Frauenbewegung,” p. 179.
50 “Die Unzucht–die Verderberin der Menschheit,” KB 1 (1887): 60.

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

61

because fornication “gnaws . . . at all respect for higher divine and human
order.”51
In this sense, socialism worked in very much the same way that popular
culture did: it excited the sensual instincts; it accustomed people to thinking of
happiness in shallow, material terms; it cultivated self-indulgence and violence.
And “trashy” popular culture likewise encouraged disrespect for authority and
fed the spirit of disobedience. Thus Otto von Leixner complained in his seminal
essay on trashy and immoral literature in 1891 that in most such publications
“the upper classes are depicted as hard-hearted, pleasure-seeking, spoiled”;
such literature “nourishes hatred against the haves” and “contempt” for the
existing “order of the world” among the have-nots. It was only in light of “the
widely spread and spreading notions and passions among the lower classes”
(that is, Social Democracy) “that one can recognize what kind of influence the
majority of such novels have.”52 Others complained that “continual reveling in
blood and horror must deaden the moral sense, must tear the belief in divine and
human justice, in divine and state authority from the heart” of the reader, or
that Schund encouraged “mistrustful aversion to all authority, overestimation
of one’s own person, a tendency toward adventurism.”53
By the same logic, contraception too was a political danger, for the same reason – that it encouraged “unbridled thirst for sensual pleasure, lust heightened
by the experience of fulfillment” (in the words of Reinhold Seeberg), cultivating “disloyal crudity and lack of character” (in the words of F. W. Foerster).54
Little wonder, then, that socialists sponsored public addresses on contraception, or that the birthrate was lowest precisely in larger cities, where the Social
Democratic Party had its greatest electoral success.55 And prostitution offered
men the opportunity for unconstrained sensual gratification and was therefore
conducive to the spread of socialism – a movement that, as the morality campaigners saw it, preached a doctrine of unconstrained gratification of material
desires.
It was similarly only logical to the morality campaigners that a doctrine
that fed fundamentally on selfish sensual/material desires should be opposed to
what they saw as the foundational institution of the social order: the family.
At least some Social Democrats sang the praises of institutions in which child
rearing would be socialized and the unpaid domestic labor of women replaced
51

Weber, “Die Unzucht,” pp. 98–99.
Otto von Leixner, Zur Reform unserer Volkslitteratur (Berlin: Drewitz, 1891), pp. 22, 24, 25.
53 Quoted in Georg Jäger, “Der Kampf gegen Schmutz und Schund: Die Reaktion der Gebildeten
auf die Unterhaltungsliteratur,” Archiv für Geschichte des Buchwesens 31 (1988): 175, 174;
Karl Kaisig and Karl Rotter, Wo stehen Wir? Eine Orientierung im Kampfe gegen die Schundund Schmutzschriften (Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer, 1914), p. VII.
54 Reinhold Seeberg, Sinnlichkeit und Sittlichkeit: Alte oder neue Moral? (Berlin: Trowitzsch,
1909), p. 16; Foerster, Sexualethik, p. 37.
55 F. Huschenbett, “Kindersegen und kein Ende?” KB 25 (1911): 84–85; Mausbach, “Der Kampf,”
p. 132.
52

62

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

by professionalized communal services – communal day care, communal
kitchens, communal baths, and so on. But moral conservatives argued that
it was in the family that people learned to respect authority, in the person of
their parents; and it was also here that people – adults as well as children –
learned to subordinate their selfish individual desires to the ethical imperative of care for others, and hence first became capable of living in an ordered
society. Marriage was, Ludwig Weber insisted, “a school of mutual devotion”
and of “love and caring for others.”56 Joseph Mausbach offered a characteristically Catholic version of the same concept in 1912: marriage “should
elevate all lowly drives through Christian respect and love, temper all legal
demands [for sex] with sensitivity, consideration and forbearance.”57 A petition against brothels lodged by Heidelberg’s Protestant morality association
in 1902 summed up the implications of this model pithily: “The preservation
of the sanctity of marriage and an orderly and happy family life are the most
important foundations on which the well-being of the state and nation are
built.”58
Beyond this socializing and moralizing role of the family, however, the
Christian morality campaigners also believed that sexual morality specifically
was the single most fundamental foundation of morality more broadly. Learning to control the physical passion of sexual desire was the foundation and
precondition for learning to control all other passions. The sexual instinct
was the most powerful of the primal, carnal instincts – the “most important
basic human instinct of all,” as Fritz Schultze put it in 1897.59 Victory here
required the cultivation of a moral discipline that would make other challenges
child’s play; failure here would pave the way for moral failure in every other
respect, would break the moral will more generally. Wilhelm Brinkmann made
this point forcefully in a speech to the AKDS in 1892: the simple fact was,
he believed, “that without sexual purity morality itself cannot exist.”60 Fifteen years later, a leading morality advocate in Munich was equally succinct:
“True morality is tested and proven most deeply in the regulation of sexual
relations.”61 Another Catholic observer argued in 1909 that “general morality
grows out of specifically sexual morality.”62 For the moral personality, in short,
sexuality was a question of life or death. And it was for this reason that sexual
disorder was so devastating for the moral fiber of the nation. As Heidelberg’s
anti-brothel campaigners put it, the prevalence of brothels was a key reason

56

Ludwig Weber, “Was verdankt die Frau dem Christentum?” KB 17 (1903): 56.
Mausbach, “Der Kampf,” p. 131.
58 “Gesuch des Heildelberger Vereins für Hebung der öffentlichen Sittlichkeit, die sittlichen
Zustände in Heidelberg betr.,” KB 16 (1902): 70.
59 Fritz Schultze, Über geschlechtliche Sittlichkeit (Leipzig: H. G. Wallmann, 1897), p. 6.
60 Brinkmann, “In wie weit,” p. 133.
61 R. Krause, “Afrikanermoral,” Allegemeine Rundschau 4 (1907): 405.
62 Quoted in Ludwig Gurlitt, “Sexuelle Sittlichkeit und Konfessionalismus,” SP 2 (1909): 173.
57

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

63

“why discipline and morality, loyalty and faith are sinking in our nation, and
crude and unscrupulous selfishness are spreading.”63
Obviously, a key assumption of the morality campaigners was that merely
natural sexuality was fundamentally brutal and destructive. This was particularly true of men’s sexuality – they frequently referred to “male brutality,” or
the “brutal male pleasure-seeking,” or the potential for a “brutal indulgence
of masculine desires” as the likely outcome of the triumph of a “naturalistic”
moral code.64 Ludwig Weber held that the root of both sexual lust and bloodthirstiness was “the desire to enforce the right of the stronger at the expense of
the weaker.”65 Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster held that sexuality was “demonic,”
it was by nature uncontrolled, without limits, and it did not stop – which was
why immorality so frequently degenerated into perversity.66
This was the case fundamentally because the body was always in revolt
against the moral will, always attempting to overthrow the dominion of the
spirit and subject the individual to its own power. Thus the Protestant morality campaigners variously observed that fornication made its practitioners
“slaves of sin”; that the great danger of the “sins of unchastity” was that
they “make one unscrupulous . . . [and] extinguish all enthusiasm for the ideal;
there remains only carnal pleasure-seeking, which drives its slaves with demonic
power from sin to sin”; that prostitution made men “slaves and servants of their
lusts”; and that “only by learning to master ourselves, to avoid being slaves to
our instincts, can we become as free . . . as it is possible to be in this world.”67
Catholics used very similar language. In its pastoral letter to German Catholic
youth in 1909, for example, the episcopate urged young men to “be heroes,
fight for your freedom. . . . Master the sensual instincts with the scepter of reason, with the hero’s sword, the will.”68 And Joseph Mausbach told the annual
Catholic conference in 1912 that monogamous marriage was the best “safeguard of freedom” against the “tyranny of uncontrolled whims and passions.”
Real freedom was only possible “if the higher moral self is able to control the
lower, instinctual self.”69
This conception of inward, moral freedom had explicit political implications. On the one hand, it meant that the morality campaigners saw their own
attempt to use the law and the police to counter cultural change precisely as a
63

“Gesuch,” pp. 69, 70.
Mahling, Probleme, p. 77; Ellger, Frauenbewegung und Sittlichkeitsbewegung (Hamburg:
Rauhes Haus, 1909), p. 8; “Der Prozess Sternberg,” KB 15 (1901): 4; “‘Ich klage an!’” Volkswart 1 (1908): 34.
65 Weber, “Die Unzucht,” pp. 98–99.
66 Foerster, Sexualethik, p. 47.
67 “Die Begründung des Männerbundes,” KB 1 (1887): 5; “J.N.J.,” KB 3 (1889): 10; Ernst
von Düring, “Rassenhygiene und sittliche Forderungen,” Abolitionist 10 (1911): 30; Hermann
Dalton, Auf zum Kampfe wider die Unzucht! (Berlin: Stadtmission, 1890), p. 18.
68 Quoted in Josef Pappers, “Eine nationale Tat,” Volkswart 2 (1909): 19.
69 Mausbach, “Der Kampf,” pp. 131, 130.
64

64

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

defense of (moral) freedom. On the other hand, they believed that people who
were not inwardly free, who had not broken the tyranny of their own desire,
could not create free institutions. Instead, they would be forced to seek power
over others, in order to satisfy their material, animal lusts. Enslavement to
desire would eat away at the fabric of order, justice, and liberty. Thus some
warned that the general loss of moral backbone was producing a loss of civil
courage and willingness to suffer for one’s principles in public life – as did
one Catholic cultural critic, who, in 1910, feared that the old “German ‘manly
pride before the thrones of kings,’ before ministers – that’s all past”; it was
being replaced by opportunistic “Byzantinism and servility.”70 Ultimately, the
result would be dictatorship and/or chaos. Ludwig Lemme, at the Inner Mission’s 1904 conference, painted a frightening picture of the consequences of
the decline of religiosity and Christian morality and the rise of an ethic “that
seeks to derive morality from evolutionary biology”:
Crude unleashing of the wildest passions. Indiscipline and pleasure-seeking among
the masses. Brutal violence of the powerful. Misery among the vulnerable. Dissolution of marital relationships. Division of families. Mistrust and fear everywhere.
Treacherous tyranny of a soldateska become aware of the power of spear and
sword. Soldier-kings who come to the throne through treachery, and fall through
treachery again.71

In 1910 Wilhelm Kuhaupt wrote that the ideas of Darwin and Nietzsche, in
which the “struggle for existence” was the “driving force of evolution,” would
reduce the world to “one great armed camp, in which death and destruction
have the upper hand. The egoistic will to power, bent on domination and
exploitation, puts a sword in every hand.”72
On occasion the morality campaigners made this argument explicitly regarding Social Democracy, which they saw as the political arm, so to speak, of that
spiritual crisis that was so evident in popular culture and the arts. Socialism was
to politics as sexual lust was to man’s moral personality: a demonic, chaotic
force in revolt against order, love, and reason, seeking to create a tyranny that
would crush human dignity beneath the weight of ungoverned physical passions. As Otto von Leixner put it, “behind the beautiful words of the apostles
of the new teaching lurks lust for power – they want to put themselves on
the throne from which they are trying to cast down all the powers that be.”73
In fact, there is a rather precise homology between the morality campaigners’
anthropology and their sociology: the (socialist) working class was the social
equivalent of the “animalistic,” instinctual, insatiable passions in the individual
person, and the ruling class was the social equivalent of the “spirit,” of man’s
reason and spiritual calling.
70

Quoted in “Gefahrdrohende Erscheinungen,” HPB 145 (1910): 420.
Ludwig Lemme, “Der Einfluss,” pp. 42, 43.
72 W. Kuhaupt, “Die moderne Moral und ihre Folgen,” Hochwacht 1 (1910): 68–69.
73 Von Leixner, Zur Reform, p. 22.
71

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

65

This model of socialism, finally, also explains why it was precisely the combination of sex and violence in popular culture that moral conservatives found
objectionable. Revolutionary socialism was both immoral and violent. Those
products of popular culture that implicitly glorified both immorality and violence, therefore, were most likely to be conducive to the spread of socialist ideas.
III. The Immorality of Capitalism
And yet, it would be a profound mistake to see the morality campaigners as
defenders of the social status quo in Germany in 1900; for as we have seen
in the case of the culture industry, they were hardly enamored of capitalism
either. Indeed, they believed that much of the moral decay of German society
was the product precisely of the convergence of amoral, vulgar, materialistic,
and sensationalistic conceptions of “fun” and of happiness among the poor
with the business acumen of unprincipled cultural entrepreneurs – whether the
organizers and marketers of popular culture or the modernist elite in “high”
culture. Beyond that, however, they were also intensely critical of the behavior
of the wealthy in their society more generally. In fact, whereas they believed
that the working classes were infected with a terrible mental disorder called
“socialism,” they also believed that the upper classes were infected with a
similar disease, which they often called “mammonism.” The latter was no
better than the former; in fact, the morality campaigners often argued that
socialism was merely the product, the logical consequence, of mammonism.
Socialism was, so to speak, the mammonism of the poor; and they had caught
it from the rich.
Prostitution was a classic example and important symbolic instance, for the
morality campaigners were convinced that brothels and white slavery were
big business. Reports of the obscene profits made by brothel owners were
in fact one of the classic rhetorical gestures of the antiregulation movement
before World War I.74 More broadly, the morality campaigners held prostitution to be rooted in the whole culture of commercialism and materialism. Thus one speaker at the 1905 conference of the AKDS admitted that
prostitution was rooted in the “great economic need – indeed subjection” of
women; but that in itself was merely an “outgrowth of the prevailing naturalistmammonist” spirit of the age. The “roots of prostitution” were to be found in
the broader cultural “soil thoroughly poisoned by mammonism.”75 More concretely, the sums earned by brothel owners were driven in part by the greed and
moral turpitude of those entrepreneurs in the culture industry who fed sensual
74

Friedrich Bohn, Unsere Forderungen zum Vorentwurf des neuen Strafgesetzbuches (Berlin:
AKDS, 1910), pp. 6, 9; Friedrich Bohn, Bordelle und Mädchenhandel (Berlin: AKDS, 1907),
pp. 6–8.
75 Hans Brennecke, Wie ist der Kampf gegen die Geschlechts-Krankheiten zu führen? (Berlin:
AKDS, 1905), pp. 19, 20.

66

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

lusts – the merchants of pornography, suggestive films, and racy literature,
and those who paid their employees (models, waitresses, pieceworkers, shop
girls, servants, etc.) the starvation wages that drove them to prostitution.76 The
morality campaigners were also convinced that prostitution served the desires
specifically of well-to-do men, asserting – as did the Swiss historian and cultural
critic Otto Henne am Rhyn at the turn of the century – that governments did not
abolish brothels and stop the traffic in women precisely because “it’s all about
the satisfaction of the sexual lusts of rich and distinguished gentlemen.”77 They
were particularly incensed by employers’ use of their authority and financial
power over the female employees for their own sexual profit; a number argued
from the 1890s in favor of the introduction of a paragraph in the Criminal
Code that would punish this form of sexual exploitation.78
However, the morality campaigners saw the sexual exploitation of workingclass women as only one limited instance of a much broader pattern of immoral
exploitation and inhumanity among the wealthy. The predatory immorality
of rich men was just one product of the broader inhumanity of capitalist
culture as a whole, which valued money above all else. Wilhelm Brinkmann,
for example, blamed the “misery, isolation, and hopelessness” of the working
classes on the “lack of love, of sympathy, of compassion” of the upper class,
their “selfishness” and “self-serving . . . lack of justice and uprightness.” It was,
he charged, “unscrupulous greed and hunger for profit that has eroded the
moral ground under the feet of the workers,” while the “arrogance and waste,”
the “provocative manner,” and the “boastful egotism” of the upper classes
made poverty and suffering all the more painful by contrast.79 “Riches and
power spark the passion of envy,” Lemme told the AKDS in 1904, and “the
hunger for power, the lust for pleasure, and envy – they are the recruiters
for Social Democracy.”80 Just as the Woman Question was really a product
of men’s behavior, the Social Question was at bottom a question about the
morality of the upper classes, not that of the working class.
Beyond mere greed and hard-heartedness, however, the morality campaigners believed that the most fundamental problem of their society was that the
modern industrial capitalist order was itself founded on immoral and unjust
principles. The modern social order, as Brinkmann put it, was founded on
mere “economic laws,” which “do not correspond to justice” because they
76

“Die Unsittlichkeit im Dienste des Mammon,” KB 1 (1887): 45.
Otto Henne am Rhyn, Prostitution und Mädchenhandel! Neue Enthüllungen aus dem Sklavenleben weisser Frauen und Mädchen (Leipzig: Hans Hedewigs Nachfolger, n.d.), p. 7.
78 See, e.g., “Soziale Nachtbilder,” KB 5 (1891): 101; “Vermischtes,” KB 3 (1889): 15; H.
Wittenberg and E. Hückstädt, Die geschlechtlich-sittlichen Verhältnisse der evangelischen
Landbewohner im Deutschen Reich (Leipzig: Reinhold Werther, 1895), Band I, Abteilung
I, p. 74, and Band I, Abteilung II, p. 217; “Zur Arbeiterinnenfrage,” KB 8 (1894): 88–89;
Klose, “Zu §182 St.-G.B.,” Streitfragen 3 (1892): 13.
79 Brinkmann, “In wie weit,” pp. 137, 155, 135.
80 Lemme, “Der Einfluss,” p. 59.
77

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

67

“serve . . . exclusively the production of goods, not their just use, more greed
and the interests of individuals than justice.”81 Lemme repeated the charge:
the capitalist social order, he believed, was essentially the product of modern,
rationalist, materialist ethics; there was nothing in these principles to “hold
people back from the wild . . . chase after gold, from sensual pleasures limited
only by considerations of one’s own health, from mockery of the highest
spiritual values.”82 The general secretary of the AKDS summed up this vision
of capitalist modernity in the organization’s journal in 1896: “Money is the
ideal of modern times . . . , it is the state within the state. . . . Money is the
authority of our times, it’s the brain of the world, it has legislative power, it has
creative force . . . it demands the rights of a sovereign, to which we are all to
be subject.”83 This was Mammonismus – life under the dictatorship of money.
Catholics often used the same sort of language. In 1908, for example, one
Catholic critic wrote in the journal of the KMV that “our economic and commercial system is ruinous for civilization. In it people fall victim to Mammon;
wisdom and virtue have to give way before cheap production and the piling-up
of capital. . . . Their tendency is to make the rich mean and heartless, the poor
careless and vicious.” The result was “universal oppression and extermination of the weak by the strong”; but even the capitalists themselves became
mere “cogs in the machine. The sense of inner freedom dies in them . . . , they
become incapable of thinking great thoughts or following high ideals. . . . We
are the slaves, not the masters of our work.”84 And the influential conservative
Catholic journal Historisch-Politische Blätter carried an article in 1910 that
held that “the modern economy contradicts ethics and justice in its fundamental principles.” The liberal “‘natural law’ of supply and demand, free competition as regulator of the distribution of wealth make power, not justice,
more and more the foundation of social life.” It was “unjust and an affront to
human intellect when in the arena of economics not the human spirit but mere
material – called money and capital – exercise dominion.”85 Capitalism itself
was the dominion of the flesh over the spirit writ large, the social equivalent of
individual slavery to sin.
By the 1900s, as the morality movement became more mainstream and
more successful, the anticapitalist rhetoric of its spokesmen moderated. Fiery
general denunciations of the upper classes became less common; anticapitalism
was increasingly expressed through the specific rhetorical gesture of criticizing
the “business” of immorality – the profits of brothels and the tendency of
publishers and film companies to “pursue the bottom line at the expense of
higher community values” (in the words of Karl Brunner) or to indulge in
81

Brinkmann, “In wie weit,” p. 135.
Lemme, “Der Einfluss,” pp. 58–59.
83 A. H., “Die Lohnbewegung im Konfektionsgewerbe,” KB 10 (1896): 27
84 J. Heneka, “Arbeit und Ruhe,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 154–155.
85 “Gefahrdrohende Erscheinungen,” HPB 145 (1910): 147, 148.
82

68

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

“crude speculation on the sensual instincts of half-grown boys and girls” (in
the words of one correspondent in Der Volkswart in 1909).86 Nevertheless,
fundamentally the morality campaigners remained committed after 1900 to
the same broader analysis: capitalism encouraged and indeed required people
to put money above values, selfishness above the commonweal, and desire
above love. It was at bottom this tyranny and joylessness of capitalist society
that explained the hunger for entertainment that the morality campaigners saw
as underpinning the flourishing of commercial popular culture. The boredom
of industrial labor, the grimness of the industrial urban environment, and
the hectic, exhausting pace of modern life fostered the taste – the need –
for sensationalism, for pure distraction. Emilie Altenloh’s 1914 study of the
sociology of the cinema delivered a concise articulation of this theory. Most
people in industrial society, she believed, “are integrated as little components in
the great economic mechanism. . . . The free, independent sphere over which the
person rules sovereign has been shrunk to a minimum.” Only a “very thin upper
crust” had retained the “inward freedom” that gave them the wherewithal to
entertain themselves. Everyone else had to seek out entertainments that offered
“distraction and entertainment.”87
For the morality campaigners, then, socialism and capitalism, the women’s
movement and men’s predatory sexual behaviors, and nude dance performances for the rich and eroticized violence for the poor were all just expressions of the same thing: the modern tyranny of materialism and selfishness over
spirituality and community. The specific emphasis of the morality movement
evolved over time; the fundamental message did not.
IV. Christianity, Nation, and Race
The morality campaigners held that the phenomena they deplored were, in addition to being wrong and immoral, also essentially treasonous. They weakened
the moral fiber and hence the power of the nation. Protestant moral conservatives in particular often called their own values “German,” rhetorically placing those who did not share those values outside the nation. Thus the general
secretary of the AKDS argued in 1894 that “to live German is the same as to
live . . . chastely”; Ludwig Weber remarked that many of the products of modern popular and high culture “throw mud on everything holy to the German”;
Karl Brunner believed that the modern cinema “continually . . . undermines the
soil in which the good old German character is rooted.”88 Often the morality
86

Karl Brunner, “Die Jugendlichen im Lichtspielgesetz,” Zentralblatt für Jugendrecht und Jugendwohlfahrt 12 (1920): 68–70; “Selbstschutz gegen den Schmutz,” Vollkswart 2 (1909): 85.
87 Emilie Altenloh, Zur Soziologie des Kino: Die Kino-Unternnehmung und die sozialen Schichten
ihrer Besucher (Leipzig: Spamer, 1914), pp. 48, 97,
88 Fritz Patzschke, Die Stellung der Studentenschaft zur deutschen Sittlichkeitsbewegung (Leipzig:
Reinhold Werther, 1894), p. 9; Ludwig Weber, “Die Unzucht,” p. 92; Karl Brunner, Der
Kinematograph von heute–eine Volksgefahr (Berlin: Vaterländische Schriftenverband, 1913),
p. 10.

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

69

campaigners sought to identify immoral behavior with foreigners, and specifically with the French. They frequently chose to use novelists like Zola, painters
like Fantin Latour, and performers like Adorée Villany as their examples of
modern immorality in the arts (although others, like Ibsen, Tolstoy, and Bocaccio, also appeared in their analyses). They held France to be the source of most
pornography and of frivolous films. They recalled Napoleon’s role in bringing
regulated prostitution to Germany. They called contraception a “French vulgarity.” And they pointed out that rationalism, socialism, and revolution all
had their origin in France as well. Thus the Korrespondenzblatt observed in
1890, for example, that the German women’s movement had its origins in “the
idea of emancipation, which came over to us from revolutionary France,” and
it argued in favor of evaluating the whole matter from a “Christian-German”
perspective.89 Twenty-three years later, the journal summed up its view succinctly: “The rot pushes in continually from the west.”90
This “rot” was a threat to national security, the morality campaigners
believed, because sexual self-discipline was the foundation for all discipline,
and specifically of the capacity for self-sacrifice for an ideal. Sexual morality
was therefore the essential and indispensable source of the martial virtues –
obedience, self-sacrificing courage, and the capacity to bear physical and psychological hardships. A nation of cynical, soft, morally and physically selfindulgent weaklings could not field a military force capable of the determination
and endurance necessary for victory. One military officer summed up this view
at the 1890 meeting of the AKDS: the “moral force of the army,” derived
from the “moral virtue” of the troops, was the decisive factor in determining
an army’s ability to win wars.91 One critic of Schund argued in 1904 that
“since in the final analysis moral force and moral virtue win victory, the military power of our nation is endangered by immoral literature.”92 And Ernst
Lennartz, general secretary of the KMV, argued in his 1908 study of nude
dance that as a matter of national security the authorities simply had to step in
to contain the spread of nudism, because “at any moment our nation may be
forced to face a bloody test of its moral force.”93

89

Friedrich Bohn, Die Internationale Verbreitung der obszönen Photographien und Bücher und
die internationale Bekämpfung dieses Handels (Plötzensee: AKDS, 1910); Altenloh, Zur Soziologie, p. 10; Hermann Dalton, Der soziale Aussatz (Hamburg: Agentur des Rauhen Hauses,
1884), p. 9; “Die Allgemeine Konferenz in Hamburg,” KB 11 (1897): 78; “Die Frauenfrage,”
KB 4 (1890): 52.
90 “Dem 27. Jahrgang zum Geleit,” KB 27 (1913): 1.
91 Major von der Oelsnitz, “Sittlichkeit und Standesehre,” AKDS, Verhandlungen der Halle’schen
Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeits-Vereine vom 8. und 9. Mai 1890 (Berlin: Berliner Stadtmission, 1890), p. 90.
92 Justus Pape, “Die Pflicht des Buchhandels im Kampfe gegen die unsittliche Literatur,” in
Kongress zur Bekämpfung der unsittlichen Literatur: Köln im Jahre 1904, ed. Friedrich Bohn
(Berlin: AKDS, 1905), p. 50.
93 Ernst Lennartz, Duncan – She – Desmond: Beiträge zur Beurteilung und Geschichte der NacktKultur (Cologne: Benziger, 1908), p. 60.

70

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

The morality campaigners also argued, however, that there was a direct relationship between moral and physical health. Immorality robbed people of their
physical vitality as well as their moral “force” or “energy” (Kraft). The negative
impact of sexually transmitted diseases within the military was only the most
obvious case of this connection; an immoral way of life led to more generalized
“softness” and “weakliness” of constitution (Verweichlichung, literally “going
soft”). But immorality also weakened the nation economically, because it was
expensive – for example, 300 million marks annually were wasted on prostitution, 110 million marks on venereal diseases, and 50 million marks annually
on Schund.94
But the most important way in which immorality decreased the material
power of the nation was through its impact on the birthrate. Already in 1887,
for example, the BMBU urged that any “rational government” had to combat
immorality, “if only to secure the necessary number of healthy recruits.”95 As
the pace of demographic change accelerated after about 1905, the morality
campaigners became increasingly obsessed with the decline of the birthrate.
The AKDS’s Korrespondenzblatt carried seven stories on the birthrate in 1912,
but thirteen in the first six months of 1914 alone.96 In the view of the morality
campaigners, selfish, materialistic, self-indulgent men and women were making
use of birth control to turn their marriages into an orgy of animalistic pleasure
seeking without responsibility and were thereby compromising the security of
the nation.
The definitive enunciation of the conservative Christian theory regarding the connection between immorality and the decline of the birthrate was
Jean Bornträger’s 1912 study, “The Decline of the Birth Rate in Germany.”
Bornträger argued that the decline in the birthrate was the product of the use
of contraceptives and abortion to limit fertility, which in turn was the result
of “the turning away from religion and old time-honored views and customs
among ever wider circles, and the modern spread of materialist, rationalist,
monistic and other world-views.” The decline in the birthrate, then, was simply the biological expression of “the crassest egotism and materialism and lack
of any healthy sense for what is really valuable in life.”97 Bornträger proposed a
whole palette of positive economic and welfare measures to encourage fertility –
including preferences for married men and particularly those with children in
94

Karl von Koblinski, “Unzucht und Verbrechen,” AKDS, Verhandlungen der Halle’schen Konferenz, p. 111; H. Häberlin, Die Ethik des Geschlechtslebens (Berlin: Franz Wunder, 1908),
p. 17; Abraham Flexner, Prostitution in Europe (New York: Century, 1914), p. 38; Ernst
Schultze, Die Schundliteratur: Ihr Vordringen–Ihre Folgen–Ihre Bekämpfung (Halle: Buchhandlung des Waisenhauses, 1909), p. 33.
95 “Auf zum Kampf!” KB 1 (1887): 11.
96 Hermann Roeren, “Neomalthusianismus und seine Bekämpfung,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 150.
97 Jean Bornträger, Der Geburtenrückgang in Deutschland, seine Bewertung und Bekämpfung
[also published as Veröffentlichungen aus dem Gebiete der Medizinalverwaltung, vol. 1, no. 13]
(Berlin: Richard Schoetz, 1912), pp. 50, 99, 51, 104.

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

71

public sector hiring, a tax on single men, rent subsidies and tax credits for
families with children, public housing subsidies, expansion of prenatal and
maternity benefits under the social insurance system, school lunch programs,
infant welfare programs, and so forth. But he also offered negative proposals:
stricter censorship of advertising, public addresses, and publications on contraception; harsher punishments for selling or advertising contraceptives; restrictions and taxes on the production and importation of contraceptives; official
discouragement of the women’s movement and married women’s employment;
the general suppression of frivolity (holidays, carnivals, festivals, amusement
parks, and bars); state support for evangelization and religious associations;
and protection of the youth from “immature materialist theories of all kinds,”
including evolutionary theory and socialism.98
Obviously, there was the potential for this populationist, biological understanding of the power and well-being of the nation to take an explicitly racist
turn; and in fact the morality campaigners occasionally did explicitly argue in
racial terms. Bornträger, for example, remarked on the fact that of the earth’s
1.7 billion inhabitants, 947 million were Asian and only 566 million white –
and that nonwhites had a higher rate of population growth. Within Europe the
“overly numerous Slavs” and especially the Russians were a threat.99 The first
pages of the Korrespondenzblatt’s 1913 volume, too, warned against the same
menaces – “the yellow . . . races,” Buddhism, Islam, and “Slavism.”100
And yet, neither racism nor imperial ambition was an essential element
of the morality campaigners’ thinking. Bornträger’s comments on race, for
example, took up one page of a 168-page publication; and such statements
were quite rare in the publications and speeches of the morality campaigners.
What is more, they were often rather ambivalent about imperial expansion and
colonial rule, not least due to sexual scandals involving colonial administrators
and soldiers.101 Already by 1901, the AKDS’s journal was warning against
the “intoxication” of national power and the “demoralizing influences that
are inevitably bound up with any colonial policy.”102 And Catholics were
even more critical. A particularly striking example is an article of 1907 in a
journal edited by one of the founders of Munich’s men’s morality association;
it savaged those who sought to “spread civilization by the firing-squad” and
held that “the black race is neither physically nor morally originally a lower or
less worthy one. . . . [We] hold the African to be . . . a human being, with every
attribute of the human species.”103 As for the Slavs, in 1902 Hermann Roeren
took time out from the morality movement and his parliamentary activities to
98

Ibid., pp. 160, 161.
Ibid., p. 82.
100 “Monatsschau,” Korrepsondenzblatt 9 (1895): 2–5; “Französische Gewohnheiten und ihre
Gefahr für Staat und Volk,” KB 27 (1913): 7.
101 “Monatsschau,” KB 9 (1895): 4; “Der Fall Leist,” KB 8 (1894): 86.
102 A. H., “Unsere Zukunft liegt auf dem Wasser!” KB 15 (1901): 79.
103 Julius Versen, “Negerseele und Kolonialmoral,” Allegemeine Rundschau 4 (1907): 198–199.
99

72

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

publish a lengthy pamphlet denouncing the Prussian state’s “Germanization”
program in Prussian Poland as merely a cover for “Protestantization.”104 Nor
were Catholics as likely as Protestants to blame their coreligionists in France
for immorality in general.
Racism as a set of explicit ideas (rather than merely prejudices) was ultimately simply not compatible with conservative Christian principles. Conservative Christians regarded people always and above all as spiritual beings.
Racism saw individuals first and foremost as physical beings. This is why combinations of sex, violence, and race were, for conservative Christians, the very
worst that popular culture had to offer.
One form of ethnic prejudice, however, most certainly was prevalent at
least within the Protestant morality movement, in which there was a powerful undercurrent of anti-Semitism. By the 1880s and 1890s, anti-Semitism
was tainted by its exploitation by populist peasant rabble-rousers; but the
Protestant morality movement never really escaped from its origins in Adolf
Stoecker’s anti-Semitic Christian Social movement. Prejudice against Jews was
seldom explicitly expounded at any length in the publications and speeches of
leading Protestant morality campaigners; but it peeked through with moderate
frequency in offhand remarks, thinly veiled references, and a selective deployment of facts that, while preserving a modicum of deniability, nevertheless got
the message across to those in the know. Thus the annual report of the AKDS
for 1888/1889 observed that the uproar over their activities in the “so-called
‘liberal’ papers, governed by the Jewish-materialist spirit” was the best evidence that they were making an impact.105 At a major conference on immoral
literature in Cologne in 1904, one speaker remarked that the idea of approaching “a Mosse or a Levysohn” (two prominent Jewish publishers in Berlin) to
seek support in the campaign against immorality in print was laughable – a
reference to the stereotype of the unscrupulous Jewish merchant of filth.106 In
1891 the Korrespondenzblatt, remarking on a scandal involving two Jewish
bankers in Berlin, had observed that the Social Democratic press would make
more of such affairs if it were “not so Jewified itself.” Other articles blamed
Jews for importing Jewish “white slaves” from Galicia into the prostitution
market, or for “hunger wages” paid to women in the garment industry.107
Such remarks fed on and nurtured a tradition of paranoid anti-Semitism that
was (usually) not explicitly propounded in the movement, but that was clearly
familiar and congenial to at least some of its leaders and activists. But the antiSemitism of the Christian Social movement also had shaped the terms of the
104

Hermann Roeren, Zur Polenfrage (Hamm: Brer & Thiemann, 1902).
Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, p. 35.
106 Kappelmenn, “Die Arbeit der Sittlichkeitsverein gegen die unsittliche Literatur,” in Bohn, ed.,
Kongress zur Bekämpfung, p. 73.
107 “Monatsschau,” KB 5 (1891): 138, 139; “‘Die Welt am Montag,’” KB 14 (1900): 60; N.,
“Zur Frauenbewegung,” KB 12 (1898): 43; “Zum Mädchenhandel,” KB 13 (1899): 78–80.
105

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

73

Protestant morality movement’s critique of modernity at their origin; for the
Christian Social movement identified both unscrupulous capitalism and Social
Democracy with what Adolf Stoecker called the postreligious “perversion of
the Jewish national spirit.” As Stoecker put it, only this could explain why
“on the one hand the worst representatives of the mammonistic spirit are
Jews . . . and that on the other hand the worst representatives of revolution
were also Jews.”108 Stoecker even used the term “un-German” as a synonym
for “Jewish” and contrasted it to the “Christian-German spirit.” In the context
of the history of the movement, then, all these familiar terms – mammonism,
un-German, revolution, German-Christian, and so on – carried, or at least
could carry, an anti-Semitic message.
It is certainly not fair to say that the entire political and social analysis
advanced by the Protestant morality movement was merely a secret code for
anti-Semitism. The Protestant morality campaigners believed that immorality
was nearly universal among (nominally) Christian German men; they were
convinced that France was a – or even the – primary font of immorality; they
did not suggest that Darwin or Nietzsche were Jews (although Marx certainly
was, as far as they were concerned); and they had a complex understanding of
the historical processes of social change that had created their “mammonistic”
society and its values. What is more, the Catholic morality campaigners shared
at least nine-tenths of the same analysis of the evils of modernity, but their
speeches and publications were virtually devoid of the kind of anti-Semitism in
which their Protestant counterparts indulged.
Nevertheless, it is clear that for a substantial proportion of the Protestant
morality campaigners, anti-Semitism was a kind of metaphor, part of a whole
field of associations in which Jews, the city, the press, white slavery, sweatshops and hunger wages, socialism, child sexual abuse, modern art, capitalism
and stock market speculation, the radical women’s movement, contraception,
philosophical and artistic modernism, sex reform, and so on were all held
together by a particular affect. All these things came from Outside; they were
all the product of someone else, of the Other – not Us, but Them. This prejudice obviously had its origins not in racist but in religious thinking; but equally
obviously it took explicitly ethnic form in this period.
In fact anti-Semitism as a metaphor was actually far less common in the
speeches and publications even of the Protestant morality movement than were
three other metaphors that conveyed a very similar message. The most common
of these were water metaphors. Germany was being overwhelmed by “muddy
floods of immorality”; the “waters of the deep gurgle and undermine the foundations of the strength and therefore also of the greatness of the German
nation”; a “disgusting tide” of “filth in word and image . . . is pouring over
108

Adolf Stoecker, “Die Anfänge der antijüdischen Bewegung in Berlin: Eine Jubiläumsbetrachtung,” in Reden und Aufsätze von Adolf Stoecker, ed. Reinhold Seeberg (Leipzig:
Deichert, 1913), pp. 144, 145, 150.

74

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

our . . . nation”; a “high tide of trash” was rising; women’s emancipation was
a “swamp-plant” that grew “in the swamp of animalistic vice.”109 Slightly less
common were disease metaphors: the “sexual bacillus” was causing a “true
epidemic” of eroticism; indecency was “a kind of spiritual syphilis”; trashy
literature was a “pestilence”; immorality was a “spiritual plague”; philosophical materialism was “spreading like an infectious disease.”110 Somewhat less
common again were poison metaphors, which usually appeared in combination with one or both of the other two: immorality was described as “creeping
poison”; “a flood of foul-smelling mud is flooding over our land, poisoning
everything” and seeking to “infect” its victims; a “poisonous stream of temptation and demoralization” was pouring from the popular press.111
These metaphors were sufficiently pervasive to be, in aggregate, quite disturbing – as they no doubt were intended to be. References to plague, poison,
waves, floods, streams, mud, swamps, suppurating sores, plague boils, cancer,
and various things poisonous (plants, mushrooms, fangs, and miasmas) were
scattered liberally throughout the publications and speeches of the morality
campaigners. In each case, immorality was portrayed as an alien, malevolent,
and insidious force from outside the boundaries of the nation, indeed of the
human community itself.
Usually the morality campaigners described what they considered valuable
and worthy of protection in much less fruity language. What was worthy of
protection was “ideal,” it was “spiritual,” it was “high” and “pure.” Particularly with reference to the family and youth, they sometimes used vegetable
metaphors: the family was a “garden,” love or children were “flowers,” young
men and women “blossomed.” The single most common positive metaphor
in their vocabulary, however, was that of war – which they used to describe
themselves. The morality movement was a “holy war” or a “crusade against
immorality”; the morality campaigners were a “small host of loyal men” and
“courageous fighters”; they must “rally around the banner of Christianity and
109

Patzschke, Die Stellung, p. 5; “Ich klage an!” Volkswart 1 (1908): 33; Franz Weigl, Die
interkonfessionellen Männervereine zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Unsittlichkeit (Hamm:
Breer & Theimann, 1910), p. 122; Karl Brunner, Unser Volk in Gefahr! Ein Kampfruf gegen
die Schundliteratur (Pforzheim: Verlag der Volkstümlichen Bücherei, 1911), p. 9; Hermann
Roeren, Die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit und ihre Bekämpfung(Cologne: J. P. Bachem, 1904),
p. 20; “Auf zum Kampf,” KB 1 (1887): 11, 10.
110 Theodor von Sosnosky, “Der Sexualbazillus,” KB 25 (1911): 27; quotation in Roeren, Die
öffentliche Unsittlichkeit, p. 14; AKDS, Kampf gegen die Schund- und Schmutzliteratur:
Verfügung des Königlichen Konsistoriums der Provinz Sachsen (Berlin: AKDS, 1910), p. 3;
Ludwig Kemmer, Die graphische Reklame der Prostitution: Nach amtlichem Material und
nach eigenen Beobachtungen geschildert (Munich: Beck, 1906), p. 3; Reinhold Seeberg, Der
Geburtenrückgang in Deutschland: Eine sozialethische Studie (Leipzig: Deichert, 1913), p. 74.
111 Brunner, Unser Volk, p. 21; Weigl, Die interkonfessionellen Männervereine, p. 133; Reinhold
Seeberg, “Alte und neue Moral,” CAIM, Verhandlungen des 35. Kongresses für Innere Mission
in Stuttgart, vom 4. bis 7. Oktober 1909 (Hamburg: Rauhes Haus, 1910), p. 275.

The Politics of Morality, Class, and Gender

75

the church”; a good morality campaigner must be like a soldier – he must not
worry about success or failure but only “stand and fall at the post entrusted to
him by his commander, loyal and brave unto the death.”112
The use of one of the four horsemen of the apocalypse in this positive sense
seems odd; and yet given the metaphors used to describe the threat, it makes
sense. Immorality was an insidious, amorphous invading enemy of the nation;
those who fought it must be solid, upstanding, alert, and uncompromising
in its defense. It makes sense too in that the morality campaigners believed
that in fighting immorality they were striving to preserve the foundation of
the nation’s power, of its ability to wage – literal – war. They were, then,
defending the nation’s freedom not only from “slavery” to sin but also from
foreign domination. In their own eyes, they literally were soldiers for God and
country.
In this respect the extent to which the men’s morality campaign reflected the
particular social interests of its members is striking. The morality campaigners
were mostly men of the “old” educated and professional middle class – the
Bildungsbürgertum. The vast majority had chosen a life of public service –
whether in the churches, the schools, the courts, the military, or in some cases
municipal, state, or national government. Public service and education defined
their social status. They were mostly members of the social elite; but for the most
part they were not the originators, organizers, or beneficiaries of the cultural,
economic, and social transformations of their times. In fact, most of the changes
going on around them at best rendered their own status less lofty by creating
new sources of cultural and social authority – most importantly innovation,
money, and expertise. To the extent that they did point an accusing finger
at particular social groups, they singled out the three most closely identified
with change: the industrial working class, the commercial and industrial elite,
and working women. And the use of martial rhetoric and imagery was part
of this broader pattern, obviously; only men were subject to conscription,
and the military was the ultimate guarantor of the life of the conservative
state.
By the years just before the outbreak of World War I, however, this kind of
rhetoric was increasingly problematic. For it was by then unmistakably clear
that this social stratum was in important ways divided against itself. Upperand middle-class men faced “insurrection” not only from the lower orders
or from vulgar and amoral nouveaux riches but also among women of their
112

Oberbreyer, Die Leipziger Sittlichkeitsbewegung, p. 12; Kemmer, Die graphische Reklame,
p. 3; “Was wir wollen,” Volkswart 1 (1908): 1; Kühl, “Unsere Stellungnahme zur öffentlichen
agitatorischen Bekämpfung des Christentums und der Kirche in der Gegenwart,” CAIM, Verhandlungen des 36. Kongresses für Innere Mission in Stettin vom 25. bis 28. September 1911
(Hamburg: Agentur des Rauhen Hauses, 1911), p. 171; Dalton, “Was uns in den Kampf,”
p. 38.

76

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

own class. Increasingly, in fact, conservative Christian men were losing control
of the language and, to some extent, of the agenda of “their” movement.
They conceived of that movement as fundamentally “manly,” even martial;
but increasingly that conception was being challenged by women of their own
class and community who saw morality as, fundamentally, women’s business –
and not men’s.
Chapter 4 turns to this development.

4
Religion, Women, and Morality

I. Women’s Transformation of the Morality Debate, 1900–1914
For most of the decade and a half before 1900, the public debate over sex and
morality was dominated by the Inner Mission and the AKDS, which championed a relatively consistent and unified body of ideas. After the turn of the century this relative organizational and intellectual unity was radically fractured.
The creation of the Catholic men’s morality movement was one instance; but
the formation of a broad spectrum of women’s associations between 1899 and
1904 was even more important, both because the new women’s organizations
were in aggregate much larger and because in some cases they advanced radically different interpretations of some of the issues and problems central to the
discussion of morality and decency. And despite the multiplicity of positions
they represented, by the years immediately prior to the outbreak of World
War I, the agendas of the various women’s organizations were clearly converging. Whereas in 1904 what was most apparent was the dramatic fracturing of the morality movement, by 1914 it was clear that, with respect
to many of the issues of central concern to moral conservatives, the resulting fragments were being reorganized around two coherent alternative perspectives: that of men, and that of women. On the other hand, particularly among conservative Protestants and Catholics, there were very close
organizational and personal ties between confessional women’s and confessional men’s organizations. It therefore proved impossible even for quite
conservative men to escape the influence and implications of the growth
of women’s activism. After about 1905, women began to exert increasing
influence over their male counterparts; and by 1913 some of the central
tenets of the men’s morality movement, which were in place since the beginning of the 1890s, were beginning to be called seriously into question –
particularly with respect to the issue of prostitution.
77

78

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

By 1914, then, the discussion of sexual morality, gender roles, and reproduction among moral conservatives in Germany had arrived at a somewhat
ambivalent condition. There was no longer a unified conservative Christian
morality movement at all; and some important positions and agendas that had
seemed quite stable in 1900 appeared rather shaky. On the other hand, the
massive proliferation of organizations and their growing memberships were
giving the discussion of morality a new weight and public importance. One of
the important aims of the early morality campaigners had been to break down
the culture of silence and tacit tolerance they believed to have been prevalent
in 1880; that aim, at least, had clearly been accomplished by about 1905. The
men’s morality movement had established the importance of its agenda for the
broader public. But in doing so it had helped to generate energies that rapidly
demolished its ability to dictate the terms in which the central issues of concern
to it were debated.
As we have seen, women had become involved in the discussion of morality
issues, independently of men, at least two decades before 1900. Most of the
practical work of “rescue” associations with women in the sex trade was done
by female Protestant deaconesses and Catholic women’s religious orders. By
the time of the formation of the first men’s morality associations, then, there
were considerable numbers of middle-class women directly engaged in their
charitable work with the problem of prostitution. These women’s views, however, closely resembled those of the men’s morality movement. The single most
influential women’s initiative before the mid-1890s was the Youth Protection
Association (Verein Jugendschutz [VJS]), formed under the leadership of Hanna
Bieber-Böhm in Berlin in 1889. The petitions her organization submitted to the
national parliament and the emperor in 1892 and 1894 advocated measures for
the suppression of vice no less draconian than (and probably largely based on)
those advanced by the AKDS – such as the elimination of regulation in favor
of criminalization of all prostitutes.1 In the latter year Bieber-Böhm played
an important role in the formation of a national umbrella organization of
women’s associations of all kinds, the League of German Women’s Associations (Bund deutscher Frauenvereine [BDF]); and she became chair of the BDF’s
own committee on morality issues (Sittlichkeitskommission). The measures the
1

Verein Jugendschutz, “Einem Hohen Reichstage,” 1.3.1892, ADW, CA/GF 531; Petition von
19 Frauen-Vereinen an Seine Majestät den deutschen Kaiser. 5. Juni 1894 (Berlin: n.p., 1894);
Anna Pappritz, “Die Teilnahme er Frauen an der Sittlichkeitsbegweung,” in Handbuch der
Frauenbewegung, Teil II: Frauenbewegung und soziale Frauenthätitgkeit in Deutschland nach
Einzelgebieten, ed. Gertrud Bäumer and Helene Lange (Berlin: W. Moeser, 1901), pp. 174–178;
Hanna Bieber-Böhm, Vorschläge zur Bekämpfung der Prostitution, LAB, HLA, Film 46-203.4;
Lutz Sauerteig, “Frauenemanzipation und Sittlichkeit: Die Rezeption des englischen Abolitionismus in Deutschland,” in Aneignung und Abwehr: Interkultureller Transfer zwischen Deutschland und Grossbritannien im 19. Jahrhundert, ed. Rudolf Muhs, Johannes Paulmann, and
Willibald Steinmetz (Bodenheim: Philo, 1998), p. 183.

Religion, Women, and Morality

79

BDF advocated in its 1895 petition to the national parliament closely echoed
those of the earlier VJS petitions.2
This conservative approach had been challenged by the IAF, which favored
the decriminalization of prostitution; and in the 1880s Gertrud GuillaumeSchack, as a member of the upper nobility, was able to stir up considerable
controversy. But Guillaume-Schack was drawn to socialism, fell afoul of the
antisocialist laws in 1885, and ultimately had to leave the country.3 In 1897,
however, Anita Augspurg and her partner Lida Gustava Heymann, leading figures in the radical women’s movement in Hamburg, formed the first of a new
wave of abolitionist associations; it was soon followed by further local organizations in Berlin (under Anna Pappritz), Dresden (under Katharina Scheven),
and other major centers.4
These organizations were able – despite substantial police harassment, particularly in Hamburg – to mobilize relatively broad support.5 One important
reason was that they benefited from a number of egregious cases of arrest and
abusive treatment of respectable women by the morals police. This development was itself most probably the product of the rising number of younger,
single middle-class women employed in white-collar jobs, and hence likely
to be out on the streets unchaperoned. Cultural changes associated with the
consolidation of the new urban nightlife, shopping, and more informal styles
of interaction between the sexes also played a role. Women protested such
arrests in a number of unprecedented mass meetings in 1897 and 1898.6 Bitter
parliamentary and public debates over the reform of the Criminal Code (the lex
2

Alice Salomon, “Hanna Bieber-Boehm,” Die Frau: Monatsschrift für das gesamte Frauenleben
unserer Zeit (hereinafter Frau) 17 (1910): 526–529; Petition des Bundes deutscher Frauenvereine
an den Reichstag betreffend Aufhebung der gewerblichen Prostitution (n.p.: BDF, 1895). On the
BDF, see Daniela Weiland, Geschichte der Frauenemanzipation in Deutschland und Österreich
(Düsseldorf: ECON, 1983), pp. 55–58; on the women’s movement generally, see particularly
Ute Gerhard, Unerhört: Die Geschichte der deutschen Frauenbewegung (Reinbek: Rowohlt,
1990); Barbara Greven-Aschoff, Die bürgerliche Frauenbewegung in Deutschland 1894–1933
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1981); Richard Evans, The Feminist Movement in Germany, 1894–1933 (London: Sage, 1976).
3 See Pappritz, “Die Teilnahme,” pp. 164–172; Theresa Wobbe, Gleichheit und Differenz: Politische Strategien von frauenrechtlerinnen um die Jahrhundertwende (Frankfurt: Campus, 1989),
pp. 31–38.
4 Susanne Kinnebrock, Anita Augspurg (1857–1943) (Herbolzheim: Centaurus, 2005); Christianne Himmelsbach, “Verlass ist nur auf unsere eigne Kraft!” Lida Gustava Heymann – eine
Kämpferin für die Frauenrechte (Oldenburg: BIS-Verlag, 1996); Kirsten Reinert, “Pappritz,
Anna,” in NDB, vol. 20 (2001), pp. 55–56; Barbara Hillen, “Scheven, Katharina, geborene
Bauch,” in NDB, vol. 22 (2005), pp. 717–718.
5 See, e.g., Ulla Wischermann, Frauenbewegungen und Öffentlichkeiten um 1900: Netzwerke–
Gegenöffentlichkeiten–Protestinszenierungen (Königstein: Helmer, 2003), pp. 95–96.
6 See Sauerteig, “Frauenemanzipation,” p. 186; “Brief an die Herausgeberin,” Frauenbewegung 4
(1898): 63–64; Minna Cauer, “Der internationale Konferenz der britischen, kontintentalen und
allgemeinen Föderation in London von 12.-15. Juli 1898,” Frauenbewegung 4 (1898): 163–165;

80

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

Heinze debate) and the sections of the new Civil Code of 1900 (the Bürgerliches
Gesetzbuch) relating to marriage and family law were critically important in
mobilizing women as well. The abolitionist movement also benefited from the
formation, at the end of 1899, of the Union of Progressive Women’s Associations (Verband Fortschrittlicher Frauenvereine [VFF]), which advocated a more
uncompromising approach to women’s emancipation than the main stream of
the BDF and made the issues of morality and prostitution central to its agenda
from the outset.7
By 1902, then, Katharina Scheven was able to launch an independent abolitionist journal (the Abolitionist); and in 1904 a national coalition of local
associations (the Deutscher Zweig – German branch – of the IAF [DZIAF]) was
formed. By 1912 it had sixteen member associations and some 1,200 members,
about 15 percent of them men.8 At the annual national conference of the BDF
in 1902, the abolitionists triumphed over Bieber-Böhm and her more conservative associates: Scheven replaced Bieber-Böhm as head of the BDF’s morality
commission, and the organization adopted abolitionism. By 1905, the BDF
rejected criminalization of prostitution as a “monstrous injustice.”9
The formal membership figures for the DZIAF or the circulation numbers
for its journal – 1,200 members and 1,600 copies in 191210 – are therefore
deceptive, as its agenda was supported by much of the broader women’s movement. Support was particularly vehement in the so-called radical faction within
the BDF, which pushed a more rights-based and less service-oriented agenda
than the competing “moderate” faction. It is no coincidence, for example,
that the BDF formally adopted the demand for women’s suffrage at the same
1902 meeting at which it adopted abolitionism, because there was considerable overlap between the DZIAF, the VFF, and the German Association for
Women’s Suffrage, which was formed also in 1902 under the presidency of
Anita Augspurg.11
The men’s morality movement regarded these developments with horror.
Partly in response, the AKDS made a considerable effort to mobilize conservative Protestant women. Women’s morality associations associated with
Marie Raschke, “Die weibliche Ehre,” Frauenbewegung 3 (1897): 250–251; “Die Schutzlosigkeit der Frau,” Frauenbewegung 4 (1898): 13–14.
7 See Else Lüders, Der “linke Flügel”: Ein Blatt aus der Geschichte der deutschen Frauenbewegung
(Berlin: Loewenthal, 1904), p. 37. On the VFF, see Weiland, Geschichte, pp. 273–275.
8 Anna Pappritz, “Die Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” in Jahrbuch der Frauenbewegung 1913, ed. Elisabeth Altmann-Gottheiner (Leipzig: Teubner, 1913), p. 142; Anna Pappritz, “Zur Kritik des
Abolitionismus,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 2; Statistisches Reichsamt, Statistik der Frauenorganisationen im deutschen Reich (Berlin: Statistisches Reichsamt, 1909), p. 10.
9 See Marianne Weber, “Die Aufgaben des Abolitionismus,” Centralblatt des Bundes deutscher
Frauenvereine (hereinafter CBDF) 5 (1903): 104–105; Anna Pappritz, “Grundfragen der Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” CBDF 5 (1903): 137–140; BDF petition of 14 January 1905, LAB, HLA,
Film 46-203.3.
10 Sperlings Zeitschriften-Adressbuch, vol. 47 (Stuttgart: Sperling, 1912), p. 196.
11 See Evans, Feminist Movement, pp. 48–50; Lüders, Der “linke Flügel,” pp. 68–69.

Religion, Women, and Morality

81

the AKDS formed their own umbrella organization, the DFHS, in 1887; it
had 12,000 members in 1898.12 From 1892 onward the AKDS published a
separate journal for these organizations; it was edited by male pastors, most
articles in it were by men, and particularly in its early years it echoed the
agenda and tone of the Korrespondenzblatt almost precisely. Like the men’s
morality movement, Protestant women’s morality organizations were embedded in a dense network of related associations that, although not specifically
devoted to morality issues, took active interest in and occasionally supported
their work – for example, the German branch of the International Union of
Female Friends of Young Women (Verein der Freundinnen junger Mädchen
[VFJM]), which was involved in preventive morality work through its hostels
for female labor migrants, or the Protestant Women’s Auxiliary (Evangelische
Frauenhilfe), which was formed in 1899 largely to support the social work of
the Protestant orders of deaconesses, and by 1912 was the largest Protestant
women’s organization in Germany, with close to 250,000 members.13
By the turn of the century, however, many in the leadership of the AKDS
were convinced of the imperative need to create a more activist conservative
Protestant counterweight to the emerging nonconfessional women’s movement.
At its 1898 conference, the AKDS leadership decided to support the creation
of an organization that would address the broader Woman Question as a
whole rather than focusing more narrowly on charitable and church affairs.
The German-Protestant Women’s League (Deutsch-evangelischer Frauenbund
[DEF]) was formed in June 1899 at a meeting of men and women close to
the Inner Mission. Ludwig Weber and Pastor Mätzold, his proxy within the
AKDS, were the group’s longtime “spiritual advisors” (geistige Beiräte).14 The
DEF was viewed with profound suspicion by more reactionary figures within
the Protestant milieu, and it grew slowly – it had some 10,000 members by
12

Gertrud Bäumer, “Die Geschichte der Frauenbewegung in Deutschland,” in Handbuch der
Frauenbewegung, Teil I: Die Geschichte der Frauenbewegung in den Kulturländern, ed. Gertrud
Bäumer and Helene Lange (Berlin: W. Moeser, 1901), p. 163; Friedrich Mahling, Die Innere
Mission (Gütersloh: Bertelsmann, 1937), p. 435; Ludwig Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre der Sittlichkeitsbewegung: Bilder aus der Geschichte des Westdeutschen Sittlichkeitsvereins und der
Allgemeinen deutschen Sittlichkeits-Konferenz (Duisburg: WSV, 1910), p. 45.
13 Anna Blanck, 50 Jahre Freundinnenarbeit 1877–1927: Festschrift zum Jubiläum (Heidelberg:
Evangelischer Verlag, 1927), pp. 5, 7, 8, 14, 16, 39; Regina Mentner, “‘Was ist und was will
die Frauenhilfe,’” Ariadne 35 (1999): 12; Fritz Mybes, Der Evangelisch-Kirchliche Hilfsverein
und seine Frauenhilfe (Cologne: Rheinland, 1988).
14 Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, p. 108; Mahling, Innere Mission, pp. 435–437; DEF, 30 Jahre
Deutsch-Evangelischer Frauenbund (Hanover: DEF, 1929), esp. p. 25; “Die allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine in Stuttgart,” Frauenbewegung 4 (1898): 219. On
the DEF, see also Doris Kaufmann, Frauen zwischen Aufbruch und Reaktion (Munich: Piper,
1988); Ursula Baumann, Protestantismus und Frauenemanzipation in Deutschland 1850–1920
(Frankfurt: Campus, 1992), here pp. 126–139; Nancy R. Reagin, A German Women’s Movement: Class and Gender in Hanover, 1880–1933 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina,
1995), here esp. pp. 147–172.

82

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

1910, and 16,000 by 1914. That was, however, quite a respectable membership
among organizations of the women’s movement; the German General Women’s
Association (Allgemeiner Deutscher Frauenverein) had only 19,000 members in
1908, and the VFF only some 2,000.15 The DEF was not concerned only with
the morality issue; it did not form its own morality commission until 1907,
and its national leadership was engaged in a whole range of issues such as
women’s education and legal rights, legal aid, charities and social reform, and
professional interests. Of the thirty-seven (out of ninety-seven) local chapters
engaged directly with morality issues in 1910, most focused on preventive
social work with young women.16 Nevertheless, morality and in particular
prostitution were central and increasingly important concerns; Paula Mueller,
the organization’s president, even called the morality question the “core point
of the Woman Question” in 1906.17 Mueller herself was a high-profile figure in
the debate surrounding virtually every issue relating to sexual morality before
World War I. She was very active in the AKDS (which accepted women as
members after the Law on Associations was changed in 1908 to allow women
to participate in political meetings and organizations) and played an important
role within the Inner Mission.
Until the end of the 1890s, Catholic women’s involvement with moral
issues appears to have been largely confined to the rescue efforts of the
women’s religious orders and the preventive work of young women’s religious
associations.18 Beginning in the early 1890s, as part of the general flourishing
of lay organizations within the Catholic charitable milieu, lay Catholic women
in numerous cities began to become active, particularly in such work. The most
prominent example was the Catholic Welfare Association for Women, Girls,
and Children (Katholischer Fürsorgeverein für Mädchen, Frauen und Kinder
[KFV]), founded in 1899 in Dortmund under the leadership of Agnes Neuhaus.
By 1912 the KFV was perhaps the single most influential and effective Catholic
welfare association in Germany, with seventy-three local chapters and thirteen shelters for single mothers.19 Catholic women were also involved in “preventive” work for the protection of girls (Mädchenschutz), particularly immigrants to larger cities. The first Catholic Mädchenschutz association was formed
15

Baumann, Protestantismus, pp. 131, 134.
“An die Mitglieder der Sittlichkeitskommission des Deutsch-Evangelischen Frauenbeundes,”
Archiv der deutschen Frauenbewegung (hereinafter ADF), DEF, no. V12; DEF, 30 Jahre,
pp. 26, 68.
17 Paula Mueller, “Eine Programmfrage,” Evangelische Frauenzeitung (hereinafter EFZ) 7 (1906):
28. On Mueller, see Halgard Kuhn “Paula Mueller-Otfried (1865–1946),” in Frauenprofile des
Luthertums: Lebensgeschichten im 20. Jahrhundert, ed. Inge Mager (Gütersloh: Gütersloher
Verlagshaus, 2005), pp. 99–122.
18 Alfred Kall, Katholische Frauenbewegung in Deutschland (Paderborn: Schöningh, 1983),
pp. 217–218.
19 Kall, Katholische Frauenbewegung, pp. 224–235; Andreas Wollasch, Der katholische
Fürsorgeverein für Mädchen, Frauen und Kinder (1899–1945) (Freiburg: Lambertus, 1991),
pp. 53, 59, 64; Wilhelm Liese, Geschichte der Caritas (Freiburg: Caritas, 1923), p. 167.
16

Religion, Women, and Morality

83

in 1895 in Munich; thereafter similar associations, using the name Marian
Girls’ Protection Associations (Marianische Mädchenschutzvereine [MMSV]),
spread rapidly; and a national association was formed in 1905.20 Activist
Catholic women launched an important journal, Die christliche Frau, in 1902,
under the direct auspices of the umbrella organization of the Catholic charities,
the DCV. And after extended negotiations at the annual conferences of German Catholics (Katholikentag) and of the DCV in 1903, the Catholic Women’s
League of Germany (Katholischer deutscher Frauenbund [KDF]) was created
in November of that year.21
Throughout its existence, the KDF would scrupulously avoid any deviation
from established Catholic social teaching, refusing to take clear positions on
critical issues of the day on which the Catholic intellectual establishment had
not reached consensus. This was true, for example, in particular of the issue
of prostitution. Like the Catholic men’s morality movement, the KDF largely
sidestepped the issue, instead focusing its activity in the field of morality on
public art and performances, trashy literature, the cinema, the urban “relationship,” and so forth – issues about which there was virtual consensus among
confessional Catholics. And the problem or crisis of morality was simply less
central to the public voice of the KDF than was true in the case of the DEF.
Partly as a result, it avoided the kind of intense hostility that the DEF faced
within the conservative Protestant milieu; and it was able to expand its membership and activities much more rapidly. By 1912, it had 40,000 members.22
The Jewish Women’s League (Jüdischer Frauenbund [ JFB]), also formed in
1904, achieved an even higher rate of membership among its potential members: by the outbreak of World War I, it had some 35,000 members, perhaps
one in five adult German Jewish women. As was true in the case of the DEF
and the KDF, morality issues played a key role in motivating its formation.
The central focus of the JFB was in fact the “white slave trade.” The B’nai
B’rith in Hamburg, Germany’s largest port, had become involved in monitoring the traffic in women already in 1897 and called a national conference of
Jewish charities on white slavery in 1902; in the same year, the second International Conference on the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children
met in Frankfurt. Bertha Pappenheim, a leading member of Frankfurt’s Jewish
charitable community, attended both meetings and came away convinced that
20

Kall, Katholische Frauenbewegung, pp. 246–263; Wilhelm Liese, Wohlfahrtspflege und Caritas
im Deutschen Reich, in Deutsch-Österreich, der Schweiz und Luxemberg (Mönchen-Gladbach:
Volksverein, 1914), p. 159.
21 See Kall, Katholische Frauenbewegung, p. 248; Wollasch, Der katholische Fürsorgeverein,
p. 75; Gisela Breuer, Frauenbewegung und Katholizismus: Der Katholische Frauenbund 1903–
1918 (Frankfurt: Campus, 1998).
22 “Aufruf an die Zweigvereine des Katholischen Franeunbundes,” VKDF 4 (1914): 2; Ursula
Baumann, “Religion, Emancipation, and Politics in the Confessional Women’s Movement in
Germany, 1900–1933,” in Borderlines: Genders and Identities in War and Peace, 1870–1930,
ed. Billie Melman (New York: Routledge, 1998), p. 288; VKDF 3 (1913): 33.

84

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

Jewish women needed a national organization dedicated to combating prostitution and white slavery. The issue was of particular concern to Germany’s
Jewish women’s organizations because poor Jewish women from East-Central
Europe made up a large proportion of those recruited into the international
traffic in women at the time.23 Like the KDF, the JFB avoided the question of
regulation, preferring to focus on preventive social and rescue work. Pappenheim in particular, however, made an important contribution to the discussion
of prostitution among women.24
The social makeup of all these women’s organizations was quite similar to
that of the male morality movements. The DEF in particular was founded on
the activism of very affluent and socially prominent women; on occasion its
leadership even openly identified with the “upper ten thousand.”25 The wives
of church officials played important roles in the Protestant women’s organizations, as did the nobility.26 Catholic women’s organizations were slightly
less upper class, with stronger representation particularly of teachers. But the
first MMSV in Munich was headed by a countess; and members of powerful
Catholic families in the Rhineland played important roles in Mädchenschutz
and in the KDF.27 The JFB was dominated by women of the affluent Jewish community of Frankfurt. Most of the abolitionist leadership came from
similarly well-to-do families.28
II. Women, Christianity, and Morality: Familiar Themes
Given this common social background, it is hardly surprising that in many
respects the analysis of the moral condition of their age advanced by the
23

Deutsche Nationalkomitee zur internationalen Bekämpfung des Mädchenhandels (hereinafter
DNBM), Die Bekämpfung des Mädchenhandels (Berlin: DNBM, 1903), p. 7; Sidonie Werner,
“Mädchenhandel,” in JFB, Referate gehalten auf dem 2. Delegiertentage des jüdischen Frauenbundes (Hamburg: JFB, 1907), pp. 23–31. On Pappenheim, see Elizabeth Loentz, Let Me
Continue to Speak the Truth: Bertha Pappenheim as Author and Activist (Cincinnati: Hebrew
Union College Press, 2007).
24 See Bertha Pappenheim, “Zur Sittlichkeitsfrage,” in JFB, Referate, pp. 12, 18, 20. On the
JFB, see Christina Klausmann, Politik und Kultur der Frauenbewegung im Kaiserreich: Das
Beispiel Frankfurt am Main (Frankfurt: Campus, 1997); Marion Kaplan, The Jewish Feminist
Movement in Germany: The Campaigns of the Jüdischer Frauenbund, 1904–1938 (Westport,
CT: Greenwood, 1979); Dora Edinger, Bertha Pappenheim (Frankfurt: Ner-Tamid, 1963).
25 See Cäcilie Krämer, “Literatur und Sittlichkeit,” Mitteilungen des deutsch-evangelischen
Frauenbundes 4 (1903): 13; Paula Mueller, “Zur Stellung unseres Bundes in der Sittlichkeitsfrage,” Mitteilungen des deutsch-evangelischen Frauenbundes 4 (1903): 57.
26 See Baumann, Protestantismus, p. 131; 50 Jahre, p. 6; Baumann, “Religion,” pp. 288–289;
Ute Planert, Antifeminismus im Kaiserreich (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1998),
pp. 137–138.
27 Kall, Katholische Frauenbewegung, pp. 222, 230, 248, 260.
28 “Pappritz, Anna” and “Pappenheim, Bertha,” in NDB, available at http://www.
deutsche-biographie.de, accessed 12 May 2013; Himmelsbach, “Verlass ist nur auf unsere eigne
Kraft!,” pp. 13–16.

Religion, Women, and Morality

85

women’s morality movements was quite similar to that presented by their
male counterparts. Male and female morality campaigners inhabited, in many
respects, a shared “culture” of moral activism.
The exception was the “radical” faction in the women’s movement. Whereas
the majority in the DZIAF belonged to the moderate faction of the nonconfessional women’s movement, a minority of prominent radicals played an
important role in the early history of that organization. These women were
adherents of left-liberalism or a vaguely defined democratic socialism, nonconformist or even agnostic in their religious beliefs, and intensely critical of the
order of gender relations in their society. From its foundation in 1895, the
journal Die Frauenbewegung, the voice of the radical faction, heaped contempt on the Christian morality movements, regarding them as crabbed, selfrighteous, and fundamentally un-Christian. The grande dame of the radicals,
Minna Cauer, for example, remarked in her report on the 1897 conference
of the AKDS that the principles of the morality campaigners were “not compatible with the views of a true Christian” and “almost fanatical,” remarking
particularly on their tendency to wish “death and destruction to the women’s
movement!”29 In 1900 Die Frauenbewegung characterized the morality campaigners as “dark powers . . . making furious efforts to contain the spirit of freedom in our national life.”30 The DEF was merely another attempt to stifle “the
free development of the spirit” that was the real precondition for the development of the women’s movement.31 The journal did publish some conciliatory
statements by conservative Protestant women shortly after the formation of
the DEF; but by 1905 it had concluded – unsurprisingly – that “for us . . . the
‘women’s movement’ associated with the church has no value whatsoever.”32
The opposite extreme was represented by conservative Protestants in the
DFHS, who had essentially no voice independent of that of their male colleagues. But the publications of the DEF followed a very similar line. Its leaders
were well integrated into the conservative Protestant milieu and particularly
the Inner Mission, and they shared its analysis of the moral status of their
society, of the origins of the moral crisis they perceived, of its likely outcome,
and of the proper means of resolving it. Thus, for example, Paula Mueller
was convinced that the “moral rebirth of national life depends upon winning the German people once again for Christian faith.”33 The Countess of
Münster, also a leading figure in the DEF, held that Nietzsche and Haeckel
29

Minna Cauer, “Gedanken über die Beratungen der Konferenz der Allgemeinen deutschen
Sittlichkeitsvereine,” Frauenbewegung 3 (1897): 191–193. On Cauer, see Gabriele BraunSchwartzenstein, “Minna Cauer: Dilemma einer bürgerlichen Radikalen,” Feministische Studien 3:1 (1984): 99–116.
30 “Kampf,” Frauenbewegung 6 (1900): 49–50.
31 “Die Haltung der kirchlichen Kreisen zur Frauenbewegung,” Frauenbewegung 6 (1900):
89–90.
32 “Die Reaktion in der Frauenbewegung,” Frauenbewegung 11 (1905): 177.
33 Paula Mueller, “Die Kongresse zur Bekämpfung der Unsittlichkeit,” EFZ 5 (1904): 11.

86

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

“exercise a fateful attraction on the great mass of the discontented and unstable,” and that this explained the prevalent “burning hatred for Christianity.”34
And the journal of the DEF was convinced, in 1908, that the rich set a bad
example because they “can’t get enough of luxury” and “entertainments” and
“sneer at traditional moral rigor.”35
Protestant women closely echoed the AKDS view on prostitution as well.
Thus a petition to the national parliament from a women’s morality association
in Westphalia in 1890 presented all the familiar arguments – that women were
turned into “slaves” by the system; that regulation made the sex trade appear
legitimate; that under existing law “in a certain sense one could . . . accuse
the police of procuring”; that in the tolerated brothels “everything that makes
human beings human disappears . . . , nothing remains but the animal instinct of
sensual pleasure”; and that prostitution undermined men’s “moral sensibility,”
resulting in more rather than fewer sexual assaults on women.36 Another petition from the national DFHS presented in the same year warned that immorality
led to “impious licentiousness and revolutionary alienation from God.”37 Two
decades later Paula Mueller would observe that her organization “opposes
regulation . . . in the first instance because it makes a mockery of the divine
commandment of the immortal value of every human soul,” that regulation
constituted an “official sanction of the business of commercial vice,” and that
brothels were “true breeding-grounds of vice and crime” and of “frightful
degeneracy and vicious aberrations.”38
Protestant women took familiar positions as well on modern fashion, trashy
literature, suggestive dances, sexual harassment, suggestive advertising, the general decline of moral rigor, and so on.39 Mueller believed that the “confusion
of true art with pseudo-art” was a major cause of moral decline; and the DFHS
journal observed in 1902 that modern literature was not art but “modern lies,
modern cowardice.”40 The 1904 volume of the DEF’s journal – the Evangelische Frauenzeitung – carried articles on “trashy” entertainments and the way
the average citizen wasted money on frivolities (two billion marks were spent
annually in the cinema, for example); on a particularly heinous case of child
sexual abuse in Breslau; on the sexual adventurism of students; on the possibility of putting more aggressive restrictions on Animierkneipen; and on women’s
“unpatriotic” and “lascivious” modern fashions. The same volume set forth
34

M. Gräfin Münster, “Wie bewahren wir die Jugend vor den Gefahren der neuen Ethik?” in Die
“Neue Ethik” und ihre Gefahr, ed. Paula Mueller (Berlin: Runge, 1908), p. 51.
35 “Auf zur Rettungsarbeit an den Gefallenen!” Frauenblätter 17 (1908): 18.
36 “Petition an den Reichstag,” KB 4 (1890): 110, 109.
37 “Aus der Frauenbewegung,” KB 4 (1890): 9.
38 Paula Mueller, Modernes Leben und sittliche Ideale (Berlin: Runge, 1912), pp. 20, 8, 9, 10, 11.
39 “Zum Kapitel Schnapsbonbons,” Frauenblätter 17 (1908): 23; “Bravo!” Frauenblätter 21
(1912): 84; “Auf zur Rettungsarbeit an den Gefallenen!” Frauenblätter 17 (1908): 18.
40 Mueller, Modernes Leben, p. 6; “Die Angst vor dem Schamgefühl,” Frauenblätter 11 (1902):
15.

Religion, Women, and Morality

87

the DEF’s demands regarding the revision of the Criminal Code, which were
very similar to those of the AKDS – including raising the age of consent, adding
employers to the list of those who could be punished for using their authority to force others into immoral acts (the “employer paragraph”), making the
knowing transmission of venereal diseases a crime, and abolishing regulated
prostitution.41 The social ideal that underlay these views was also the same
as that propagated by the men’s morality organizations: “self-discipline and
self-control for man and woman,” as Paula Mueller put it in 1911, or, in 1914,
“self-sacrificing chivalry . . . for man and self-denying devotion for woman.”42
Again, Catholic women organized in the KDF were much more reticent
about immorality than their counterparts in the DFHS or the DEF. When
they did speak out on such issues, however, their views were quite similar.
Hedwig Dransfeld, who served as a kind of spokeswoman for the KDF on the
morality question even before she became chair of the organization in 1912, is
a particularly striking case. The modern age, she contended, was characterized
by a “confusion of opinions more colorful and muddled than almost any other
age has seen.” Modern literature was “unprincipled in a downright frightful
degree” and was guided only by a desire “to make a sensation at any cost.”43
Schund and Schmutz publications were sources of “spiritual infection” that
spread the “sexual over-excitation and confused ideas” of the age. Trashy
literature could lead people into “appalling crimes”; it “excites the imagination
and the senses in disordered fashion and makes one incapable of perceiving real
life.” Specifically in sexual matters, it was “seductive” and “ruinous.” Such
works were dangerous for “half-grown youth or the uneducated woman” and
the “broad mass of the people.”44 It all derived, she held, in 1914, from the
“elimination of the religious element from public and private morality” and
from the fact that in the modern age “material is God, and the spirit . . . has
become a servant where it should rule.”45
Dransfeld’s essays and speeches were atypical; most of the Catholic women’s
leadership was far more restrained and sought to encourage Catholic women to
take part in the morality crusade in specifically “feminine” ways – by educating
their children in moral restraint and religious faith; protecting sexual life with
41

“Kampf gegen den Schmutz und Schund”; “Zur Sittlichkeitsfrage”; “Studentisches Wohnungswesen”; “Gegen die Animierkneipen”; M. Deneke, “Unsere Eingabe und die Beschlüsse
der Strafrechtskommission”; and Paula Mueller, “Die Frau und die Mode,” all in EFZ 14
(1914): 84, 45, 75, 85, 97–99, 113–114.
42 Paula Mueller, quoted in “Zur Prostitutionsfrage,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 103; Paula Mueller,
Frauenbewegung und persönliches Leben (Berlin: Runge, 1914), p. 11.
43 Hedwig Dransfeld, “Der Wandel der sittlichen Begriffe,” CF 6 (1908): 329, 331. On Dransfeld,
see Hedwig Wassenberg, Von der Volksschullehrerin zur Volkslehrerin: Die Pädagogin Hedwig
Dransfeld, 1871–1925 (Frankfurt: Lang, 1994).
44 Hedwig Dransfeld, “Die Bekämpfung der Schundliteratur,” Caritas 17 (1911): 93, 97, 96.
45 Hedwig Dransfeld, “Die Teilnahme des Katholischen Frauenbundes an der Bekämpfung
gefährlicher und unsittlicher Bestrebungen,” CF 12 (1914): 109, 111, 112, 110, 111, 146.

88

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

the “cloak of sacred modesty”; not tolerating questionable books, pictures, or
statues in their homes; boycotting stores that sold immoral books and pictures;
and so on.46 Despite the gender-appropriate packaging, however, the message
was fundamentally the same: modern society was corrupt, destructive, and
unstable because it was godless.
The moderate majority within the nonconfessional women’s movement,
including in the DZIAF, advanced views far less similar to those of conservative men. Most of these women were liberal Protestants and were profoundly
estranged from some of the views of their theologically conservative counterparts. Anna Pappritz of the IAF, for example, was horrified by the efforts of the
morality campaigners to pass more restrictive censorship legislation – which
she saw as an attempt to censor anything that “represents liberal tendencies
in religious or political respect” and as a product of “inner unchasteness,”
which caused people to “suspect every form of nudity and naturalness of being
indecent.”47 Many liberal Protestants found the beliefs and attitudes of their
orthodox colleagues outdated and overly restrictive and deplored the undertone of anti-Semitism in their publications and speeches.48 Katharina Scheven
even offered an explicitly secular justification for her (sexually conservative,
politically liberal, and feminist) beliefs, regarding it as a “great advantage”
that her creed “does not claim to be revealed truth”; and she argued that
the moral catastrophe of her society was the product not of a falling away
from God but of men’s power.49 A deep political difference also divided these
two Protestant communities; most of the moderate leadership were left-liberals
who supported votes for women, rather than conservatives, who were, at best,
ambivalent about women’s suffrage.50
On two fundamental practical issues directly related to the problem of
immorality, moreover, there was an important difference between the conservative morality movement and moderate or liberal Protestant women. The
first was the straightforward liberal principle that the state is a creature not of
morality but of law, and that its function is not to force people to be good –
to enforce moral order – but to secure the rights of the citizen. Fundamental to
this form of liberalism was the understanding that the survival and flourishing
of the good society is the result not of the omnipresence of authority but of
46

See, e.g., Else Hasse, “Kinderlüge und Zeitgeist,” CF 10 (1911): 136, 138, 137; Johannes
Mumbauer, “Der Anteil der Frau am Kampfe gegen die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit,” CF 5 (1906):
24, 63, 82.
47 Anna Pappritz, “Wie ich zu meiner Arbeit kam,” LAB, HLA, B-Rep 235-13, pp. 59a, 87.
48 See, e.g., Liebster, “Die Konferenz der Sittlichkeitsvereine in Leipzig vom 27. bis 29. Oktober
1901,” Christliche Welt 6 (1902): 230–231.
49 Katharina Scheven, “Sexualethik und Kulturfortschritt,” Abolitionist 12 (1913): 4.
50 Paula Mueller, Zur Abwehr: Eine Widerlegung der Angriffe gegen den Deutsch-Evangel.
Frauenbund (Berlin: Runge, 1913), pp. 14–15; Andrea Süchting-Hänger, Das “Gewissen der
Nation”: Nationales Engagement und politisches Handeln konservativer Frauenorganisationen
1900 bis 1937 (Düsseldorf: Droste, 2002), p. 58.

Religion, Women, and Morality

89

the maximization of the citizen’s freedom to engage in the pursuit of his or
her own rational self-interest. The second was their emphasis on the idea that
regulation was unjust because it affected only women and thus breached the
principle of equality before the law.
The two most influential leaders of the DZIAF, Katharina Scheven and Anna
Pappritz, summed up that organization’s position in a pamphlet on criminal
law reform in 1909. Regulation was unacceptable “from a legal standpoint,
because it represents an unjustified encroachment on civil liberty, and it is
unjust, because it affects only one party to a shared act, the woman.”51 Criminalization of prostitution would merely further reinforce the double standard
on which regulation was built, because “punishment would only affect the
woman, while the man, who is in many cases the more guilty party and in all
cases an accomplice, would go unpunished.” The state should intervene only in
cases of coercion or of the abuse of minors, cases of procuring, or cases in which
overly raucous solicitation created a disturbance of public order and an endangerment of public decency. Otherwise, sex was “a private concern of the individuals, whose freedom the state would impugn in outrageous fashion if it set
itself up as judge and warder of . . . sexual life.”52 As one speaker at the DZIAF’s
1906 conference put it, it was the right of any citizen to dispose of his property as he wished, for example, by hiring a prostitute. In prostitution women
merely disposed of their bodies as they wished – “and who can deny them
that?”53
In an important programmatic essay printed in the Abolitionist in 1913,
Katharina Scheven made explicit the political allegiances these ideas implied.
Scheven was optimistic about the development of modern culture and society, welcoming “the great movements that have taken up the struggle against
social injustice and for the liberation of humanity from outward and inward
servitude . . . : the women’s movement, the morality movement, the temperance movement, and last not least the workers’ movement.” Of the concept
of class struggle that inspired the latter, she remarked that “I for my part
deeply deplore it”; but she insisted that the movement itself was inspired by “a
profound ethical meaning, a vital idealism.”54 Such language must have nonplussed conservative Christians, who identified the socialist movement with
materialism, not idealism.
This was not an isolated case. Although most of their Christian counterparts
regarded contraception as profoundly immoral, for example, some moderates

51

Anna Pappritz and Katharina Scheven, Die positiven Aufgaben und strafrechtlichen Forderungen der Föderation (Dresden: n.p., 1909), p. 25.
52 Pappritz and Scheven, Die positiven Aufgaben, p. 26; Katharina Scheven, “Die Arbeit der
Männer-Sittlichkeitsvereine,” Frauenbewegung 9 (1903): 186, 187; Pappritz, “Die Teilnahme,”
p. 181.
53 Anna Pappritz, Eine Kundgebung des Abolitionismus (Leipzig: Malende, 1906), p. 3.
54 Scheven, “Sexualethik,” p. 15.

90

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

viewed it with genuine ambivalence. The Abolitionist did carry some articles
critical of contraception – for example, one in 1911 argued that the use of contraceptives was driven by “solely egotistical” motives and was a demographic
and hence military disaster for the nation.55 Yet Anna Pappritz, in 1906, supported the “regulation” of births to ensure that mothers had a rest period of
at least two years between deliveries; and Katharina Scheven suggested that
the IAF’s “rejection of interference by the state in sexual relations . . . logically”
implied acceptance, for example, of doctors’ advocacy of the use of condoms.56
The abolitionist approach to venereal diseases demonstrated a similar pragmatism. For the men’s morality campaigners, venereal diseases were not really a
“problem” to be resolved at all, because if there were no fornication, there
would be no venereal diseases. They therefore did not think much about actually treating or preventing these diseases. The abolitionists, in contrast, developed quite concrete proposals in this direction. They argued for “free and
humane hospital treatment,” the creation of a system of free policlinics and
outpatient services, and the inclusion of venereal diseases among those covered by the public insurance system (which under existing law were classified
as self-inflicted injury and were not covered or only partially covered).57 The
proper way to combat prostitution and venereal diseases, Scheven argued, was
not to cast prostitutes out of society through the use of discriminatory laws
but to “constantly re-integrate this group into the national organism through
special welfare measures.”58
Despite such differences, however, most of the “moderates” were liberal
Protestants and also had a great deal in common with their more conservative
coreligionists. Again, up until 1902, the BDF’s position on prostitution was
virtually the same as that advocated by the AKDS.59 Bieber-Böhm’s “suggestions for combating prostitution,” which were adopted by the BDF in 1895,
advocated confining “our straying sisters” to reformatories for a period of one
to two years. And in order to cut off recruitment to the sex trade, Bieber-Böhm
also proposed stricter measures against “immoral books, pictures, displays,
closing of questionable dance locales, the worst sort of night-cafes, TingelTangel, questionable ‘girl pubs’ and wine-bars with private rooms,” the raising
of the age of consent, the “employer paragraph,” and criminalizing the knowing transmission of venereal diseases. Although the BDF did adopt abolitionism
55

Ernst von Düring, “Rassenhygiene und sittliche Forderungen,” Abolitionist 10 (1911): 28, 29.
Anna Pappritz, “Malthusianismus,” Neues Frauenleben 18 (1906): 5, 6; Katharina Scheven,
“Die Generalversammlung der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” Abolitionist 10 (1911): 65.
57 Anna Pappritz, Herrenmoral (Leipzig: Frauen-Rundschau, n.d.), pp. 17–18 (quotation); Pappritz, “Die Teilnahme,” pp. 181, 182.
58 Katharina Scheven, “Zur Geschichte der Sittlichkeitsbewegung in Deutschland,” in Am Born
der Gemeinnützigkeit: Festgabe zum 80. Geburtstage des Herrn Geh. Reg.-Rat Prof. Dr. jur.
Victor Böhmert, ed. Peter Schmidt (Dresden: O. V. Böhmert, 1909), p. 121.
59 Quoted in Pappritz, “Die Teilnahme,” p. 172.
56

Religion, Women, and Morality

91

in 1902, it continued to support much of this broader repressive program.60
Many in the IAF, too, supported stricter censorship and other repressive moral
legislation – as when, for example, Anna Pappritz welcomed new legislation
against Schmutz in 1914 that many other political liberals saw as an assault on
the freedom of German culture.61
And the moderates agreed with conservative Christians on a number of
fundamentally important postulates. They shared the view that the double
standard of sexual morality was indefensible and the root cause of the sexual
chaos they saw all around them. They rejected the idea that prostitution was
a necessary evil, denouncing it as “ridiculous,” a transparent cover for “selfishness,” for “the simple motive of lust or whim.”62 They held that men bore
the greatest responsibility for the sexual chaos of their society – that, as the
Abolitionist put it in 1905, the “moral anarchy” created by the double standard was simply a product of “men’s lack of discipline in sexual matters.”63
They saw regulation as fundamentally contrary to the legal and constitutional
principles of modern society – a glaring failure to make the transition from
the “old police-state to the modern state founded on law [Rechtsstaat]” (in the
words of Scheven).64 The DZIAF argued in a petition to the Ministry of Justice in August 1904 that it “contradicts the modern social sense that the state
declares some people to be a diversionary target for the desires of others, labels
them as second-class beings, as slaves.” Tellingly, virtually the same phrasing
had appeared in an article by Anna Pappritz published in the BDF’s journal in
December 1903, in an AKDS petition of March 1904; and in a BDF petition in
early 1905.65
60

Bieber-Böhm, Vorschläge, pp. 8, 11; “Petition des Bundes Deutscher Frauenvereine an den
Reichstag zu dem Entwurf eines Gesetzes betreffend Aenderung und Ergänzung des Strafgesetzbuches” 1898, LAB, HLA, Film 46-203, 4; “Bundesnachrichten,” CBDF 6 (1905): 153–
154; Camilla Jellinek, Petition des Bundes Deutscher Frauenvereine, zur Reform des Strafgesetzbuches und der Strafprozessordnung (Mannheim: Bensheimer, 1909); Camilla Jellinek,
Petition deutscher Frauen betreffend das Verbot weiblicher Bedienung in Gast- und Schankwirtschaften (Gautzsch/Leipzig: Dietrich, 1910).
61 Anna Pappritz, “Der Gesetzentwurf gegen den Schmutz in Wort und Bild,” Abolitionist 13
(1914): 56–59.
62 “Fürsorgeerziehung und Sittenpolizei,” Abolitionist 6 (1907): 19; H. Minod, “Warum die
Föderation die Prostitution als solche nicht für ein Vergehen im strafrechtlichen Sinne hält,”
Abolitionist 4 (1905): 4.
63 Minod, “Warum,” p. 5; Käthe Schirmacher, “Antisozial,” Abolitionist 4 (1905): 20–21;
H. Ludwig, “Die Kasernierung der Prostitution,” Frau 12 (1905): 521.
64 Katharina Scheven, “Zur Frage: Abolitionismus oder Reglementierung,” Volkswart 4 (1911):
33. For a similar formulation, see Schmölder’s comments before the first conference of the
Deutsche Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten (DGBG) in “Diskussion,”
ZBG 1 (1903): 379, 381.
65 “Petition des Deutschen Zweiges der I. A. Föderation an das Reichs-Justizamt,” Abolitionist 7
(1908): 24; AKDS petition of 15 March 1904, ADW, CA 526; Anna Pappritz, “Grundfragen
der Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” CBDF 5 (1903): 137–140; “Bundesnachrichten,” CBDF 6 (1905):
153–154.

92

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

Like conservative Christians, abolitionist women were acutely aware of the
class dynamics of prostitution, seeing regulation as “only motivated by the
desire to secure ‘healthy goods’ for the young men of their own circles, for
propertied, educated men” (in the words of Pappritz).66 They too believed that
regulation was ethically indefensible because it reduced women to the status of
mere things, indeed to “slavery.”67 They too argued that regulation represented
a “fateful incitement to immorality” for young men, making prostitution seem
“permitted and natural and moreover not dangerous.”68 Brothels in particular were “sites of moral brutalization”; rape and child abuse therefore “lie
along a line of continuity with prostitution,” and the state that regulated prostitution was therefore the “intellectual author of these crimes.”69 The pimps
and hangers-on who gathered around the tolerated brothels “represent a terrible social danger.”70 Some even believed that regulation generated corruption
in the police – an argument that was occasionally confirmed by sensational
scandals within vice squads.71
In any case, in the following year the Abolitionist declared that the “low
moral level in every area of our cultural life is largely determined by the fact
that vice is officially licensed and legalized.”72 Particularly fatefully, it undermined family life by disrupting marriages and generally “poisoning . . . relations
between the two sexes.”73 It accustomed men to the greater “variety” of
“polygamy freed from any responsibility,” taught them “loathsome practices”
and “perverse inclinations” that estranged them from their wives, and disgusted women with men’s “naked and crass” selfishness.74 And all this served
no good purpose, because regulation was completely ineffective as a public
health measure.75
Abolitionist women largely concurred, as well, with the conservative Christian diagnosis of the deeper moral crisis of their society. As the Abolitionist
put it in 1906, the fight against prostitution was at the same time a fight
“against all the dark forces that are corrupting our national and political life:
66

Pappritz, Herrenmoral, pp. 13, 12, 18.
Anna Pappritz, “Welchen Schutz können Bordellstrassen gewähren?” ZBG 3 (1905): 417; Anna
Pappritz, Eine Kundgebung, p. 4.
68 BDF “Petition” of 1905, LAB, HLA, 46/203-3.
69 H. Ludwig, “Die Kasernierung der Prostitution,” Frau 12 (1905): 43.
70 BDF “Petition” of 1905, LAB, HLA, 46/203-3.
71 “Ein Skandal bei der Berliner Sittenpolizei,” Abolitionist 10 (1911): 82–84; Bruno Meyer,
“Sittenschutzmann und Zuhälter,” NG 9 (1913): 404.
72 “Die erzieherischen Aufgaben der Föderation,” Abolitionist 5 (1906): 16.
73 Pappritz, Eine Kundgebung, p. 4.
74 H. Ludwig, “Die Kasernierung der Prostitution,” Frau 12 (1905): 524, 526; Katharina Scheven,
Denkschrift über die in Deutschland bestehenden Verhältnisse in Bezug auf das Bordellwesen
(Dresden: Böhmert, 1904), p. 16.
75 See Jellinek, Petition . . . zur Reform des Strafgesetzbuches, p. 26; “Petition des Deutschen
Zweiges der I. A. Föderation an das Reichs-Justizamt,” Abolitionist 7 (1908): 23; Anna Pappritz, “Die Geisseln der Menschheit,” Frauenbewegung 8 (1902): 42.
67

Religion, Women, and Morality

93

injustice, arbitrariness, exploitation of the weak, selfishness, pleasure-seeking
and low sensuality.”76 The moderates too believed that “civilized humanity is
without doubt sexually over-stimulated today” due to “alcohol, the sensually
excited hot-house atmosphere of big-city entertainments, regulated prostitution . . . , filth in literature and art” – and the decay of “inherited unquestioned standards, sacred custom, religious traditions” (in the words of Alice
Salomon).77 They too held that modernity was characterized – as Gertrud
Bäumer, a leading moderate who became chair of the BDF in 1910, put it in
1909 – by a deplorable “diversity . . . that produces new [philosophical] systems, new world-views, every day.”78
Abolitionists often shared, finally, more conservative women’s understanding of the broader implications of sexual immorality. Anna Pappritz, for example, believed that immorality in this one area could only fuel immorality in
every other aspect of life; for a person accustomed to committing immoral
actions in his sexual life “will not hesitate to give free rein to his selfish wishes
at the expense of other people in other respects, as well.”79 Katharina Scheven
echoed conservative Christian critiques of capitalism in 1913, arguing that the
“miserable social distress” of poor women “is commercially exploited by modern industrialism,” that prostitution was a “rank capitalist weed,” and that
the “frightening growth of sexual vice and perversity in every form” was a
product of the growth of the “big-city Lumpenproletariat” under the influence
of “capitalism and industrialism.”80
Not surprisingly, then, abolitionists and more conservative women often
were able to cooperate on some of the key initiatives of the morality campaign. In late 1910, for example, a broad coalition of women’s organizations
formed the Central Committee of the German Women’s Organizations for
Combating Trash and Filth in Words and Pictures, which brought together
representatives from the BDF, the IAF, the KDF, the KFV, the DEF, and teachers’ organizations.81 Similar coalitions formed locally as well – in 1910 in
Munich, for example, the IAF, KDF, DEF, and other organizations collaborated in protesting against Animierkneipen, and in Frankfurt the IAF and the
DEF even cooperated with the Catholic men’s morality association; in Danzig
in 1909 the IAF, DEF, KDF, and VFJM jointly established an employment
76

“Die erzieherischen Aufgaben,” p. 14.
“Selbstbeherrschung oder freie Liebe?” Abolitionist 4 (1905): 98; Alice Salomon, Mutterschutz
und Mutterschaftsversicherung (Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1908), pp. 78–79. On Salomon,
see Alice Salomon, Character Is Destiny, ed. Andrew Lees (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 2004).
78 Gertrud Bäumer, “Die Frauenbewegung und die Zukunft unserer Kultur,” Frau 16 (1909):
515. On Bäumer, see Weiland, Geschichte, pp. 46–51.
79 Pappritz, Eine Kundgebung, p. 4.
80 Katharina Scheven, “Sexualethik und Kulturfortschritt,” Abolitionist 12 (1913): 13, 14.
81 “Die Frauenvereine im Kampf gegen Schmutz und Schund in Wort und Bild,” Abolitionist 10
(1911): 6–7.
77

94

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

agency for young women.82 Organizational ties between the DEF and the IAF
in particular were strong; and the language of activists in the two organizations
was sometimes strikingly similar.83
On the face of it, this convergence appears rather odd. The moderates were,
after all, committed to an extensive range of social and legal reforms that
would have revolutionized gender relations in Germany: votes for women, fully
equal access to education and the professions, and reforms of family law that
would establish gender equality within the family. Many conservative Christian women and most Christian men rejected this program. But again, the two
movements actually shared an important religious common ground. Most abolitionists subscribed to some variety of non-conformist liberal Protestantism; a
few were liberal Jews or – as in the case of Alice Salomon – Jewish converts
to liberal Christianity; and these women’s arguments for women’s liberation
were rooted precisely in a gendered variant of the conservative Christian view
of the moral crisis of modernity. The capacity for childbearing and their natural
role in child rearing, they argued, gave all women a particular psychological,
spiritual, and emotional constitution, an affinity for life and organic relationships (as opposed to mechanical structure, which corresponded to masculinity). Women were nurturing; they were emotional; they were generous; and
they were characterized by warmth, feeling, a natural tendency to be attentive
to others’ needs, and a natural willingness to subordinate their own needs to
those of others or of the community as a whole. It was woman’s special mission to bring these values and capacities to bear on social life in general, rather
than realizing them only within their own families; and it was on this basis
that they argued for women’s rights. The reform of family law was necessary
to secure women’s influence within the family; reforms of constitutional law,
educational systems, the professions, the churches, and other institutional and
legal systems were necessary to secure their influence in society as a whole – to
make “the independent female citizen,” as Helene Lange, the godmother of the
moderate faction within the BDF, put it, “the representative of motherliness in
politics.”84
These women argued that German society desperately needed this motherly influence because it was suffering from a pathological predominance of
male values and characteristics. Their list of those values and characteristics
roughly corresponded to the conservative Christians’ list of the godless values of
modernity: rationality, materialism, self-assertion, aggression, pleasure seeking,
82

“Verein zur Förderung der öffentl. Sittlichkeit,” “V. Jahresbreicht des Danziger Zweigvereins
der Intern. Abolition. Föderation,” and “Eine öffentliche Kundgebung der Frauen Frankfurts
gegen Animierkneipen und Bars,” all in Abolitionist 9 (1910): 42–43, 97.
83 See, e.g., “Geschäftsbericht des Deutschen Zweiges der Int. Abol. Föderation,” Abolitonist 9
(1910): 50–51; Katharina Scheven, “Die Erziehung der Jugend zu sexueller Ethik und Hygiene,”
Abolitionist 11 (1912): 83–89, 91–95.
84 Lange, quoted in Bärbel Clemens, “Menschenrechte haben kein Geschlecht!” (Pfaffenweiler:
Centaurus, 1988), p. 97. On Lange, see Barbara Brick, “Die Mütter der Nation,” in Frauen in
der Geschichte, vol. 4, ed. Annette Kuhn (Düsseldorf: Schwann, 1983), pp. 99–131.

Religion, Women, and Morality

95

moneymaking, organization, and hunger for power. Without the humanizing influence of women, these male qualities degenerated into rigid adherence
to ideologies and ideological conflict, selfishness, violence, irresponsible lust,
greed, and amoral materialism – all those fundamentally amoral behaviors that
conservative Christians deplored.
The moderate leadership thus had an almost messianic understanding of
the social and moral mission of women. Gertrud Bäumer, for example, characterized what men did – science, technology, economics, and the intellect –
as superficial “civilization,” which was all very nice but secondary; it became
really meaningful only when it “becomes a means of creating the most perfect
possible people, nourishment for the growth of the soul.” This latter was the
special province of women, whose mission was “of course in the end what is
essential”: “culture” – the life of the spirit, the heart, the emotions, and the
cultivation of genuine Persönlichkeit (individuality).85 The leading Bavarian
moderate feminist Ika Freudenberg had made an almost identical argument in
the journal of the moderate faction of the BDF, Die Frau, five years earlier,
arguing that men were all about “force of arms . . . business and transport . . . ,
science and technology” and the mechanization of work, life, and even art,
whereas women’s job was the “perfection of real [eigentlichen], personal life.”
And whereas man’s tendency was to “put a low value on his own life and the
lives of others,” women’s job was “to sustain life.”86
Fundamentally, then, the moderates understood the women’s movement to
be an effort to secure the dominion of the spirit over the flesh – which was how
they, too, defined morality. For example, Marianne Weber, wife of sociologist
Max Weber and an influential figure in the moderate women’s movement,
argued at the Protestant Social Congress conference of 1907 that
wherever moral ideas arise at all, the physical needs of the sexual sphere and the
demands of spiritual culture can come into conflict with each other. A general
harmony between the elemental forces of the “natural” and the “should” of the
moral will has never and nowhere existed. On the contrary, there is immanent
in the undisciplined, “natural” physical instinct always the tendency so strongly
to intrude into the psychic realm that it destroys our equally natural instinct and
capacity for its moralization.87

Again, sex was a matter of life and death for the moral personality. Gertrud
Bäumer even quoted with approval the contribution of another speaker at the
85

Gertrud Bäumer, “Die Frauenbewegung und die Zukunft userer Kultur,” Frau 16 (1909): 514,
521, 522, 525.
86 Ika Freudenberg, “Die Frauen und das Vaterland,” Frau 12 (1905): 581, 583, 587. See Marita A.
Panzer and Elisabeth Plössl, Bavarias Töchter: Frauenporträts aus fünf Jahrhunderten (Regensburg: Pustet, 1997), pp. 241–243.
87 Marianne Weber, “Sexualethische Prinzipienfragen,” in Frauenbewegung und Sexualethik:
Beiträge zur mondernen Ehekritik, ed. Gertrud Bäumer et al. (Heilbronn: Salzer, 1909), p. 29.
On Weber, see Bärbel Meurer, Marianne Weber: Leben und Werk (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck,
2010).

96

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

conference who warned of the “unbelievable demonic power of the sexual drive
to drag down even spiritual, refined individuals into animalistic sensuality” –
although in an essay of 1910 she seemed to exempt women, citing another
author’s remark that the “strict sexual discipline of the Christian centuries”
had given them “a natural independence with respect to the naked instinctual
needs.”88 But culture aside, monogamy also had its origins in “the biological
connection between love and motherhood in women”; for women, “the sexual
question is really the tension between the demands of their feelings of love and
the erotic life of men” – which was not spiritual, emotional, or procreative but
simply physical and hedonistic.89 As Helene Lange argued in Die Frau in 1905,
“the whole women’s movement is, in its deepest meaning, a struggle for the
validity of moral ideals in contrast with external material force.” The Christian
ideal of monogamy was actually “a victory of Woman over the polygamous
instincts of men.”90
There was an important difference, of course, between the views of the moderate women’s movement and those of conservative Christians. The Christian
men’s morality movement believed that men were particularly responsible for
the moral catastrophe all around them; but they believed that only the reconstitution of patriarchal authority would bring about the restoration of moral
order. Many in the women’s movement believed that only the full emancipation of women, the final abolition of the outdated forms (legal, social, and
attitudinal) of patriarchal culture, would do so.
Yet in practical terms the moderate women’s movement was in some cases
quite willing to contemplate taking rather draconian measures to stem the flood
of immorality. This was so even where such action would be taken primarily
against other women. A good example is the concern of the moderate women’s
movement with the Waitress Question (Kellnerinnenfrage) – the belief that
women who worked in bars, cabarets, restaurants, and cafes were simply in
the anteroom to prostitution, and that their moral endangerment required protective intervention. The rapid expansion in the number of such establishments
in the last decade or two of the nineteenth century shocked and outraged many
bourgeois women. By 1910 the situation appeared sufficiently critical to move
Camilla Jellinek, an influential figure in the BDF and head of its law reform commission, to draw up a petition that – “in the name of the dignity of woman” –
asked the Ministry of the Interior and the national parliament to outlaw the
employment of women as waiters in bars and restaurants.91

88

Gertrud Bäumer, “Die Sittlichkeitsfrage auf dem evangelisch-sozialen Kongress,” Frau 15
(1907): 6; Gertrud Bäumer, “Zur Vertiefung der Sexualethik,” Frau 18 (1910): 142.
89 Gertrud Bäumer, “Die ‘neue Ethik,’” Frau 12 (1905): 711–712.
90 Helene Lange, “Moderne Streitfragen in der Frauenbewegung,” Frau 13 (1905): 74; Helene
Lange, Die Frauenbewegung in ihren modernen Problemen (Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer, 1908),
p. 60.
91 Jellinek, Petition . . . Schankwirtschaften, pp. 3–5.

Religion, Women, and Morality

97

This was by no means the only response of the moderate women’s movement
to the “problem” of waitressing. Ika Freudenberg in particular vehemently
rejected Jellinek’s proposal to eliminate one of all too few opportunities for
women’s employment.92 In 1900 Freudenberg had helped to launch a waitresses’ union in Munich, and a number of leading moderates – including
Salomon, Lange, and Pappritz – were part of a failed effort to form a similar
organization in Berlin in the same year.93 Such efforts met with little success,
however; and the petition of 1910 might be seen as the product of bourgeois
women’s realization that self-help efforts would not be effective in improving
the working conditions and wages of waitresses.
Waitressing was not a unique case. Anna Pappritz even went so far as to
demand the “banning of all places of entertainment that are nothing more
than veiled brothels” – including, for example, “indecent displays and performances” that had no “artistic value” but merely served “commercial hunger
for profit.”94 In 1908 the Abolitionist carried a liberal Protestant pastor’s
denunciation of “immoral literature” printed on cheap paper, published in
mass editions, and presenting “exciting narratives” in “miserable German”;
“allegedly scientific or medical texts on sexual matters and perversions”; and
“newspaper accounts of murder and robbery.” Against all these things it was
self-evidently necessary, the author believed, to “proceed with decision and
ruthlessly” in order to stop the “ruiners of the nation” who “fill their pockets
by producing, publishing, and distributing such smut.” Such things, “which
speculate on peoples’ low, less-than-human instincts for the sake of money,”
must be rooted out “without mercy or pity.”95
Again, much of the leadership of the radical faction and particularly of the
VFF had little sympathy with such views, rejecting them as morally authoritarian and “churchified” (as Die Frauenbewegung put it in 1905).96 They were,
however, clearly in a minority. In fact, the controversy over the sexually radical
New Ethic advanced by some of these women after 1905 (a subject explored
in Chapter Nine) rapidly polarized the DZIAF and allowed the moderates
around Katharina Scheven and Anna Pappritz to consolidate their control of
the organization. Some of the radicals shifted the focus of their activism to
the issue of women’s suffrage; others abandoned the DZIAF in favor of the
new sex-reform movement. By 1908 the DEF joined the BDF; in contrast, the
main sex-reform organization, the League for the Protection of Motherhood
92

See Camilla Jellinek, “Das Verbot der weiblichen Bedienung in Gast- und Schankwirtschaften”;
Ika Freudenberg, “Ueber Kellnerinnen-Organisation”; Camilla Jellinek, “Zur Kellnerinnenfrage”; and Ika Freudenberg, “Zur Abschaffung des Kellnerinnenstandes,” all in CBDF 11
(1909): 73–75, 116–118, 125.
93 See Pappritz, “Die Teilnahme,” p. 187.
94 Pappritz, Herrenmoral, pp. 18, 21.
95 Ernst Baars, “Unser Kampf gegen den Schmutz in Kunst und Literatur,” Der Abolitionist 7
(1908): 69, 70, 71, 76, 72.
96 “Die Reaktion in der Frauenbewegung,” Frauenbewegung 11 (1905): 177–178.

98

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

(Bund für Mutterschutz [BfM]) was refused membership in that organization.97
III. From Silence to Solidarity: Morality as Women’s Business
There is one further important respect in which conservative and liberal women
shared common ground: both groups faced powerful organizational and cultural obstacles in advancing their ideas in public. Women in both groups produced much less verbiage than did their male counterparts – fewer articles,
fewer speeches, fewer conference reports, and far fewer books. The central reason for this should be obvious: men simply had incomparably greater financial,
organizational, and intellectual resources than did women. The leaders of the
men’s morality organizations included clergymen and in fact often high church
officials, professors of theology, judges, military officers, directors of charitable
institutions, or civil servants. They could build on institutional frameworks that
were very powerful and very wealthy. Most had university educations. Most
women had few or none of these resources. Married women also carried the
entire burden of running their households – which is why almost all German
women’s organizations were dominated by unmarried, widowed, or childless
women, in particular teachers (who in most German states were fired upon
marriage).98
Beyond this, there was also enormous resistance in German society around
the turn of the century to the very idea of women speaking about sexuality
at all. Gertrud Guillaume-Schack opened an address in 1882 by remarking
that “perhaps it will have surprised you, that a matter so difficult to handle
as the morality question should be discussed in public, and perhaps yet more
that I, a woman, want to speak about it.”99 At the BDF’s first conference in
1895, the organization’s board attempted to prevent any public discussion of
its petition to the national parliament on prostitution, because it dealt with
“very awkward matters”; and when Bieber-Böhm addressed an international
women’s conference in Berlin in 1896 on the subject of “The Morality Question – A Public Health Issue,” some women in the audience promptly got up
and left.100 After the turn of the century women became more accustomed to
speaking about such matters, even in public. But more conservative women
continued to find doing so painful. Katharina Scheven remarked in 1904 that it
“is still regarded in many educated circles as unbecoming to know about these
97

“Die zweite General-Versammlung des deutschen Zweiges der I. A. Föderation,” Abolitionist
7 (1908): 50; Mueller, Zur Abwehr, pp. 30–31.
98 For a critical comment, see Marion Gräfin Münster, “Die Beteiligung der Frauen an der
Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” EFZ 7 (1906): 68.
99 Gertrud Guillaume-Schack, Ueber unsere sittlichen Verhältnisse und die Bestrebungen und
Arbeiten des Britisch-Continentalen und Allg. Bundes (Berlin: Dolfuss, 1882), p. 5; Gertrud
Guillaume-Schack, Ein Wort zur Sittlichkeitsfrage (Berlin: Dolfuss, 1881), p. 3.
100 Lüders, Der “linke Flügel,” pp. 17, 69; Pappritz, “Die Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” p. 141.

Religion, Women, and Morality

99

things, mush less to talk about them.”101 Even as late as 1909, speaking at
the annual conference of the Inner Mission, Paula Mueller told the assembled
Protestant notables that “we are well aware that it affronts the sensibilities of
the best men and women, if in these matters women too raise their voices in
public.”102
This cultural code could have important legal consequences, for women also
faced stubborn resistance from men who believed that such matters were none
of their business. The extreme case was that of Gertrud Guillaume-Schack, who
was tried for gross misconduct because she dared to speak out on prostitution
at all.103 Anita Augspurg had to fight a protracted and bitter struggle against
the police in Hamburg in the years immediately after she refounded the German
branch of the IAF in 1898. The police closed down her public addresses on the
subject of the regulation of prostitution because, as a representative of the city
put it in the national parliament, the open discussion of sexuality, particularly
where young women were present, constituted a “more serious threat to public
decency” than the existence of the brothels themselves. The school authorities
also shut down the sex education sessions the Hamburg IAF had begun holding
for young people graduating from the city’s schools, in 1901.104
More conservative Protestant men, in fact, so objected to public appearances
by women that they regarded the mere foundation of the DEF as a deplorable
“concession to the modern Zeitgeist.”105 In 1912 and 1913, the DEF leadership engaged in a bitter debate with conservative Protestant men about its
position on women’s suffrage – which it rejected for political reasons (because
the SPD was very successful in organizing working-class women) but not on
principle.106 The KDF and the JFB were more cautious in their approach to controversial topics and questioned traditional conceptions of women’s roles less
aggressively; but they too faced resistance within their communities. In 1908,
for example, the KDF petitioned for the right for women to address the annual
conference of German Catholics (the Katholikentag) – and was denied.107 As
101

Scheven, Denkschrift, p. 14.
CAIM, Verhandlungen des 35. Kongresses für Innere Mission in Stuttgart, vom 4. bis 7.
Oktober 1909 (Hamburg: Rauhes Haus, 1910), p. 277.
103 Guillaume-Schack, Ueber unsere sittlichen Verhältnisse, pp. 28, 30, 37, 45–47.
104 See Heymann’s account in Lida Gustava Heymann and Anita Augspurg, Erlebtes – Erschautes:
Deutsche Frauen kämpfen für Freiheit, Recht und Frieden 1850–1940 (Meisenheim/Glan:
Hain, 1972), pp. 50–53; Lutz Sauerteig, Krankheit, Sexualität, Gesellschaft: Geschlechtskrankheiten und Gesundheitspolitik in Deutschland im 19. und frühen 20. Jahrhundert
(Stuttgart: Steiner, 1999), p. 230.
105 Baumann, Protestantismus, pp. 103, 124, 129.
106 Ursula Baumann, “Religion und Emanzipation: Konfessionelle Frauenbewegung in Deutschland 1900–1933,” in Frauen unter dem Patriarchat der Kirchen: Katholikinnen und Protestantinnen im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert, ed. Irmtraud Goetz von Olenhausen et al. (Stuttgart:
Kohlhammer, 1995), p. 106.
107 Baumann, “Religion und Emanzipation,” p. 293; Zentralkommittee für die Generalversammlung der Katholiken Deutschlands to Zentrale des Katholischen deutschen Frauenbundes,
102

100

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

the reaction against the women’s movements intensified in 1912 and 1913,
Ellen Ammann, leader of the KDF’s Bavarian branch, remarked in a particularly
candid letter (to her mother) that “the whole [KDF] is threatened” by men in the
Volksverein, who regarded the women’s organization as “too independent.”108
The formation of the JFB and in particular the demands of its chair, Bertha
Pappenheim, that women be given a voice in the government of their congregations sparked the creation in 1907 of a rival organization of more conservative
Jewish women, supported by influential male colleagues.109
The hostility of men to women’s engagement with questions of sexual morality may, moreover, also have derived in part from the fact that women across
the ideological spectrum had a much narrower conception of what the problem
was than did their male counterparts. The moral crisis addressed by women’s
organizations consisted primarily of one thing: prostitution. There were echoes
of conservative men’s understanding of the connection between sex and politics
in women’s speeches or publications; but the connection between sexuality and
socialism, between sexuality and capitalism, and between trashy literature and
political radicalism were not of central interest to women, as they were for men.
“For women,” as Gertrud Bäumer put it in Die Frau in 1907, the “tragedy”
of sexual life was men’s incapacity to maintain the boundary between spiritual
love and “purely animalistic” sensuality – “to maintain which is, for every
person, a rule of spiritual self-preservation.”110
This narrower focus among female morality activists had two important consequences. The first was that even more conservative women were concerned
to a greater degree with the specific social origins of prostitution than with its
roots in the broader moral condition of the age. As we have seen, conservative
Christian men were very much aware of the financial imperatives that drove
women into the sex trade; but they saw those problems as a consequence of the
disintegration of the patriarchal social order, the erosion of religious conviction
and hence of Christian family life, the crisis of social authority, the triumph of
philosophical materialism and selfishness, and so forth. For women, the misery
of the working class in general and the pervasive discrimination against women
in the labor force in particular were the heart of the issue.
This was particularly true, of course, in the DZIAF. Prostitution was,
as the Abolitionist put it in 1906, simply “a symptom of our faulty social
organization.”111 Abolitionists looked to social reform, not religious revival or
12 January 1913, Archiv des katholischen deutschen Frauenbundes (hereinafter AKDF),
1-33-1, Katholikentage I.
108 Ellen Amman to her mother, 1 March 1913, Archiv der Erzdiözese München, Rep. 199,
Nachlass Ellen Amman, Ordner no. 4. On Ammann, see Marianne Neboisa, Ellen Ammann
(St. Ottilien: Eos, 1992).
109 Klausmann, Politik, pp. 182–186.
110 Gertrud Bäumer, “Die Sittlichkeitsfrage auf dem evangelisch-sozialen Kongress,” Frau 15
(1907): 7.
111 “Die erzieherischen Aufgaben der Föderation,” Abolitionist 5 (1906): 16, 15.

Religion, Women, and Morality

101

the police, for a solution. Above all else, that meant just and adequate wages and
equal access to education, employment, and the professions for women.112 Pappritz and Scheven summed up the social reform program of the DZIAF in their
1909 pamphlet: they held that “prostitution is primarily called forth by demand
from the side of men, and that it is often social distress that forces women to
meet this demand with the corresponding supply.” The proper response was
not use of the criminal system but protective legislation for women workers,
“organization of women workers, in order to secure for them a living wage,”
and better access for women to education and vocational training.113
The abolitionists were quite aware that this perspective put them at odds
with the men’s morality movement. In an article of 1903, Scheven stressed the
positive achievements of the Protestant men’s morality movement in bringing
“ethical demands” to bear against the “purely sanitary and policing standpoint” of the defenders of regulation. But the Christian morality movement,
she believed, did not understand that prostitution was
above all a social ill and hangs together with our social order, capitalism, industrialism, militarism . . . and that one of its main causes is the economic, legal, and
moral dependence and lack of freedom of women. . . . Prostitution is seen too
much as a sin and a vice, the increase of which is traced back to falling away
from God, and which one must fight by calling on religious-moral influences and,
where they don’t suffice, the criminal law.

More important than such religious or legal measures, she believed, was “a
transformation of our social conditions . . . above all the economic and political
emancipation of woman.”114
This position was reinforced as women became more active in social work
from the late 1890s onward. Anna Pappritz, for example, published an influential collection and interpretation of short biographies of women working in
the sex trade based on the case notes of a female police assistant, in 1907.
On the basis of these examples from “real life,” she concluded that both the
“apostles of morality” and “social policy experts of the school of Lombroso”
(who argued that prostitutes were simply “born whores”) were mistaken, and
“that in almost all cases economic causes, that is need, social misery, deliver
the girls into prostitution.”115 Moral categories were simply inadequate tools
for understanding the social phenomenon of prostitution.
In consequence, abolitionists tended to be more exclusively critical of men.
Conservative Christian men very clearly identified men’s anarchic sexual behavior as the sexual problem of the age. But they embedded their critique in a much
112

Pappritz, “Die Teilnahme,” p. 183.
Pappritz and Scheven, Die positiven Aufgaben, pp. 4–9, 26 (quotations pp. 5, 26).
114 Katharina Scheven, “Die Arbeit der Männer-Sittlichkeitsvereine,” Frauenbewegung 9 (1903):
179.
115 Anna Pappritz, Die Welt, von der man nicht spricht! (Aus den Papieren einer Polizei-Beamtin)
(Leipzig: Dietrich, 1907), pp. 7, 29, 30.
113

102

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

broader analysis of deeper ills of which they believed it to be an expression –
materialism, selfishness, lack of religious conviction, and so on. Abolitionists
less frequently portrayed men’s behavior as an expression of any deeper problem. More often, they believed simply that men as a species were, in moral
terms, contemptible. The sexual problem of the age was not men who had
been seduced by the moral and philosophical evils of the times; it was just men.
As one article in Die Frau remarked in 1905, “the man is the man’s worst
seducer.”116 In fact, whereas Christian men identified sexual anarchy with
scoundrels, libertines, seducers, and wastrels, there was a markedly stronger
tendency in the women’s movements to see immoral and antisocial behavior
as characteristic not of problem men but in fact of the average man. This was
particularly true in the case of the radicals in the abolitionist movement. Thus
the leading sex reformer Helene Stöcker, for example, held that “in sexual
matters the average man is still not a civilized person, but a crude barbarian,”
and the enormously successful women’s novelist Gabriele Reuter believed that
“the relationship of most men to women is an unending chain of hypocrisies,
untruths and insincerities.”117 But the moderate leadership was scarcely less
vehement. Already in 1895 Hanna Bieber-Böhm had asserted that 99 percent of
young men “lead an immoral life before marriage.” Katharina Scheven believed
that “the average member of our male public” was essentially a sexual predator. The DZIAF’s petition to the national Ministry of Justice in 1904 argued
for the “employer paragraph” on the grounds that the “lax moral conceptions of the average man” meant he could not be trusted with authority over
women.118
Specifically, abolitionist women shared with most educated Germans in this
period the belief that whereas women were by nature monogamous, men were
by nature polygamous – or, perhaps more accurately, indiscriminate. As Alice
Salomon put it, men had a “tendency . . . toward fleeting relationships, whereas
the majority of women only give themselves to a man in the belief and hope
of a lasting, indissoluble shared life.”119 Gertrud Bäumer held that the ideal
of monogamous marriage “has its origins not only in spiritual culture, but
in the biological connection in women between love and motherhood.”120
Quite aside from such anthropological theories, however, these women simply
held that men had laxer moral standards. As Katharina Scheven wrote in
116

Ludwig, “Die Kasernierung,” p. 530.
“Der Segen der Form,” NG 1 (1905): 135; Reuter, quoted in Max Thal [Rosenthal], Mutterrecht, Frauenfrage und Weltanschauung (Breslau: Schottlaender, 1903), p. 124. On Stöcker,
see Christl Wickert, Helene Stöcker (Bonn: Dietz, 1991); on Reuter, see Ludmila KaloyanovaSlavova, Übergangsgeschöpfe: Gabriele Reuter, Hedwig Dohm, Helene Böhlau und Franziska
von Reventlow (New York: Lang, 1998).
118 Bieber-Böhm, Vorschläge, p. 4; “Selbstbeherrchung oder freie Liebe,” p. 96; “Petition des
Deutschen Zweiges der I. A. Föderation an das Reichs-Justizamt,” Abolitionist 7 (1908): 16;
119 Quoted in Gustav von Rohden, Ehe und freie Liebe: Ein Wort zum Individualismus in der
Frauenfrage (Berlin: Martin Warneck, 1911), p. 10.
120 Gertrud Bäumer, “Die ‘neue Ethik,’” Frau 12 (1904/1905): 711, 712, 715.
117

Religion, Women, and Morality

103

1905, men did not have the “inner discipline of a sense of responsibility”
that prevented freedom from “degenerating into licentiousness.”121 Women
sometimes explicitly drew the obvious conclusion from such ideas: that, as
Pappritz put it in 1904, “a large part of the masculine world does not possess
the moral maturity and the moral seriousness to deal with such matters with the
appropriate measure of dignity,” and that therefore women were “the proper
leaders in this area.”122
A fundamental principle underlay and necessarily proceeded from this
understanding of morality as something that women defended and men trampled on: the principle of female solidarity. The social gulf between bourgeois
women and working-class prostitutes permitted the women’s movement to
support relatively draconian measures – such as those advanced by BieberBöhm and the BDF both before and after 1902. But over time the idea that
prostitution was an affront to all women, that it compromised the interests
and honor of respectable middle-class women no less than those of poor
women actually working in the sex trade, steadily gained ground. Already
in 1881 Gertrud Guillaume-Schack had pointed out that “police regulations
affect all women equally,” because even respectable women had no recourse
against arbitrary police power.123 Almost two decades later, the growing
frequency of cases in which this warning was born out helped to mobilize
women in support of abolitionism. Thus in 1897 Marie Raschke, commenting on one such case in Die Frauenbewegung, observed that “every German
woman . . . must feel herself insulted by the awful treatment of this girl.”124 A
BDF resolution of 1902 declared §361.6 to be “a disgrace for the entirety of
German womankind,” warning that the police “are turned by this paragraph
into a danger for the female half of the nation.”125 The Abolitionist, appealing in 1906 to the “feeling of solidarity” of women, objected that regulation
reflected and enforced “the sexual bondage and denial of rights of the whole
sex.”126
Again, conservative religious women shared a great deal of their male colleagues’ broader moral and political analysis and were less focused on women’s
social disabilities, much less their political rights, than were the abolitionists.
There were exceptions – Bertha Pappenheim in particular published, for example, an influential essay in Die Frau in 1901 on “The Social Origins of Prostitution,” which was foundational to the abolitionists’ social analysis.127 But the
majority in the religious women’s organizations focused on moral, not social,
121

“Selbstbeherrschung oder freie Liebe,” pp. 95, 96.
Die deutschen Frauen und die Hamburger Bordelle (Pössneck: Schneider, 1904), pp. 18, 20.
123 Guillaume-Schack, Ein Wort, p. 7; Guillaume-Schack, Ueber unsere sittlichen Verhältnisse,
p. 13.
124 Marie Raschke, “Die weibliche Ehre,” Frauenbewegung 3 (1897): 250.
125 “Der 5. Generalversammlung des BDF,” EFZ 3 (1902): 12.
126 “Die erzieherischen Aufgaben der Föderation,” Abolitionist 5 (1906): 17.
127 Bertha Pappenheim, “Die sozialen Grundlagen der Sittlichkeitsfrage,” Frau 9 (1901): 130,
132, 133, 132, 134, 131, 132, 138.
122

104

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

concerns. It is all the more striking, therefore, that particularly in the second half
of the decade of the 1900s the language of female solidarity cropped up with
growing frequency even among confessional women, especially in the DEF.
Thus in 1906 Countess Münster, reviewing the whole analysis of the social
origins of prostitution, expressed sympathy for the “justified outrage over the
degradation of their sex” that moved some women to the regrettable “passion”
sometimes betrayed by female critics of regulation.128 By 1912 Paula Mueller
appealed to the “sentiment of solidarity” among her colleagues: “As women
we are outraged by the fact that members of our sex, who should be as sisters
to us, are treated as . . . commodities. Their humiliation affects us.”129
In fact within a few years of its formation the DEF was drifting, under the
impact of such sentiments, toward open adoption of the abolitionist position.
By 1904 Paula Mueller made it clear in the DEF’s journal that she, unlike the
leaders of the AKDS, regarded the criminalization of prostitution as “impossible today without leading to the greatest injustice against women, and above
all against poor women.” She explicitly rejected the idea that the state had no
“right to intervene in matters of morality”; but, as she pointed out, the DZIAF’s
commitment to using the state to combat “all manifestations of immorality that
make themselves evident in public life” meant that the two organizations were
largely in agreement.130 In early 1908 the organization’s morality commission
finally voted overwhelmingly in favor of decriminalizing prostitution, with only
one vote in dissent.131
The DEF as an organization did not formally adopt this position before
World War I. But it was increasingly involved in advocating it in practice. The
DEF sent a representative to the 1908 conference of the DZIAF and joined
the BDF in 1908 – against the advice of its spiritual advisors, pastors Weber
and Mätzold of the AKDS. Later that year the BDF reiterated its demand
for the abolition of §361.6, by unanimous vote and without discussion.132
By 1910 Mueller exactly echoed abolitionist language in the journal of the
DEF: “A complete eradication of prostitution through police repression” was
“impracticable,” and in any case “prostitution is a question of . . . personal
morality” and such problems “cannot be solved by the criminal law.”133
128

Münster, “Die Beteiligung,” pp. 68, 67.
Mueller, Modernes Leben, pp. 11, 12, 13, 15
130 Paula Mueller, “Die Kongresse zur Bekämpfung der Unsittlichkeit,” EFZ 5 (1904): 12.
131 “Protokoll der Sitzung der Sittlichkeitskommission der Deutsch-Evang. Frauenbundes am 13.
Februar 1908,” ADF, DEF, no. V12; Paula Mueller, “Die Stellung des Deutsch-Evangelischen
Frauenbundes zur Sittlichkeitsfrage,” Handbuch der Frauenfrage, ed. Paula Mueller (Berlin:
Runge, 1908), p. 104.
132 Paula Mueller, “Die Stellung,” p. 104; “Die zweite General-Versammlung des deutschen
Zweiges der I. A. Föderation,” Abolitionist 7 (1908): 49; “Die achte Generalversammlung
des Bundes deutscher Frauenvereine,” CBDF 10 (1908): 123, 130; on Weber’s and Mätzold’s
position, see Baumann, Protestantismus, p. 137.
133 Paula Mueller, “Ernste Pflichten,” EFZ 11 (1910): 1–2.
129

Religion, Women, and Morality

105

The defection of the DEF to abolitionism brought about a fundamental
change in the thinking of conservative Protestant men. Neither the Inner Mission nor the AKDS formally changed their position on prostitution before
World War I. In the last years before the war, however, there were intensive negotiations going on within the conservative Protestant morality movement, as men struggled to come to grips with the thinking of their female
counterparts. By June of 1912 the Inner Mission’s regional conference in the
more liberal southwest of the country adopted the abolitionist position.134 The
national organization thereupon established a special commission to reconsider the matter. Within that commission the representatives of the DEF and
the AKDS argued that the Inner Mission should advocate decriminalization.
More conservative members pointed out that the Central Committee of the
Inner Mission had to be more careful, because it was dependent on the public authorities; as one member put it, “one can’t demand the impossible of
the Central Committee.”135 Within the Central Committee itself, meeting in
November of 1912, more conservative members continued to insist on criminalization; but both Mueller and representatives of the AKDS advocated abolition
without criminalization, because (as Wilhelm Philipps put it) the “Protestant
standpoint” was “redeeming love,” not punishment.136 In the end the Central
Committee itself could not reach a clear decision and referred the question back
to the special commission.137 The issue was not resolved before the outbreak of
the Great War. The writing, however, was clearly on the wall. The presence of
women in the counsels of the Inner Mission had broken what one abolitionist
called the “hermetic isolation” of conservative Protestant men; the certitudes
of “male morality” were beginning to falter under the impact of “women’s
feeling of solidarity.”138
The language of solidarity with prostitutes almost never appeared in the
speeches and publications of the leadership of the JFB or the KDF, and these
organizations did not openly support the abolitionist position before 1914.
134

P. Bruns, “Verschiedenes: Verein zur Förderung der öffentlichen Sittlichkeit,” Abolitionist 11
(1912): 72.
135 “Protokoll über die Sitzung der Kommission des Central-Ausschusses für Innere Mission zur
Beratung der Prostitutionsfrage . . . 14 Februar 1912,” ADF, DEF, no. V17; Mahling, Innere
Mission, pp. 912–914.
136 See “Sitzung des Central-Ausschusses für Innere Mission mit seinen auswärtigen Mitgliedern
und Agenten sowie dem Vertretern der ihm verbundenen Vereine, Anstalten und Verbände am
12. und 13. November 1912,” pp. 59–64, ADW, CA-Gf/ST, no. 263; “Protokoll der Sitzung
der Kommission zur Beratung der Prostitutionsfrage, am 10. Dezember 1914, nachmittags 5
Uhr, im Büro des Herrn Direktor D. Spieker, in Berlin SW 11, Am Askanischen Platz 4,”
ADW, CA/GF-531X. On this discussion, see Isabell Lisberg-Haag, “Die Unzucht, das Grab
der Völker”: Die evangelische Sittlichkeitsbewegung und die “sexuelle Moderne” (1870–1918)
(Münster: Lit, 2002), pp. 77–80.
137 “Central-Ausschuss für Innere Mission: Novemberkonferenz 1912. Resolution zur Prostitutionsfrage,” ADF, DEF, no. V17; Mahling, Innere Mission, pp. 912–914.
138 Ludwig, “Die Kasernierung,” pp. 519, 524; Freudenberg, “Die Frauen,” p. 585.

106

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

And yet, it appears that there was a dynamic at work here similar to that
apparent in the DEF. Again, Bertha Pappenheim in particular was one of the
architects of the social analysis of prostitution; and of course the JFB, too,
had joined the BDF in 1907 and apparently accepted the demand for decriminalization without demur.139 The KDF, like the broader Catholic morality
movement, avoided taking a clear stance on prostitution before World War I.
Prostitution appears not to have been a very important issue within the organization, which did not establish its own commission on the morality question
(Sittlichkeitskommission) until 1908.140 As was true among Protestants, the
most vehement resistance to abolitionism came from charity organizations
involved in “rescue” work, which depended heavily on cooperation with the
police. In the Rhineland, where the KFV was most influential, this view prevailed; and indeed the national KDF headquarters there even tried to rule out
discussion of the issue within its chapters. In Munich, in contrast, the local
branch of the KDF insisted on signing a petition of Bavarian women’s organizations in 1908 requesting that the Bavarian government support decriminalization in negotiations between the states over revision of the Criminal Code.141
Faced with such differences, the KDF established its own morality commission
in the same year.142
By 1914, then, the entire women’s movement was converging on a shared
set of ideas. Increasingly, all women involved in the morality movement were
speaking the language of female solidarity and of female moral authority. And
at least within the Protestant morality movement, they were able fundamentally
to change the terms of the debate already by 1912.
IV. Morality and Women’s Roles: The Erosion of Female
Patriarchalism
The claim to moral authority central to women’s engagement with the problem of morality was obviously also a broader claim to a public role, to political authority. This was clearest in the case of the nonconfessional women’s
movement. Here radicals and moderates alike argued fundamentally that – as
Helene Lange had put it in arguing for the vote for women in 1897 – “the
139

See the stenographic report in LAB, HLA, B Rep. 235-01, films 2967–2975, pp. 440–441.
Breuer, Frauenbewegung und Katholizismus, pp. 112, 122, 124–126.
141 “Central-Vorstands-Sitzung von 8/1.08,” AKDF, Protokollbuch No. 2 der Vorstandssitzungen, fol. 72–75; Felicitas Buchner/Féderation Abolitioniste Internationale, Congrés de Genève
to Generalsekretariat des Kath. Frauenbundes, 6.7.1908, and Ellen Amman to Centrale des Kath. Frauenbundes Köln, 12.1.1908, AKDF, 2–13; Neuhaus/Centrale des Kath.
Fürsorgevereine für Mädchen, Frauen und Kinder to Centralvorstand des Kath. Frauenbundes, 1 February 1911, AKDF, 2–13; “An die beiden Häuser des bayerischen Landtages,”
12 February 1908, ADCV, Rep 319.4 (SKF), FI 1e and 1f, Faszikel I.
142 See Breuer, Frauenbewegung und Katholizismus, pp. 121–127.
140

Religion, Women, and Morality

107

masculine state is a fiasco,” and that the influence of women was needed to rescue German society from the pathologies of masculine power.143 Unlike more
conservative Christians, they interpreted women’s essential difference from
men – their “motherliness” – not as disqualifying women from participation in
public life but precisely as the justification for women’s emancipation. Lange
summed up the argument in 1902: “The interest of society in the liberation of
woman derives from the differentiation of the sexes,” specifically from a quality
that “men have never had, nor can have . . . , motherliness.”144 As Bäumer put
it seven years later, the “suffusion of the merely civilizational achievements” (of
men) “with cultural values” (of women) “cannot be achieved through action
at a distance from the security of the home”; it required women’s “responsible,
self-conscious collaboration” in shaping public life – and hence fully equal civil
and social rights for women.145 The program of the nonconfessional women’s
movement included, however, not only a demand for equal access to the public
sphere but also that for the transformation of the private sphere. As Lange put
it in 1908, the women’s movement demanded “that all traces of the sexual
servitude of woman disappear from legal institutions, all provisions of marriage law that concede power to the husband, as husband, over the wife, and
all provisions by which the state itself sanctions the double standard.” There
must be “a transformation of marriage” in the direction of “comradeship” and
“mutual understanding.”146
This was not how the confessional women’s movements understood the matter. In fact the most influential journals of the Christian women’s organizations
quite frequently carried articles by men that explained the proper or legal or
biblical role of women in society and the family; and not surprisingly the views
presented in such pieces were profoundly conservative. In 1903, for example,
the KDF’s journal Die christliche Frau regaled its readers with the good old ideal
of “the man as the head of the marital unit, to its [mutual] advantage (because
community between two complete equals is simply unthinkable), not to his
own advantage.”147 Another essay in the same volume argued that married
women should not work, because they would then “be unable to do full justice
to the more important of her two callings, that of motherhood.” A third was
more ambivalent, holding that “woman has the right to learn everything she
is capable of, insofar as her femininity is not compromised,” demanding equal
pay for equal work, and arguing that girls who could support themselves financially would not have to enter into marriages of convenience or “meal-ticket
143

Helene Lange, Frauenwahlrecht (1899), reprinted in Elke Frederiksen, ed., Die Frauenfrage in
Deutschland 1865–1915 (Stuttgart: Reclam, 1981), pp. 386, 391 (quotations).
144 Helene Lange, “Wissen und sittliche Kultur,” Frau 10 (1902): 199.
145 Baümer, “Die Frauenbewegung und die Zukunft,” p. 524.
146 Lange, Frauenbewegung, pp. 74–75, 76.
147 Gottfried Schmitz, “Das Bürgerliche Gesetzbuch und die Frau,” CF 1 (1902/1903): 314.

108

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

marriages.” But it also stated flatly that “the man is the head of the family, the
wife is . . . the heart of the family. . . . So it should ever remain; that is natural
law and divine order.”148
The journals of the DFHS and the DEF were, particularly in their earlier
years, not significantly less conservative in outlook. Adolf Stoecker, for example, writing in the DEF’s journal in 1904, stated that there was no reason
why women should not study theology or law in order to work in women’s
religious orders, or with women’s trade unions. On the other hand, women’s
“primary mission” would always be in the family and in helping others – for
example, through work in child welfare; daycare; care for the ill, handicapped,
or needy; and so on. Women, he insisted, should “not offer the man false competition” by going beyond work in such helping professions. And “may God
preserve us from the vote for women!”149 Other men were considerably less
broad minded: one claimed in the DFHS journal in 1903, for example, that
“the modern woman rebels against divine, human and natural order” by championing equality rather than seeing to the vitality of the “roots of the German
nation . . . : fear of God, the Christian home, and chaste, good morals.”150 A
few pages later, the journal’s readers were assured that “God’s Word” required
of wives “humble and yet voluntary dependence and subordination within the
bounds set by God.”151
By about 1905, however, the first rumblings of a shift in perspective were
audible at least among conservative Protestant women. In 1895 the DFHS
journal carried an essay arguing that on simple economic grounds “the emancipatory efforts of women are in many respects completely justified,” but it
immediately countered the essay with another that fulminated against the radical women’s movement because their ideas “bear the mark of naturalism on
their brow” and that denounced the “false concept of freedom and equality”
that had given rise to “so-called ‘women’s emancipation.’” The gender order,
it insisted, was “a part of God’s plan for the world . . . which cannot be bent
or broken.”152 A decade later, in contrast, an increasing number of female
authors who published in the journal argued that some degree of “emancipation” was not a threat to but rather the precondition of sexual morality
and hence social order. Thus by 1906 Marie Martin, an influential and more
liberal figure in the DEF, argued that although “the natural and most honorable calling of any girl is to become a mother” and to be “a helpmeet and
148

Anna de Crignis, “Frauenfrage und Mutterschaft,” and Luise Hitze, “Die neuere Frauenbewegung nach ihrer idealen Seite,” both in CF 1 (1902/1903): 293, 295, 362, 396.
149 Adolf Stoecker, “Die Aufgaben der Frau in der Gegenwart,” EFZ 5 (1905): 39, 40, 31.
150 H. v. St., “Wohin wir kommen,” Frauenblätter 12 (1903): 11.
151 “Frauenrecht und Frauenpflicht,” Frauenblätter 12 (1903): 42.
152 R. in S., “Was bedeutet die sogenannte Frauenfrage?” Frauenblätter 4 (1895): 16; “Wie
stellen wir uns zur Emanzipation der Frauen?” Frauenblätter 4 (1895): 27; R. in S., “Zur
Emanzipation der Frauen,” Frauenblätter 4 (1895): 68; “Sind Mann und Weib tatsächlich
gleich?” Frauenblätter 4 (1895): 68, 69.

Religion, Women, and Morality

109

companion to her husband,” actually this meant that women too must have a
Beruf, a calling. If women were forced to simply wait for life to bring them a
husband, they would end up in immoral “meal-ticket marriages” – which were
“in their innermost nature prostitution.” Besides, she suggested, men weren’t
really all that wonderful. They were uninterested in children, because they only
thought about sex; they enjoyed useless and destructive “party conflicts”; and
they had “a tendency to brutal force, to brutal pleasure, to the double standard.” From such people, Martin seemed to suggest, a little more independence
couldn’t hurt.153 As for work depriving children of their mothers, one article of
1910 suggested that serious working women would find ways to spend enough
time with their families. In any case, it was not “we” – the women’s movement –
who drove women into the workforce, but material need; and since they were
working, they might as well be well trained and well paid.154 Such views seem
hardly part of the intellectual world dominant in the same journal only a few
years before. Indeed, in 1912, when the (male) editors of the journal saw fit
to publish in its pages an announcement of the formation of the League for
Combating Women’s Emancipation, the journal received so many angry letters from its readers that in the next issue the editors were obliged to publish
the BDF’s response to the formation of the League – which pointed out that
there were 6.5 million single and 3 million married women in the labor force,
and that therefore it was “completely impossible to limit women’s professional
activity . . . to ‘single women’ in traditionally ‘female professions.’”155
This shift in the views of women in the DFHS undoubtedly reflected, among
other things, the influence of the DEF – which had begun to take on a “feminist
character” (as Katharina Scheven saw it) as early as 1903.156 One article in the
DEF’s journal in 1908, for example, celebrated the growing presence of women
in the legal profession (for example, as legal aid workers) with the observation
that “woman is beginning to conquer a place for herself in all areas of economic
and intellectual life.”157 Conservative Protestant women were clearly drifting
increasingly into confrontation with more traditionalist men in their milieu.
It does not appear that Catholic or Jewish women were – as yet – passing
through a similar transition. What discussion there was of politics and morality
in their organizations was not sufficiently extensive to constitute a renegotiation of the traditional ideal of women’s roles comparable to that occurring in
the Protestant community. Yet the very rapid growth of the KDF and JFB was

153

Marie Martin, “Die doppelte Moral und die Mädchenerziehung,” Frauenblätter 15 (1906):
41, 42.
154 “Was will die Frauenbewegung?” Frauenblätter 19 (1910): 35.
155 “Aufruf,” “Der Aufruf des Deutschen Bundes zur Bekämpfung der Frauenemanzipation,”
and “Erklärung des Bundes deutscher Frauenvereine zur Organisation der Gegner,” both in
Frauenblätter 21 (1912): 71, 70, 77, 78.
156 Scheven, “Die Arbeit der Männer-Sittlichkeitsvereine,” p. 179.
157 “Weibliche Juristen,” EFZ 9 (1908): 77.

110

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

an important signal; and by 1908 the KDF did establish its own morality commission to discuss prostitution, indicating a new sense of independence. It is
surely not a coincidence that in the same year Die christliche Frau published its
first article supporting women’s suffrage.158 The choice of Hedwig Dransfeld
as leader of the KDF in 1912, too, put a woman with a passionate interest in
morality issues at the head of the organization – one who would, eight years
later, make her views on women’s proper political role clear when she was
elected to the German national parliament. And in some instances Catholic
women also suggested that morality fell under women’s purview and not
men’s – as when one remarked in Die christliche Frau in 1905 that “woman
is called by God to be the protector of domestic morality, the better angel of
her husband. . . . The man embodies physical force, woman moral,” or when
Hedwig Dransfeld remarked that women had always been the “decisive force
in the struggle against vice and its consequences.”159
In that sense, in helping to initiate the formation of the DEF and KDF in
particular, men in the Christian morality movements had, so to speak, let the
genie out of the lamp. Their intention had been to counteract the influence of
liberal Protestant women in the IAF and the BDF; by the 1910s, Protestant men
especially found themselves negotiating the details of their own acceptance of
some of the central principles and demands of those same organizations with
the very women they had helped to draw into public debate.
V. Women, Race, Class, and Power
In some respects, then, the agendas of morally conservative men and women
were very similar and converging, at least specifically with respect to their single
most important concern, prostitution. Equally strikingly, however, in other
respects they remained profoundly different. In particular, morally conservative
women seem simply not to have cared much about a whole range of issues that
were of central concern to their male counterparts. What is most striking here,
however, is not what women said about these issues, but what they did not say.
The most remarkable case is that of socialism. Conservative women did
reject Social Democracy; the DEF in particular in fact opposed women’s suffrage largely because its leadership feared that the SPD, with its ties to the
extensive women’s trade union movement, would be more successful than conservative parties in mobilizing female voters. But again, the connection their
male counterparts saw between socialism and immorality was simply not a
significant theme even in the publications of the DEF leadership; and the KDF
158

Baumann, “Religion und Emanzipation,” p. 109; Eilsabeth Gnauck-Kühne, “Christin und
Staatsbürgerin,” CF 7 (1908): 4–8.
159 Cäcilie Movius, “Die Pflicht der Gebildeten zur Fürsorge für jugendliche Verwahrloste,” and
Hedwig Dransfeld, “Schattenseiten der modernen Frauenbewegung,” both in CF 3 (1905):
189, 375.

Religion, Women, and Morality

111

and JFB, much less the IAF and BDF, were even less interested. Women simply
did not often think in party-political or even in constitutional terms.
Conservative women also appear not to have thought a great deal about
military power. They did not reflect much on the military consequences of a
loss of moral backbone among men (perhaps because they didn’t think men had
much to start with). As concern over the declining birthrate rose, women did
discuss the problem in their speeches and journals; but for the most part they
simply refused to panic. Alice Salomon, for example, observed in 1908 that,
fundamentally, the prevailing demographic trend was positive: fewer births,
more children surviving to adulthood, and hence greater reproductive efficiency and “gain in power for the nation, in particular for economic life.”160
Anna Pappritz, too, argued in favor of a more rational “human economy,”
rejecting both the simple-minded pronatalism of conservatives like Bornträger
and the idea that women had to confine themselves to having lots of healthy
babies.161 Even women in the DEF were sometimes surprisingly ambivalent
regarding contraception. One 1913 report to the DEF’s morality commission,
for example, found that birth control “contradicts nature,” was a “serious
moral danger,” and filled the author with “disgust”; but working-class women
clearly desperately needed a way to control their fertility, and “the state would
be better served by the birth of fewer, but healthy, strong children rather than
a mass of sickly ones.” Ultimately, “in such highly personal matters each must
decide according to his best knowledge and good conscience.”162
Conservative women also did not spend as much time discussing race as did
conservative men. The DEF’s morality commission, for example, did address
the question of mixed-race marriage in the colonies in 1912, when this was a
hot topic of public discussion. It held that such marriages were “a personal and
national humiliation and abasement,” that they should be hindered as much
as possible, and that their legal consequences (“e.g. citizenship and inheritance
rights for the colored woman and children”) should be strictly limited.163 Yet
it rejected an outright ban on moral grounds – because it would simply lead to
still more mixed-race children being born out of wedlock. Katharina Scheven
deplored the “spirit of brutal master-morality” that inspired proposals to create
brothels in German Southwest Africa as a way of reducing the number of such
liaisons, and she dismissed as “bordering on madness” the idea of stealing
mixed-race children as a method of discouraging these relations.164 But these
were marginal concerns for these women.
160

Alice Salomon, “Literatur zur Frauenfrage,” Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik
26 (1908): 485.
161 Anna Pappritz, “Höherentwicklung und Menschenökonomie,” Frau 19 (1912): 750–753.
162 L. Wex, “Neu-Malthusianismus,” ADF, DEF, no. V12. For Mueller’s position, see Paula
Mueller, “Begründung zum Verbot des Anbietens etc. der Schutzmittel” and “Kommissionsarbeit: Forderung zur Frage der Schutzmittel,” both undated, ADF, DEF, no. V15.
163 “An den Vorstand des Deutsch-Evang. Frauenbundes,” n.d., ADF, DEF, no. V12.
164 Katharina Scheven, “Sexualethische Begriffe in Südwest,” CBDF 12 (1910): 75.

112

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

Moreover, neither conservative Christian women nor the mainstream moderates indulged in the sort of coyly offhand anti-Semitism that was common
in the speeches and publications of conservative Protestant men. There were
occasional exceptions among conservative Protestant women, and even within
the nonconfessional women’s movement there were some instances at least of
milder forms of social anti-Semitism.165 But explicitly anti-Semitic ideas were
rare even in conservative Protestant women’s discourse.
Finally, women in the morality movements sometimes addressed the topic of
eugenics or “race hygiene” in quite positive terms; but they were not really very
interested. It is telling, for example, that they very often confused hereditarian
eugenics with the prevention of venereal infection. Anna Pappritz, for example,
argued in an essay of 1906 that “those with hereditary diseases (above all
venereal diseases)” should “voluntarily renounce having progeny.”166 Others
pointed out that the single most important source of “racial degeneration”
was clearly sexually transmitted diseases.167 In 1907 Agnes Bluhm, the only
influential female eugenics advocate in Germany in this period, discussed at
a meeting of the Berlin branch of the DZIAF the idea of a legal prohibition
on marriage for people with “certain constitutional, heritable maladies”; but
significantly, what she was actually addressing was the suggestion that men be
required to submit a medical certificate verifying that they were not suffering
from a venereal disease before being granted a marriage license.168
This is not to say that these women did not support eugenics in principle.
Die Frau in particular carried numerous articles by Bluhm. By 1913, the journal even assured readers that the age of liberal universalism was drawing to a
close, because “the natural sciences, genealogy, the history of civilization . . . are
working hand in hand to create a secure foundation for race-hygiene, for
‘eugenics.’” And yet, it also concluded that the time was not yet ripe for legislation, because a firm scientific foundation for policy was still being built.169
And the specific terms in which most women (Bluhm excepted) discussed the
issue make it clear where their primary concern lay. Pappritz, for example,
165

See P. Gruss, “Gedanken zur Sittlichkeitsfrage,” EFZ 3 (1903): 67; Iris Schröder, Arbeiten für
eine bessere Welt: Frauenbewegung und Sozialreform, 1890–1914 (Campus: Frankfurt, 2001),
pp. 206–207; Leonie Wagner, “‘Eine gewisse Verstimmung unter den Frauenrechtlerinnen,’”
Ariadne 45–46 (2004): 9, 10; Baumann, Protestantismus, pp. 84–85; Heidemarie Wawrzyn,
“Als die ‘Mutter der Nation’ Abschied nahmen von den Menschenrechten,” in Nation, Politik, und Geschlecht, ed. Ute Planert (Frankfurt: Campus, 2000), pp. 182–197; Bürgerliche
Frauenbewegung und Antisemitismus, ed. Mechthild Bereswil and Leonie Wagner (Tübingen:
diskord, 1998).
166 Pappritz, “Malthusianismus,” p. 6.
167 Pappritz, Eine Kundgebung, p. 6.
168 “Berliner Zweigverein der I. A. F.,” Abolitionist 4 (1905): 47. On Bluhm, see Johanna Bleker,
“Agnes Bluhm, die Wissenschaftlerin unter den Rassenhygienikern, und die Frauenbewegung,”
Acta Historica Leopoldina 48 (2007): 89–111.
169 Agnes Bluhm, “Der Geburtenrückgang in Deutschland,” Frau 20 (1912/1913): 233; Gertraud
Haase-Bessell, “Rassenbiologie,” Frau 20 (1912/1913): 489, 544.

Religion, Women, and Morality

113

explicitly pointed out in 1913 that “raising a healthy, numerous, mentally and
morally fit progeny can only be achieved through the work of intellectually and
morally mature, physically healthy mothers conscious of their responsibility”;
and creating the latter was “the foremost goal of the women’s movement.”170
And Gertrud Bäumer, in a highly skeptical article on race hygiene in Die Frau
in 1910, asserted that women understood the importance of race hygiene, but
that it was after all just about bodies, not about the spirit – and therefore “it can
in and of itself never be the ultimate goal of culture – because human society is
after all something different from a stud-farm or a chicken-ranch.”171
In short, what was primary for these women was the life of the spirit and the
job of protecting women’s health from men’s immorality. They were simply
not terribly interested in other issues – issues that were of intense concern to
many more conservative men.
This profound gendered division within the morality movements was all the
more unsettling because these movements, as a whole, faced intense hostility
and opposition from many of their compatriots. The combination of trends was
not auspicious: in the face of what they saw as the rising challenge from secular
and scientific worldviews, socialism, the culture of the big city, and the media
revolution, the morality movements after 1900 were increasingly fragmented
along confessional and gender lines, effectively falling victim to the same proliferation of “isms” that they deplored in their culture more broadly. And yet,
it was also obviously true that growing numbers of Germans were engaging
directly and passionately with the problem of sex and morality. The rather odd
outcome was that the morality campaigners’ perceptions of their society and
culture were increasingly schizophrenic. Although they were convinced that
their society was descending into an ever more frightful moral crisis, they were
also convinced that they were triumphantly on the march against that crisis.
Chapter 5 turns to the emergence of this oddly bifurcated perception.

170
171

Anna Pappritz, “Zur Frage des Geburtenrückgangs,” Frauenbewegung 19 (1913): 172.
Gertrud Bäumer, “Sentimentale Wissenschaft,” Frau 17 (1910): 705–706.

5
Isolation and Impact

I. Jeremiah in Germany: Isolation, Ridicule, and Confusion
A large proportion of liberal and progressive public opinion in Germany
regarded the morality campaigners as ignorant, backward, reactionary
troglodytes on a mission to crush everything creative and exciting out of
German public life. Liberal newspapers variously saw them as representatives of “the high-church and extreme reactionary party” on “an offensive
against modern culture”; denounced their “spirit of intolerance and shortsightedness,” their “narrow-minded zealotry,” and their “unspeakably silly
positions”; accused them of wanting to “nail the genius of art to the cross
of prudery”; or deplored the “inquisitorial zeal of their medieval moral
teachings.”1 Social Democrats were even more vehement. In 1899 the flagship
Social Democratic women’s journal, Die Gleichheit, characterized the morality campaigners’ attempts to introduce more stringent censorship as being
motivated by the “blind rage and hate of reactionaries for the free development of intellectual life.”2 The same journal saw in the efforts of BieberBöhm and Christian antiprostitution campaigners mere “childish naiveté” and
“moral dilettantism.”3 And some critics even discerned sexual rather than
political motivations behind the morality campaign. The humorous journal
1

Ludwig Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre der Sittlichkeitsbewegung: Bilder aus der Geschichte des
Westdeutschen Sittlichkeitsvereins und der Allgemeinen deutschen Sittlichkeits-Konferenz (Duisburg: WSV, 1910), p. 36; “Intolerante Sittlichkeitsapostel,” Berliner Zeitung 7 (October 1904);
“Die Apostel der Sittlichkeit,” Leipziger Neueste Nachrichten (14 October 1904); Welt am
Montag (4 July 1904), all reproduced in Ein kulturgeschichtliches Denkmal für die deutsche
Presse, ed. Friedrich Bohn (Berlin: AKDS/A. Dartsch, 1905), pp. 63, 69, 37.
2 “Um Freiheit und Kultur,” Die Gleichheit: Zeitschrift für die Interessen der Arbeiterinnen (hereinafter Gleichheit) 10 (1900): 50.
3 “Die neue ‘lex Heinze,’” Gleichheit 7 (1897): 17; “Sittliches und Unsittliches im Reichstag,”
Gleichheit 9 (1899): 50.

114

Isolation and Impact

115

Simplizissimus, itself a special target of conservative Christian attacks, wrote
in 1911 that the morality movement was “a kind of spiritual venereal disease. . . . The struggle against the sexual is in this case one last opportunity for
sexual experience.”4
The morality movements also faced intense criticism from those whose
economic interests it threatened. This was particularly true of the prostitution industry. One representative of Berlin’s Property Owners’ Association
(Grundbesitzerverein), for example, told the annual conference of the national
Home and Property Owners’ Association in 1905 that Kasernierung “must be
demanded in the name of the well-being of the community, the family, the
church and the schools” as well as “of public health.”5 When one small city
in central Germany decided to abolish its brothels, a local craftsman warned
that many producers and retailers depended on the sex industry to bring cash
and customers to the town’s businesses, and in one small Saxon city this argument was made even in the city council.6 Members of the Berlin City Mission’s
“Midnight Mission” (Mitternachtmission), who patrolled streets, cafés, bars,
and public amusements in order to distribute pamphlets and shame young
men out of hiring prostitutes, complained of “insults in the street,” “scorn and
mockery,” and “curses and abuse” from both prostitutes and their clients; their
counterparts in Dresden reported “physical assaults” and accusations that it
was “immoral” to “deprive of their livelihoods honorable people and the poor
girls who sacrifice themselves for the city.”7
Other industries sometimes defended themselves as well. The trade journal Der Kinematograph (The Cinema) argued shortly before the war, for
example, that the efforts of some schools in Berlin to prevent their pupils
from going to the movies were just a “new example of bureaucratic class
justice.”8 The morality campaigners themselves, of course, were convinced that
those who objected to censorship were merely “a certain sector of the public
who have a business interest in distributing low, obscene works in print and
pictures.”9
Municipal patriotism, too, was sometimes offended by the antiurban tirades
of the morality campaigners. Thus the Berliner Börsenzeitung (Berlin Financial
Times) reported of the BMBU in 1889 that “the way Berlin is portrayed and
4

“Eine Simplizissimus-Entdeckung,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 43.
“‘Öffentliche Häuser zum Wohle der Kirche und Schule’?!” NG 1 (1905): 203.
6 Agnes von Zahn-Harnack, Die Frauenbewegung: Geschichte, Probleme, Ziele (Berlin: Deutsche
Buch-Gemeinschaft, 1928), pp. 120–121; Katharina Scheven, “Zur Heidelbreger Bordellangelegenheit,” CBDF 5 (1903): 85.
7 See Joachim Schlör, Nachts in der grossen Stadt: Paris, Berlin, London 1840–1930 (Munich:
Artemis & Winkler, 1991), pp. 220, 221, 223; “Dresdener Nachtmission,” KB 26 (1912):
49–53; Adolf Müller, Dresdner Nachtmission (Berlin: AKDS, 1912), p. 9.
8 Karl Brunner, Der Kinematograph von heute–Eine Volksgefahr (Berlin: Vaterländischer
Schriftenverband, 1913), p. 18.
9 Margaret Danneel, “Notschrei einer deutschen Frau,” Hochwacht 1 (1910): 7.
5

116

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

described in this association borders on slander.”10 Similarly, one speaker at the
AKDS meeting of 1901 in Leipzig protested that “my Leipzig is no Sodom!”11
And a liberal newspaper in Munich complained shortly after the founding of
the interconfessional men’s morality association there that the way the city
had been characterized in speeches at its first annual conference was “severely
damaging to the good name” of the city.12
The resistance faced by female morality campaigners in nonconfessional
women’s organizations differed little from that faced by Christian men and
women. Feminist moral reformers were lampooned as “decency aunties” or
“abstinence aunties” and “fools” who indulged in “puritanical piety.”13 One
medical man wrote in 1910 that feminist activists in this field were simply hysterics or “masturbators” who were “aggressive in making sexual accusations
and creating all sorts of scandal and upset” because they were “morally ruined
by frequent masturbation.”14
Such scurrilous denunciations were no doubt hurtful. Even more disturbing
to the morality campaigners, however, was simply the widespread indifference
of the German public. Over and over again the publications and speeches of
the morality campaigners reported on instances in which their contemporaries
clearly regarded as self-evident propositions that they saw as profoundly
immoral. Whereas an ideal of sexual self-control was central to the identity
of conservative Christian middle-class men in the morality movements, a
large number of middle-class and working-class men subscribed to a very
different conception of masculinity. They accepted that their bodies demanded
sexual satisfaction and assumed that any rational system of morality would
take this irreducible need into account. A ruling of Berlin’s commercial court
(Kaufmannsgericht) argued in 1913 that “the natural satisfaction of unmarried
people’s sexual drives therefore cannot be seen as immoral in and of itself;
that’s true for people both of the female and of the male sex.”15 In the same
year a Berlin newsletter for civil servants remarked that there was no other way
for the lower bureaucrat to preserve his social position than contraception;
and the journal of the liberal trade unions held that birth control was “in
and of itself not an immoral act – rather it is the result of a deep sense of
responsibility toward one’s children.”16
10

“Aus dem Männerverein,” KB 3 (1889): 29, 35; see also Schlör, Nachts, pp. 195–196.
Quoted in Liebster, “Die Konferenz der Sittlichkeitsvereine in Leipzig vom 27. bis 29. Oktober
1901,” Christliche Welt 6 (1902): 232.
12 “Münchener Männerverein zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Unsittlichkeit,” Münchner
Neueste Nachrichten 315 (8 July 1906).
13 Anna Pappritz, “Unter dem Deckmantel der Wissenschaft,” Abolitionist 5 (1906): 40; C.
Pelman, “Ueber die Stellung des Staates zur Prostitution,” Centralblatt für allgemeine Gesundheitspflege 4 (1887): 188–189.
14 “Sexuelle Verdächtigungen durch Onanistinnen,” AKAK 39 (1910): 183.
15 See “Die Sexualethik des Berliner Kaufmannsgerichts,” Volkswart 6 (1913): 3.
16 “Die Behandlung der Frage des Geburtenrückganges in gewissen ‘neutralen’ Fachblättern,”
Volkswart 6 (1913): 27–28.
11

Isolation and Impact

117

What fragmentary evidence there is regarding Germans’ actual sexual practices, moreover, suggests that most Germans inhabited a moral universe that
overlapped very little with that of the Christian morality campaigners. Prostitution is a particularly striking case: despite decades of agitation, it appears
that relatively few working-class people saw it as a moral problem. In 1903,
for example, one doctor in Vienna reported with some bemusement that in his
experience, the working-class prostitute didn’t see prostitution as disgraceful
and “doesn’t understand why people want to prevent her from deciding of
her own free will what she does with her body.” Nor, he observed, did they
suffer any meaningful consequences within their social milieu, “in which sexual honor appears only as an imaginary quantity.”17 As for the clients who
paid for sex, that was widely regarded, apparently in all classes, as a regrettable necessity and ubiquitous fact of life. The journal of the Protestant men’s
morality movement concluded already in 1888 that “in the preponderant part
of the male population of all classes, the view prevails that one can’t really hold
premarital sexual intercourse against a young adult man.”18 That attitude does
not appear to have changed much in succeeding decades. Even in the Bavarian
parliament, for example, one deputy’s remark in 1902 that in the matter of
prostitution “probably all of us men can say together ‘mea culpa’” elicited
“loud amusement.”19
Prostitution was not a unique case. The prominent criminal psychiatrist Paul
Näcke reported in 1913, for example, that about half of all firstborn children
were conceived out of wedlock.20 Both the panic of the morality campaigners
over the growing prevalence of contraception and the falling birthrate suggest
that the idea that sex should serve only the purpose of conception did not occur
to many men – who may well have believed, as one price list mailed out by
a condom manufacturer put it in 1910, that “no rationally thinking person
can deny that the prevention of conception is in countless cases an outright
necessity.”21 The leading sexologist Max Marcuse found in an informal survey
of 100 female patients in 1913 that some two-thirds practiced some form
of contraception, with coitus interruptus “far and away the most common
method.”22 Marcuse also found that for the most part “the women see the fact
of abortion as something self-evident, and see no reason to deny it,” because
17

Anton Baumgarten, “Die Beziehungen der Prostitution zum Verbrechen,” AKAK 11 (1903): 6.
“Jeder wahre Freund des Vaterlandes–ein Freund unserer Bestrebungen,” KB 2 (1888): 27.
19 Quoted in Sybille Krafft, Zucht und Unzucht: Prostitution und Sittenpolizei im München der
Jahrhundertwende (Munich: Hugendubel, 1996), p. 129.
20 Paul Näcke, “Die Grösse des ausserehelichen Geschlechtsverkehrs,” AKAK 55 (1913): 360. On
Näcke, see Erich Friedländer, “Paul Naecke,” in Deutsche Irrenärzte: Einzelbilder ihres Lebens
und Wirkens, ed. Theodor Kirchhoff (Berlin: Julius Springer, 1924), pp. 266–269.
21 Quoted in Hermann Roeren, “Neomalthusianismus und seine Bekämpfung,” Volkswart 4
(1911): 146–147.
22 Max Marcuse, “Zur Frage der Verbreitung und Methodik der willkürlichen Geburtsbeschränkung in Berliner Proletarierkreisen,” SP 9 (1913): 778. On Marcuse, see Thomas
Mayer, “Der Sexologe Max Marcuse (1877–1963): Seine Beiträge zur Sexualwissenschaft,”
PhD dissertation, Berlin, 1986.
18

118

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

they “do not perceive it in the least to be something immoral.”23 In 1915 one
jurist remarked that whereas twenty-five years earlier oral sex “had not yet
attacked the healthy body of the nation, today it is widespread in all social
circles.”24 In 1908 the Allgemeine Rundschau, a journal close to the Catholic
morality movement in Munich, reported that one of the lawyers in a scandal
trial involving homosexual acts by a prominent member of the Imperial court
had remarked, “God yes, it’s sad and certainly highly reprehensible, but isn’t
it actually quite common? Is the youth of any man who has passed through a
cadet-school, a boarding school or something similar free of it?”25 As for the
campaign against immoral texts and images, again, the period around the turn
of the century saw an enormous boom in popular publishing and, after 1900,
in the film industry. That boom was built on popular tastes that were simply
not as restrictive as those of conservative Christians. As the secretary of the
BMBU put it in his annual report of 1898, the simple fact was that “there is a
general predilection for indecency in word and image.”26
It is hardly surprising, then, that the morality movements failed to mobilize
masses of supporters. The morality movements – of all ideological varieties –
probably had no more than 50,000 members by 1913. In contrast, by one
estimate in 1890, 150,000 men paid for sex each year in Berlin alone, and
in one instance in 1915, 3,000 men visited Hamburg’s brothels in one night
alone.27
In fact, for much of their history, the morality associations were a rather
sleepy affair. In 1898, for example, the Korrespondenzblatt’s report on the
annual conference of the BMBU verged on the pathetic. The meeting was “only
weakly attended”; membership had fallen slightly from the year before; the
organization was operating in the red and faced “serious financial problems”;
the authorities at the municipal women’s hospital were not cooperating with
the volunteer sent to them by the Berlin City Mission; and the police department
was uncooperative, for example, in its handling of young prostitutes or film
censorship. The only good news was that the organization had secured a subsidy
of 900 marks annually from the Ministry of Culture.28 In 1902 only 370 men
and women attended the AKDS’s annual conference.29 Other organizations
23

Marcuse, “Zur Frage,” p. 775; Max Marcuse, “Die Fruchtabtriebung und das Sittlichkeitsempfinden des Volkes,” AKAK 55 (1913): 372.
24 Horch, “Sexualität und Ehescheidung,” Archiv für Sexualforschung 1 (1915): 49.
25 [Armin Kausen], “Fürst Eulenbug moralisch gerichtet,” Allgemeine Rundschau 5 (1908): 285.
26 “Die Generalversammlung des Berliner Männerbundes zur Bekämpfung der Unsittlichkeit,”
KB 12 (1898): 27.
27 “Flugblatt: Der Kampf gegen die Unsittlichkeit,” ADW, BP I, 240; “Tagesgeschichte,” Mitteilungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten (hereinafter
MDGBG) 13 (1915): 17.
28 “Die Generalversammlung,” pp. 26, 27.
29 “Die XIV Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine in Heidelberg,” KB 16
(1902): 87.

Isolation and Impact

119

faced similar problems. In 1910, the DZIAF reported that representatives of
only half of its chapters attended its annual conference in Dresden; that in
particular few men were present; that a well-advertised public meeting on the
second day of the conference was very poorly attended; and that only one of
the 700 invited lawyers and doctors in the city bothered to attend.30 As the
Korrespondenzblatt put it in 1889, “we are in a position similar to that of
Jeremiah.”31
Still more unsettling, however, was the fact that at times the morality
campaigners themselves had difficulty agreeing what was immoral and what
was not. In a discussion at the 1893 conference of the AKDS, for example,
Ludwig Weber used the prominent playwright Hermann Sudermann’s play
Heimat as an example of an indecent theater piece but was contradicted by
another attendee, who suggested that the same playwright’s Sodom’s End was
a much better example. A third speaker then chimed in with the opinion that
Sodom’s End was not indecent either. A fourth discussant added that some people took offence at Richard Wagner’s opera Lohengrin, but that this “surely
goes too far” – to which there was, finally, general assent.32 Even some of the
most bitterly conservative morality campaigners hinted that they, too, thought
that some of their followers might be motivated by suppressed lust, rather
than genuine moral principle. An article of 1902 in the journal of the KDF,
for example, warned “that frequently there lurks beneath prudery a dangerous, perhaps even corrupted imagination, which sees everything as risqué” and
takes offense even “where impartial souls see nothing dirty.”33 Anna Pappritz
warned in 1914 against people “for whom the ‘nude’ is synonymous with ‘indecent,’ a view that can only arise from pathological, hidden lasciviousness.”34
In 1906 Friedrich Bohn of the AKDS denounced the “pathological prudishness” of those who had chopped the offending bits off a public statue of a
naked boy in Kassel. Similar events in Elberfeld five years earlier had led the
Korrespondenzblatt to condemn “nocturnal moral lynch-justice.”35
A decision of the German supreme court (Reichsgericht) in 1899 held that
the question of the decency or indecency of any given publication had to be
decided on the basis of the “normal, shared feeling of modesty and morality in sexual matters.” The morality campaigners often appealed to the same
30

“Die 3. Generalversammlung des Deutschen Zweiges der I. A. Föderation,” Abolitionist
9 (1910): 45, 48.
31 “J. N. J.,” KB 3 (1889): 1.
32 AKDS, Verhandlungen der Allgemeinen Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine am 6. und
7. September 1893 zu Frankfurt a.O. (Berlin: AKDS, 1894), pp. 51–52.
33 Johannes Mumbauer, “Der Anteil der Frau am Kampfe gegen die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit,”
CF 1 (1902): 63.
34 Anna Pappritz, “Das Gesetzentwurf gegen den Scmutz in Wort und Bild,” Abolitionist 13
(1914): 58.
35 Friedrich Bohn, “Aus Kassel,” KB 20 (1906): 71; A. H., “Vom Elberfelder Kunstkrieg,” KB 15
(1901): 99.

120

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

standard. But the court went on to admit that it was difficult to determine what
the “average” or “common” or “normal degree of modesty and morality” was,
and furthermore that such ideas or feelings were “in no people, and in no age,
absolutely unchanging.”36 In fact there simply was no universal sense of what
was or was not moral and decent. As the prominent painter Hans Thoma put
it in a speech to the parliament of Baden in 1907, “what popular sentiment is,
and who has it, is admittedly difficult to say.”37
II. Failures: Legislation, Administration, and Public Opinion
Given the relative isolation (and occasional confusion) of the morality campaigners, it is not surprising that on many issues they failed rather abjectly to
reshape either the legal environment or public opinion. This was nowhere more
true than in the case of prostitution. Despite a generation of agitation against
the system of regulation, by 1910 its critics – whether they favored criminalization or abolition – seemed no closer to their goal than they had been in
1880. In fact the police and medical experts often seemed to be moving in the
opposite direction. Increasingly they favored the imposition of the barracks
system – which was de facto a step in the direction of the resurrection of the
public brothel. By 1902 the AKDS worried that regulation, long typical only
of larger cities, appeared to be becoming more appealing to municipal administrations in smaller towns as well.38 In 1905 one Prussian minister openly
advocated Kasernierung in the Prussian parliament; in 1906 the annual conference of the AKDS passed a resolution deploring the “growing inclination” of
municipal governments in favor of the barracks system; by 1909 Pastor Ellger
feared that Kasernierung was more and more favored by “public opinion” as
well.39
Another particularly painful example is that of child sexual abuse. Everyone
involved in the morality campaign regarded men’s sexual predation among
minors as a particularly egregious sign of the moral decrepitude of their society,
and they supported an intensification of policing in this area. In fact this crime
was policed with growing intensity, and in that sense the morality movement
may have had an influence on policy. After 1900, however, the rising number
of prosecutions of men for having sex with girls also sparked a backlash and
a growing demand among jurists and doctors that the law be modified so
36

Entscheidungen des Reichsgerichts in Strafsachen, vol. 32 (Leipzig: Veit, 1900), pp. 420–421.
Thoma, quoted in Johannes Guttzeit, Schamgefühl und Sittlichkeit, besonders in
geschlechtlicher Hinsicht (Dresden: Sturm, 1908), p. 213.
38 “Innere Mission und Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” KB 16 (1902): 10. See, e.g., “Die Aufhebung
der Bordelle in Oldenburg,” KB 16 (1902): 11; “Gesuch des Vorstandes des Heidelberger
Vereins für die Hebung der öffentlichen Sittlichkeit, die sittlichen Zustände in Heidelberg betr.,”
KB 16 (1902): 70.
39 Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, pp. 140, 145; Ellger, Frauenbewegung und Sittlichkeitsbewegung
(Hamburg: Rauhes Haus, 1909), p. 3.
37

Isolation and Impact

121

that only men who victimized “innocent” children could be prosecuted. Max
Marcuse is a striking example; in his view, the law should protect only truly
“pure, uncorrupted children,” and not “regular whores” who happened to
be minors.40 Girls and their parents, some argued, were taking advantage
of the law to blackmail men; others held that “mendacity is a professional
characteristic” among prostitutes (including minors), who should therefore be
barred from testifying in the courts; still others believed that false accusations
of sex crimes were being lodged by hysterical women and girls corrupted
by masturbation.41 In some instances, such ideas influenced the courts. In
a particularly egregious case of group abuse of minors in Cologne in 1901,
which eventually involved some sixty men, the court decided that the two
girls in question displayed “extraordinary depravity,” which it counted as a
mitigating circumstance in sentencing.42
It is hardly surprising, in this atmosphere, that the morality movement found
the heated debates over the reform of the Criminal Code in the 1890s – the
lex Heinze – extraordinarily frustrating. The course and outcome of the debate
revealed how limited the appeal of the morality campaigners’ agenda was.
The initial bill pursued two aims. First, it introduced the crime of pimping,
under a new §181a of the Criminal Code and attempted to protect landlords
from prosecution for procuring by introducing a new subparagraph in §180 to
the effect that renting to prostitutes “is not punishable if it occurs in conformity
with police regulations issued to this effect.” Second, it sought to expand the
policing of public indecency under §184. The existing law punished anyone
who “offers for sale, sells, or distributes indecent texts, pictures, or depictions
in places accessible to the public.” The proposed revision added
anyone who produces them for distribution, or possesses them for the purpose of
distribution, or advertises or offers them, or anyone who uses advertising in print
to seek indecent connection, or who displays or posts in public streets or plazas
pictures or portrayals that, without being indecent, are suited to give offense by
grossly insulting the sense of modesty and morality.43

The morality campaigners initially had considerable success in revising this
legislation in committee. They regarded the proposed revision of §180 as an
attempt to introduce “localization” or the barracks system, and it was struck
40

Max Marcuse, “Männer als Opfer von Kindern,” AKAK 56 (1913/1914): 188.
See, e.g., E. Oppermann, “Jugendliche Verkommenheit,” Kinderfehler 2 (1897): 122–123;
“Der Wert von Kinderaussagen,” SP 9 (1913): 641; [Eugen] Martin, “Zum Process Sternberg,”
AKAK 6 (1901): 186, 187, 184–185; “Sexuelle Verdächtigungen durch Onanistinnen,” AKAK
39 (1910): 183.
42 “Traurige Sittenbilder,” “Sogenannte Sternberg-Prozesse,” “Sternberg-Prozesse,” and “Ein
überraschendes Urteil,” all in KB 15 (1901): 38–39, 63, 71–72.
43 “Gesetz über Abänderung von Bestimmungen des Strafgesetzbuches,” in Stenographische
Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Reichstages (hereinafter SBVR), vol. 130 (Berlin: Sittenfeld, 1893), no. 11, p. 22; Das Strafgesetzbuch für das Deutsche Reich (Berlin: Grosser,
1876), p. 49.
41

122

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

from the bill. Instead the committee decided that landlords should not be punished for procuring as long as the rental agreement “does not involve any
exploitation of the immoral earnings of the renter” – that is, as long as prostitutes were not charged special, exorbitant rents.44 The committee also raised
the age of consent from sixteen to eighteen; added a new paragraph punishing
employers for using threats or promises “in connection with the employment
relationship” to persuade their female workers to perform or tolerate indecent acts; and added a new subparagraph to §184 (on public indecency) that
punished the public display or advertisement of “objects intended for indecent
use” – that is, primarily, contraceptives. An attempt to introduce stricter theater
censorship was narrowly defeated; but a new paragraph was added punishing
those who had sex while aware that they were infected with a venereal disease.45
After this initial success, however, the morality campaigners’ champions in
the legislature hit a wall of opposition. Over the next eight years, there was a
stubborn, spluttering, and increasingly bitter three-way struggle between the
representatives of the government (who championed, effectively, the interests of
the police and employers), the parliamentary friends of the morality movement,
and the opponents of more restrictive censorship legislation. Debates on the
1892 bill and a new version submitted by the Center Party in 1897 were
not concluded before the end of the respective legislative sessions. In a bitter
culminating battle in 1900, the minority opposed to the bill were able, by
repeatedly absenting themselves so that there was no quorum, to force the
majority to draft a compromise bill that retreated from key clauses of the
original. This bill was then, at last, adopted. In the end, as one history of
the Center Party concluded in 1929, “one could not overlook the fact that
this result represented a severe defeat for the Christian-thinking parties and for
Christian morality.”46
The morality campaigner’s drive to reshape the Criminal Code was frustrated by three problems. The first was that most parliamentarians were completely deaf to all arguments against the regulation of prostitution. In fact even
Catholic representatives of the Center Party who supported the bill were not in
favor of eliminating it (although they did oppose Kasernierung).47 The idea of
striking §361.6 – thereby criminalizing all prostitution – did not even get out of
committee until 1900, when it was defeated by 237 votes to 48.48 For Protestant morality campaigners, this was a devastating defeat; as Ludwig Weber told
44

“Gesetz über Abänderung,” p. 24 (quotation); “Bericht der VIII. Kommission über den derselben zur Vorberathung zugewiesenen Gesetzentwurf über Abänderung von Bestimmungen des
Strafgesetzbuches,” in SBVR, vol. 131, pp. 931, 933–934, 955.
45 “Bericht der VIII. Kommission,” pp. 938, 939, 941, 942.
46 Karl Bachem, Vorgeschichte, Geschichte und Politik der deutschen Zentrumspartei (Cologne:
Bachem, 1929), p. 77.
47 See, e.g., SBVR, vol. 127, p. 135 (Gröber).
48 “Bericht der IX. Kommission über den von den Abgeordneten Prinz von Arenberg . . . eingebrachten Entwurf eines Gesetzes, betreffend Aenderung und Ergänzung des Strafgesetzbuches,”
SBVR, vol. 164, pp. 1765–1766; “Bericht der XI. Kommission über den Entwurf eines Gesetzes,

Isolation and Impact

123

the AKDS conference in 1893, “if we lose on this, we’ve lost completely.”49
And outright decriminalization (“abolitionism”) had even less support.
The second problem was that many influential participants in the debate
did not share the morality campaigners’ understanding of what was or was
not immoral – and neither did much of the public. Government representatives, for example, objected to the employer paragraph on the grounds that if
men were punished for “every impure touch” of a female worker or servant,
“very undesirable consequences for marital harmony and for the authority of
fathers over children would eventuate in many families.”50 The assumption
here seems to have been that men would be men, and their authority must not
be compromised by their moral laxity. One parliamentary deputy remarked in
the debate on the law that it was simply part of the “divine order of the world”
that a high degree of civilization brought with it a flourishing sex trade.51 In
committee hearings in 1899, some members argued that landlords or parents
who allowed affianced couples to have sex under their roof should not be
prosecuted for procuring; it would be “unjust and unfair,” as one put it, “if
the law were to treat as ‘indecent’ things that are in wide social circles not
regarded as indecent.”52 And hilarity was so frequent during the debates over
the law that in 1904 Anna Pappritz would recall the “sorry spectacle . . . of the
elected representatives of the people treating so serious a matter as the morality
question . . . as if it were a risqué farce.”53
Third, it was very difficult to reduce moral sensibilities to a clear legal standard. The courts had settled on a reasonably clear definition of what constituted
“indecent” texts or images: those that portrayed or described sexual acts. Once
lawmakers began to consider what might or might not “offend against the sense
of shame and morality,” they entered into a definitional jungle through which
they simply failed to cut a path. The parliamentary committee first settled
on criminalizing display of materials that “are suited because of their lewdness or lasciviousness grossly to offend the sense of modesty or decency”;
a second revision favored punishing the display of materials that “without
being indecent, are suited due to gross indelicacy grossly to offend the sense of
decency or modesty.”54 Opponents denounced such wording as “too vague,
too elastic,” or as “blank-check definitions.” They pointed out that urban and
rural people often had different standards regarding public decency; that moral
standards were different, too, in different social groups even within a given

betreffend Aenderung und Ergänzung des Strafgesetzbuches,” SBVR, vol. 174, no. 312, p. 2108;
SBVR, vol. 171, p. 5584.
49 AKDS, Verhandlungen der Allgemeinen Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine am 6. und
7. Oktober 1893 zu Frankfurt a. O. (Berlin: AKDS, 1894), p. 46.
50 “Bericht der VIII. Kommission,” pp. 938, 939.
51 SBVR, vol. 127, p. 355.
52 “Bericht der XI. Kommission,” pp. 2089, 2091, 2092, 2094, 2099, 2100, 2104, 2105.
53 Die deutschen Frauen und die Hamburger Bordelle (Pössneck: Schneider, 1904), p. 19.
54 “Bericht der VIII. Kommission,” pp. 939, 940, 941, 942.

124

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

community; that judges’ views varied according to their background; and that
in any case standards of decency actually changed quite rapidly even within
particular social milieus. As one parliamentarian put it, then, “we lack a universally valid norm that defines the sense of modesty.” Another observed bluntly
that what was offensive in word or image was simply “damned difficult to
define.”55
The compromise bill that was eventually passed criminalized pimping; raised
penalties for some morality crimes; and punished the production of indecent
materials, the public display or advertising of “objects intended for indecent
use,” and public advertising for indecent intercourse. It also made it illegal to
sell indecent materials or even materials that merely “grossly insult the sense
of modesty” specifically to those under age sixteen. But it did not raise the age
of consent, introduce stricter standards for the theater, punish knowing transmission of venereal diseases, permit intervention against the display of merely
“shameful” materials or their sale to adults, or criminalize sexual harassment
by employers – or, of course, eliminate the regulation of prostitution.56 Not
all the morality movements, of course, supported all these measures. But most
were bitterly disappointed by one or another aspect of the new law.
What is more, the debate had been followed closely by the educated public,
and a number of important arts associations – including the Royal Academy
of the Arts in Berlin – had worked to mobilize public opinion against the bill.
Ultimately the affair led to the formation of an anticensorship alliance of artists,
writers, art professors, and various prominent figures in German cultural life –
the Goethe Association for the Protection of the Freedom of Art and Science.57
Although not happy with the legislative outcome, participants were relieved
that the damage had been contained. A celebratory meeting held in Berlin on
the day of the compromise bill’s passage drew an audience of 6,000, who were
told that a heroic minority in parliament had defeated the “domineering clerics
of both confessions.”58
The extent of the morality campaigners’ failure to win the public relations
struggle outside parliament was made clear a decade later in the debate over
the reform of the Criminal Code as a whole between 1909 and 1913. The
55

“Frankfurt, 21. März,” Frankfurter Zeitung (21 March 1898), in GSAPKB, Rep. 84a,
no. 57917, fol. 69; Excerpt, “Generalbericht der Vorstandsbeamten des Oberlandsgerichts
Königsberg für die Jahre 1898.1899.1900.1901,” GSAPKB, Rep. 84a, no. 9098, fol. 62; SBVR,
vol. 165, p. 1416; SBVR, vol. 127, pp. 149, 356; SBVR, vol. 165, pp. 1416, 1414, 1419; SBVR,
vol. 169, p. 3927; SBVR, vol. 127, pp. 138, 139, 149; SBVR, vol. 165, p. 1416; SBVR, vol.
169, p. 3752; “Bericht der XI. Kommission,” p. 2105.
56 Reichsgestzblatt 23 (30 June 1900): 301–303.
57 See Wolfgang Hütt, ed., Hintergrund: Mit den Unzüchtigkeits- und Gotteslästerungsparagraphen gegen Kunst und Künstler, 1900–1933 (Berlin: Henschel, 1990), pp. 20–25, 113,
92–97; Walter T. Rix, ed., Hermann Sudermann: Werk und Wirkung (Königshausen: Neumann, 1980), pp. 19–22.
58 “Nach der ‘Hunnenschlacht,’” KB 14 (1900): 50–51.

Isolation and Impact

125

preliminary draft of the new Criminal Code published in 1909 made virtually
no improvements, from the morality campaigners’ point of view, on the lex
Heinze. Section 175, which criminalized sex between men, was to be extended
to homosexual acts between women as well; parents were added to the list
of those punished for committing indecent acts with those in their care (§173
penalized only incestuous sexual intercourse); and new provisions were introduced that made it easier to prosecute “white slavers.” Otherwise, the bill
virtually ignored the agenda of the morality campaigners.59
The morality campaigners were completely taken aback. Paula Mueller
wrote in the DEF journal that the retention of regulated prostitution in the
bill was, “after everything that has been said and written in Germany in the
past decade, scarcely to be believed.” Friedrich Bohn of the AKDS, too, found
the obtuseness of the legislature “completely incomprehensible.”60 Anna Pappritz concluded that the draft was “a great disappointment for us” and an
expression of “unconscious male sexual egotism”; indeed she feared that “our
25 years of work has been for nothing!”61 And the further course of legislation
brought few improvements. Liberal jurists vehemently attacked the bill as out
of touch with modern legal thought, producing their own “counter-draft” in
1911;62 but the draft finally submitted to parliament in 1913 was little changed.
The whole project was abandoned with the outbreak of the war; but as of 1913,
it appeared likely that the new Criminal Code, whenever it might be passed,
would largely ignore the agenda of the morality campaigners.63
Whereas the legislative process was particularly important in revealing to
the morality campaigners the extent of their isolation, numerous judicial and
administrative decisions during the decade before World War I also reinforced
this message. In the last years before the outbreak of the war, for example, it
became clear that the military hierarchy regarded prostitution as a normal and
unavoidable part of life in the armed forces and was interested only in trying to
prevent venereal infection. From about 1905 onward, a number of army corps
set up dispensing machines for prophylactics in barracks – a step the AKDS
regarded as an “outright invitation to debauchery,” and Katharina Scheven
59

Vorentwurf zu einem Deutschen Strafgesetzbuch (Berlin: Guttentag, 1909), pp. 48–51; “Zur
Sittlichkeitsfrage,” Frauenbewegung 14 (1908): 12; Anna Pappritz, “Der Kampf gegen die
Reglementierung der Prostitution,” Frauenbewegung 17 (1911): 77–78; Anna Pappritz,
“Die Generealversammlung der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” Abolitionist 8 (1909): 34; Anna Pappritz, “Ergebnisse der abolitionistischen
Bestrebungen im In- und Auslande,” CBDF 12 (1910): 187.
60 Paula Mueller, “Ernste Pflichten,” EFZ 11 (1910): 1; Friedrich Bohn, Unsere Forderungen zum
Vorentwurf des neuen Strafgesetzbuches (Berlin: AKDS, 1910), pp. 7, 9, 10.
61 Anna Pappritz, “Der Vorentwurf zu einem deutschen Strafgesetzbuch,” Frau 17 (1910): 263;
Anna Pappritz, “Der Kampf,” p. 78.
62 W. Kahl et al., Gegenentwurf zum Vorentwurf eines deutschen Strafgesetzbuches (Berlin:
Guttentag, 1911).
63 Entwurf zu einem Deutschen Strafgesetzbuch nach den Beschlüssen der Strafrechtskommission
(Berlin: n.p., 1913), GSAPKB, Rep. 84a, no. 8410, fol. 271, pp. 84–87.

126

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

saw as “official training in shamelessness” for young men.64 In the end, the
emperor himself intervened to forbid the practice, and the machines were
removed; but he also ruled that medical officers on army bases could stock
prophylactics, to be given out free of charge to those soldiers who insisted
on endangering themselves.65 In 1912, moreover, it came out that the military authorities had been pressuring the garrison city of Colmar (in Alsace)
to reintroduce regulation, which it had abandoned two decades earlier.66 As
the Korrespondenzblatt put it, “in military circles people are still completely
stuck in the old view of the necessity and indispensability of extramarital
sexual intercourse for young men.”67 But again, as we have seen, a growing
number of municipal governments too favored the adoption of some form of
Kasernierung, or localization of prostitution. A particularly galling case was
that of Hanover, where the DEF had its headquarters.68
The police took a similar view of a number of other issues related to morality. Even in conservative Catholic Bavaria, for example, in 1909 the police in
Munich held that although truly offensive public lectures on sexual matters
clearly had to be proscribed, “a general knowledge of the normal processes
of male and female sex life, and of the dangers of extramarital sexual intercourse” was not entirely a bad thing, “above all in view of conditions in
the metropolis.”69 Munich’s police took a relatively relaxed attitude, as well,
toward the city’s often provocative arts scene; indeed in 1911 one conservative
Catholic paper commented on the police chief’s “well-known recipe of gradually, almost un-noticed, stepping back inch by inch from the boundaries of
morality, good taste, and decency” in order to allow Munich’s art community
to develop “new ‘attractions’” that would draw visitors to the city.70
Even in cases in which the police could be moved to act, moreover, the
courts frequently rejected the notion that there was any objective standard of
decency, taking the behavior of the public – the market – as their measure
instead. In 1897, for example, a Berlin court held that a suggestive performance could not be forbidden because it was “no different in moral terms
from performances that are usual in such theaters, and the public knows what
kind of performances” they would find there.71 In other cases judges chose to
64

Ellger and Weber, 25 Jahre, p. 140; “Viro-Automaten in Kasernen und auf Kriegsschiffen,” KB
25 (1911): 5; “An den Hohen Reichstag,” KB 26 (1912): 35; Katharina Scheven, “Gefahr der
physischen und moralischen Verseuchung unseres Heeres,” Abolitionist 11 (1912): 5.
65 See “Tagesgeschichte,” ZBG 14 (1913): 262.
66 “Ein drohender Rückschritt,” Abolitionist 11 (1912): 77.
67 “Viro-Automaten in Kasernen und auf Schiffen,” KB 26 (1912): 31.
68 Nancy R. Reagin, A German Women’s Movement: Class and Gender in Hanover, 1880–1933
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 1995), pp. 147–172.
69 W., “Sexuelle Massenaufklärung,” Volkswart 2 (1909): 9.
70 Quotation in Adorée Via-Villany, Tanz-Reform oder Pseudo-Moral (Paris: Villany, 1912),
p. 283.
71 “Vermischtes,” KB 11 (1897): 24.

Isolation and Impact

127

rely on the aesthetic judgments of artists (often professors at art academies)
called as expert witnesses, rather than on the moral judgments of the clergy.72
As early as 1890, for example, Wilhelm Philipps of the AKDS had gone so far
as to describe as a “completely unauthorized usurpation” a ruling of Berlin’s
regional court (Landesgericht) holding Boccaccio’s Decameron to be “in and
of itself offensive” but of such “historical and artistic value” as to be above
censorship.73 Even the Prussian minister of the interior complained to the minister of justice in 1903 that the courts were exercising “striking leniency” in
indecency cases, despite the new legislation of 1900; the Berlin police department called it instead “astonishing leniency.”74
The morality movements appear, then, to have had an extraordinarily difficult time persuading any branch of government – the legislature, the military,
the police, municipal government, or the courts – to support their agenda. It
was particularly demoralizing, too, that in some cases they could not depend
even on their own churches, which occasionally hung them out to dry on
morality issues in order to avoid compromising other vital interests. In 1902,
for example, the Protestant church authorities in Oldenburg decided that they
would not publicly protest their city government’s approval of two new brothels, declaring that “decisions regarding hygienic measures . . . we leave to the
competent authorities.”75
III. Winning the War of Attrition? Morality and the Regulatory State
And yet, we should not exaggerate the extent of the morality campaigners’
failures. In truth the ideas of the morality campaigners seem to have been
widely influential at least among more conservative middle-class Germans.
Although they did fail to abolish the regulation of prostitution, for example,
they were able to make it an important topic of debate – a problem. The code
of silence that had surrounded prostitution in the nineteenth century had been
definitively broken. In some cities the police still attempted to make public
policy by administrative fiat; but it appears that they rarely succeeded in doing
so without sparking intense public debate. Similarly, the morality campaigners
failed to gain everything they wanted in the lex Heinze debate; but of course
some measures they favored were adopted. The army preserved its freedom
to distribute prophylactics, but it was forced to remove dispensing machines
from its barracks. And the policing of crimes against morality did intensify
throughout the prewar years – in fact, the rate of conviction (convictions per
72

Hermann Roeren, Die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit und ihre Bekämpfung (Cologne: J. P. Bachem,
1904), p. 25.
73 Ph[ilipps], “Ein empörendes Erkenntnis,” KB 4 (1890): 109.
74 Ministry of the Interior to Ministry of Justice, 21 October 1903, and Polizeipräsident Berlin to
Ministry of the Interior, 5 October 1903, both in GSAPKB, Rep. 84a, no. 8098, fol. 77, 28–80.
75 “Die Aufhebung der Bordelle in Oldenburg,” KB 16 (1902): 11.

128

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

1,000 legally responsible adult citizens) for the category of morality offences
rose 62 percent between 1882 and 1913, whereas that for all crime rose by
only 10 percent.76
In short, the morality campaigners appeared around the turn of the century
to be winning the most fundamental struggle of all: the struggle to define
what people will struggle over. The morality movements lost many particular
battles, but by 1910 it would have been difficult for any German to argue that
there was not a “morality question.” As Ludwig Weber put it in 1910, “today
the morality associations have a position in public life that can no longer be
overlooked.”77
In fact, behind the scenes, government agencies often responded favorably
to pressure from the morality movement. In 1908 and 1910, for example, in
response to growing pressure from teachers and parents organized in local antiSchmutz committees, ministries in a number of states (Prussia, Bavaria, and
Württemberg) issued circulars requiring schools to warn pupils and parents
of the dangers of Schmutz and Schund, or even to boycott bookstores that
refused to remove such literature, or indecent images, from public display.78
In some areas (such as the Rhineland) the provincial authorities were already
taking the initiative in this field, for example, by instructing school authorities
to discuss the matter in teachers’ conferences, parent-teacher meetings, and the
like.79 In 1910 the Berlin police established an anti-Schmutz center for all of
Prussia.80 By 1912 Der Volkswart was claiming that total Schmutz sales in
Germany had been reduced from 60 million marks in 1908/1909 to 45 million
in 1910/1911.81
After 1910, moreover, apparently having concluded that they would not
gain much ground in attempts to reform the Criminal Code, the morality
campaigners shifted their strategy, attempting instead to achieve regulatory
changes through piecemeal revisions of the Industrial Code (Gewerbeordnung).
After repeated petitions from various conservative groups in favor of a new
law against Schmutz and Schund, for example, in early 1914 the government
at last introduced a bill revising the Industrial Code to prohibit the display in
public places (such as shop windows or bookstore sales rooms) of images or
76

See Edward Ross Dickinson, “Policing Sex in Germany, 1882–1982: A Preliminary Statistical
Analysis,” Journal of the History of Sexuality 16 (2007): 204–250.
77 Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, p. 169.
78 Corey Ross, Media and the Making of Modern Germany (London: Oxford University Press,
2008), p. 67.
79 See Ernst Schultze, Die Schundliteratur: Ihr Wesen–Ihre Folgen–Ihre Bekämpfung (Halle:
Waisenhaus, 1925), pp. 163–164; Paul Samuleit, Kriegsschundliteratur (Berlin: Heymanns,
1916), p. 6; “Eine Regierungsverfügung gegen den Schmutz in Wort und Bild,” Volkswart
2 (1909): 133; “Die liberale Presse und der Kampf gegen die Schundliteratur und
Schmutzkunst,” Allgemeine Rundschau (hereinafter AR) 5 (1908): 767.
80 “Endlich!” Volkswart 4 (1911): 44.
81 “Statistik der Schundliteraturbekämpfung,” Volkswart 5 (1912): 174–175.

Isolation and Impact

129

texts “suited to give offense by reason of moral endangerment of the youth” –
a bill that opponents referred to as a “new lex Heinze.”82 At the same time,
a bill was introduced that would have imposed on cinemas the same licensing
requirement that governed theaters and other forms of live performance, in the
hope that limiting competition would reduce the pressure to offer spectacular or
racy films.83 A bill using the Industrial Code to further restrict Animierkneipen
was approved by the upper house of parliament in the spring of 1914.84 And
beginning with a first draft in late 1910, repeated attempts were made to pass
a bill allowing the upper house of parliament to issue regulations restricting
or banning the sale of contraceptives and abortifacients.85 The outbreak of the
war put these projects on hold; but there was clearly gathering momentum in
favor of restrictive regulation.
The morality movements had significant success in shaping the policies of
local and state agencies as well. In the early years of the cinema, for example,
there was virtually no control over subject matter except at the local level;
and even there the conditions for police intervention were in practice fairly
restrictive.86 But local and state governments soon introduced stricter controls.
Only two German states actually passed new film censorship laws (Brunswick in
1911 and Württemberg in 1914); in the rest of Germany censorship remained
in the hands of local authorities. The local censorship board established by
the police in Berlin, however, soon came to provide a minimum standard for
most of Prussia and, by 1914, other parts of Germany as well. The practice of
the board closely followed the agenda of the morality campaigners: the greatest
number – about half – of censored scenes depicted violence; about one-eighth
were sexually suggestive. In many cases, furthermore, local authorities ruled
that films could not be shown to minors under the age of sixteen at all, or not
to unchaperoned children; others established special “family” programs for
children. By 1913 school and police authorities in some fifty cities and several
82

“Schutz der Jugend,” EFZ 14 (1913/1914): 116–117; Robin Lenman, “Mass Culture and the
State in Germany, 1900–1926,” in Ideas into Politics, ed. Roger Bullen, Hartmut Pogge von
Strandmann, and Anthony Polonsky (London: Croom Helm, 1984), p. 54; SBVR, vol. 303,
p. 2796, no. 1385; vol. 276, p. 4134, no. 878; and vol. 299, p. 316, no. 368.
83 See Gabriele Kilchenstein, Frühe Filmzensur in Deutschland (Munich: diskurs film, 1997),
pp. 191–196.
84 See Ulrich Linse, “‘Animierkneipen’ um 1900: Arbeitersexualität und bürgerliche Sittenreform,” in Kirmes–Kneipe–Kino: Arbeiterkultur im Ruhrgebiet zwischen Kommerz und Kontrolle (1850–1914), ed. Dagmar Kift (Paderborn: Ferdinand Schöningh, 1992), pp. 109–110;
“Gegen die Animierkneipen,” EFZ 14 (1914): 85.
85 SBVR, vol. 277, doc. no. 535 of 18 November 1910, p. 3; SBVR, vol. 303, p. 2793, doc. 1380
of 13 February 1914.
86 See Jeanpaul Georgen, “Der pikante Film: Ein vergessenes Genre der Kaiserzeit,” in Kino
der Kaiserzeit: Zwischen Tradition und Moderne, ed. Thomas Elsaesser and Michael Wedel
(Munich: text + kritik, 2002), p. 45; Kaspar Maase, “Massenkunst und Volkserziehung:
Die Regulierung von Film und Kino im deutschen Kaiserreich,” Archiv für Sozialgeschichte
41 (2001): 54.

130

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

provinces or states had passed laws restricting minors’ access to the movies.
Entertainment taxes were also used locally to impose some restraint on the
cinema business.87
The morality campaigners also did have some successes in the courts. The
supreme court (Reichsgericht) adopted an increasingly strict interpretation of
the new §184.3 of the RStGB as it applied to art and literature, holding, for
example, in 1905 that a text could be banned even if there were no specific passages in it that were indecent, because that did not rule out the possibility that
its “conceptual content” could “offend against the general sense of morality or
modesty of the reading public by exciting lasciviousness.”88 In 1909 a Cologne
court even held that “every accurate depiction of the naked human body in
which the sexual characteristics are clearly evident is . . . suited in and of itself
to excite lasciviousness.”89 Similarly, the Reichsgericht ruled that an object did
not need to be only intended for indecent purposes to be technically indecent,
and that mailing catalogs describing contraceptives to individuals was illegal
even if those individuals had requested such catalogs in response to public
advertisements; indeed, even offering such articles to doctors and apothecaries,
or in medical journals, was indecent.90
In some instances there were surprising victories, even in the case of prostitution. In 1905 a new Prussian law on infectious diseases would at least in theory
have allowed the replacement in that state of police regulation of prostitution
with a purely “hygienic” or medical system. A circular issued by the Prussian
government in 1907 – after the minister of the interior had a personal audience
with Anna Pappritz – instructed local police departments to make sure that free
treatment of or advice concerning STDs were available in their jurisdictions, to
merely require those arrested on suspicion of prostitution for the first time to
submit a doctor’s certification that they were healthy or in treatment, to register women as prostitutes only after a formal court procedure, to work with
rescue associations, not to punish minor infractions against police regulations,
and to charge with assault those who had sex with others while knowing they

87

Maase, “Massenkunst,” pp. 55, 59–60; Albert Hellwig, Kind und Kino (Langensalza: Beyer
& Söhne, 1914); Emilie Altenloh, Zur Soziologie des Kino: Die Kino-Unternnehmung und
die sozialen Schichten ihrer Besucher (Leipzig: Spamer, 1914), pp. 40–42; Lenman, “Mass
Culture,” esp. pp. 53–56; David Welch, “Cinema and Society in Imperial Germany, 1905–
1918,” German History 8 (1990): 28–45; Gary Stark, “Cinema, Society and the State,” in
Essays on Culture and Society in Modern Germany, ed. Gary Stark and B. K. Lackner (College
Station: Texas A&M, 1982); Kilchenstein, Frühe Filmzensur, esp. pp. 172–191, 234–237;
Sabine Hake, The Cinema’s Third Machine: Writing on Film in Germany, 1907–1933 (Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press, 1993), pp. 27–60.
88 “Tagesgeschichte,” ZBG 3 (1905): 471.
89 “Ein bemerkenswertes Urteil wider den Aktbilderunfug,” Volkswart 2 (1909): 70, 71.
90 See Julian Marcuse, “Unterdrückung der Schutzmittel durch Gesetzgebung und Rechtssprechung,” ZBG 13 (1911): 164–171.

Isolation and Impact

131

were themselves infected with an STD.91 Abolitionists were disappointed that
regulation itself was left in place; but otherwise the circular reflected many of
their demands. By 1907, too, the national coalition of associations combating
the traffic in women (the German National Committee Against the Traffic in
Girls, or the Deutsche Nationalkomitee zur internationalen Bekämpfung des
Mädchenhandels [DNBM], formed in 1899), which had until then avoided
the whole topic of regulation in order not to risk alienating government agencies whose cooperation it needed, decided to advocate at least the abolition of
brothels and passed a resolution opposing Kasernierung.92 And in 1910 the
parliament of the liberal southern state of Baden voted in favor of the closure
of all brothels in the state.93
More important, the morality campaigners had some success in preventing
(or rescinding) the introduction of Kasernierung or brothels in individual cities
through careful coalition building across ideological lines, strategic use of civil
suits by property owners concerned for their property values, neighborhood
demonstrations, and even direct action, such as the use of a spotlight and
nightly pickets to disrupt business in red-light districts.94 In 1909, one speaker
at a conference on venereal diseases even complained that the general assault
on brothels in Germany had created such uncertainty that capital invested in
them was no longer secure.95
Similar local efforts by groups concerned with various forms of public indecency resulted in small gains locally in cities around the country. In Strassburg,
for example, a coalition of Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish organizations and
school officials organized a boycott of stores that displayed indecent objects,
texts, or images in their windows or on their shelves; peppered the city government and police with petitions and notifications of illegal activity; organized
“patrols” to keep an eye on shop windows; persuaded the local schools to
boycott noncooperative stores; and moved the city government to force operators of kiosks to eliminate Schund from their offerings.96 Similar efforts had
some success in moving the police to adopt stricter practices as well. In Berlin,
91

“Aus den Bundesvereinen,” CBDF 9 (1907): 45; “Preussischer Ministerialerlass zur Handhabung der Sittenpolizei,” MDGBG 6 (1908): 52–56; Katharina Scheven, “Die Neuordnung
der Sittenpolizei in Preussen,” CBDF 10 (1908): 161–162.
92 DNBM, Der “Mädchenhandel,” und seine Bekämpfung: Denkschrift mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Arbeitsjahre 1899 bis 1902 der deutsch-nationalen Arbeit (Berlin: DNBM, 1903),
pp. 9–11; Elisabeth Lüders, “Ein moralischer Erfolg,” Frau 15 (1907): 117–119.
93 Katharina Scheven, “Die Aufhebung der öffentlichen Häuser in Baden,” CBDF 12 (1910):
67–68.
94 “Die Aufhebung der Bordelle in Heidelberg,” Abolitionist 6 (1907): 95; Friedrich Bohn, Wie
man sich Bordelle vom Leibe hält und wie man sie sich vom Halse schafft (Berlin: AKDS, 1913),
pp. 4–5, 12–14.
95 “Die Generalversammlung der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” Abolitionist 8 (1909): 35.
96 Bruns, “Aus der praktischen Arbeit,” Hochwacht 1 (1910): 20–22.

132

Moral Reform, 1880–1900

by 1913 there were cases in which policemen were stationed in dance halls to
discourage indecent dances, and the barbers’ guild complained to the city government that members who sold contraceptives were being hauled down to the
police station for questioning.97 In 1909 the journal of the DEF reported with
satisfaction that in some cities the police were prohibiting public addresses by
sex reformers (Aufklärungsvorträge or sex education talks).98 In Munich the
morality movements secured the prohibition in 1907 of Maud Allen’s seminude
“Salomé” dance, and the arrest of Adorée Villany for a similar performance in
1911.99
By about 1908 or 1910, in fact, a new and rather surprising tone began to
appear in the speeches and publications of the morality campaigners: increasingly a note of triumphalism began to surface alongside the more traditional
Jeremiads. Already in 1904, for example, Hermann Roeren believed that “no
one dares any more to deny the frightful decline of morality.” In the following year Ludwig Weber reported that “the whole tendency of the times has
become more favorable to the morality movement and its goals.” Two years
later, Gustav von Rohden claimed that “the cause of the morality associations is
drawing in ever wider social circles. What ten years ago was seen as an unpleasant crotchet of small groups of decency fanatics and pessimists and laughed
at or impatiently dismissed is now talked about by ‘the best people.’”100 By
1910 Der Volkswart detected a “revolution in public opinion” in favor of the
morality movement that had been underway since 1908. The IAF celebrated
the fact, in 1912, that even “outside of the organized abolitionist movement
the conscience of the German people and particularly of German women is
beginning to stir,” and in 1913 Anna Pappritz believed that there had been
a “revolution in opinions” in favor of abolitionism since 1900 and “that we
have every reason to look with joyful courage to the future.”101
And yet, in precisely these years the morality campaign was also confronted
with a new and frightening challenge. For whatever their successes in the
regulatory war of attrition against immorality, from 1902 forward the morality
campaigners also faced a coherent ideological challenge from progressive social
and sexual reformers who were in many cases no less idealistic, no less utopian,
97

“‘Sittlichkeit,’” NG 10 (1914): 46.
“Aus der Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” EFZ 10 (1909): 22.
99 Franz Weigl, “Das gegenwärtige Hervordringen des Nackten in die Öffentlichkeit,” Volkswart
1 (1908): 19, 21; Peter Jelavich, Munich and Theatrical Modernism: Politics, Playwriting, and
Performance, 1890–1914 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985), pp. 238, 242,
245–253.
100 Roeren, Die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit, p. 3; Weber and Ellger, 25 Jahre, pp. 140, 150.
101 “Generalversammlung des Cölner Männer-Vereins z. B. d. ö. Unsittlichkeit am 10. März
1910,” Volkswart 3 (1910): 77; Anna Pappritz, “Wann fällt die Reglementierung?” CBDF
9 (1907): 105; “Gegen die Regelementierung der Prostitution,” Abolitionist 11 (1912): 9;
“Geschäftsbericht des Deutschen Zweiges der I. A. Föderation,” Abolitionist 11 (1912): 49;
Anna Pappritz, “Die Sittlichkeitsbewegung,” Jahrbuch der Frauenbewegung 1913 (Leipzig:
Teubner, 1913), p. 145.
98

Isolation and Impact

133

and no less crusading in spirit than they were themselves, but whose ideas were
in many respects diametrically opposed to their own. The Christian morality
campaigners had, by 1905, been denouncing philosophical materialism as the
root of the moral crisis of their times for more than twenty years; but by that
year they were embroiled in an increasingly heated confrontation with a set of
reform movements that championed explicitly and self-consciously scientificmaterialist notions regarding sexual morality.
The morality campaigners, then, had been successful in establishing sexual
morality as a problem in German society and in imposing a broad, ongoing
debate over their moral agenda – in parliament, in the courts, within the regulatory agencies of the state, in municipal councils, and in the public sphere
at large. By 1908, however, it seemed increasingly possible that this victory
would turn out to have been a Pyrrhic one. Increasingly, it appeared possible
that they might lose the debate they had imposed.
This is the subject of Part II.

part ii
SEXUAL RADICALISM, 1900–1914

6
Social Democratic Sexual Ethics

Social Democrats were relatively minor contributors to the discussion of sexual
ethics, measured by the sheer volume of their publications and speeches on
the matter. Nevertheless, socialist thinking on the problem of sexuality and
sexual morality was of central importance in the broader debate, for two
reasons. On the one hand, the role of foundational texts by Friedrich Engels
and particularly August Bebel as starting points for the elaboration of a radical
realist and materialist sexual ethics gave the socialist position an influence
out of proportion to Social Democrats’ direct engagement in the debate. On
the other hand, Social Democrats could cast themselves as spokespeople not
only for a particular theoretical tradition or position but also for an emergent
social reality – the real, existing sexual culture of the working class.1 It may
also have been significant that Social Democratic journals reached a very wide
audience. Even the party’s leading theoretical journals, Die Neue Zeit and
Sozialistische Monatshefte, both of which published intermittently on topics
related to sexuality, had circulations between 3,000 and 10,000 in the decade
before 1914 – two or four times that of the specialty journals of the morality
campaigners. The socialist women’s journal Die Gleichheit, which was both a
key publication for the women’s trade union movement and a major forum for
the articulation of socialist views on sexuality, reached an audience of 85,000
in 1910.2
1

On Social Democracy and sexuality, see particularly Jean H. Quataert, Reluctant Feminists in German Social Democracy, 1885–1917 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1979); Anne Lopes and Gary Roth, Men’s Feminism: August Bebel and the German Socialist Movement (Amherst, NY: Humanity, 2000); Heinz Niggemann, ed., Frauenemanzipation
und Sozialdemokratie (Frankfurt: Fischer, 1981); Christa Uhlig, Reformpädagogik: Rezeption
und Kritik in der Arbeiterbewegung (Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 2006), pp. 160–173.
2 Till Schelz-Brandenburg, “‘Die Neue Zeit,’” available at library.fes.de/nz/nz-intro.html, accessed
12 May 2013; Hubert Woltering, “Die ‘Sozialistische Monatshefte’ (1895/96–1933),” available

137

138

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

Three distinct positions were dominant in Social Democratic thinking on
sexuality. Particularly during the earlier years, first, critiques of the moral corruption of bourgeois society led some Social Democrats to develop an analysis
of the immorality of their times that sounded surprisingly similar to that of
conservative Christians. Thus, for example, in 1892 Heinrich Lux insisted
that prostitution was the product of “the influence of social misery,” but
also of “seduction, bad example, miserable living conditions, deficient education . . . chaotic family conditions, men and women working together in the
same spaces, especially at night, the pleasures of loose living, love of finery
etc.” And the result of widespread prostitution was growing sexual cynicism,
demoralization, and brutalization, such that “the whole of social life takes on
a lascivious tone through constant contact with prostitution.”3 In 1896, similarly, the Social Democratic women’s journal Die Gleichheit deplored the fact
that the “entrepreneurial class unscrupulously sacrifices the virginity of women
workers to the profit motive” and that “starvation wages” forced female “wage
slaves” into prostitution. Employers of domestic servants, factory owners, and
managers preyed on their female employees, making them “pleasure slaves.”
Among workers, poor housing conditions “deaden the sense of sexual delicacy,
awaken and excite sensual desire early, and often lead to its pathological development,” and in any case working-class girls left home long before they were
ready to face the moral challenges of independent living.4 August Bebel, in
the 1887 edition of Woman and Socialism, criticized the “unscrupulous businessmen” who “lure” men into brothels; deplored the “trade in female flesh”
in which white slavers “ply their trade with the same cold-bloodedness as if
they were dealing in any other commodity”; warned that “an excess of sexual
pleasures” could lead to impotence, sterility, nervous disorders, and the need
for “special forms of stimulation” such as homosexual acts or child sexual
abuse; and suggested that the result of all this “vice, debauchery, crimes and
misdemeanors” was that “the whole of society is kept in a state of disquiet.”5
Not only did Bebel sound very much like the morality campaigners, but he
even sometimes quoted directly from the AKDS’s Korrespondenzblatt – for
example, in the parliamentary debate over the lex Heinze.6
Even after the turn of the century, Social Democrats often viewed popular
culture with a skepticism similar to that of conservative Christians. Thus in
1904 Die Gleichheit held that “in the capitalist world the mind of youth is

at library.fes.de/sozmon/070201-smh-begletittext.pdf, accessed 12 May 2013; Niggemann, ed.,
Frauenemanzipation, p. 300.
3 Heinrich Lux, Die Prostitution (Berlin: Vorwärts, 1892), pp. 22–23.
4 “‘Arbeiterinnen pflegen keine Vestalinnen zu sein,’” Gleichheit 6 (1896): 41.
5 August Bebel, Die Frau in der Vergangenheit, Gegenwart und Zukunft (Zurich: Schweizerische
Volksbuchhandlung, 1887), pp. 79, 84, 88 (slightly modified in the 1910 edition, pp. 206–207,
210).
6 SBVR, vol. 127, p. 143.

Social Democratic Sexual Ethics

139

poisoned by trashy literature.”7 Eight years later, an article in the same journal
argued that the cinema – characterized by “ugliness and baseness . . . mendacity
and sensationalism” – distracted proletarians from the struggle for social justice by filling their heads with sexually suggestive and trivial nonsense.8 In the
1910 edition of Woman and Socialism, Bebel deplored the fact that newspapers
and magazines carried advertisements that “encourage unnatural satisfactions
in the most shameless manner,” whereas obscene pictures, suggestive poems,
novels, and modern art made it little wonder that “sexual excesses . . . have
become a social disease.”9 In 1911 Die Gleichheit blamed imperialism, militarism, and the profit motive among the owners of “Tingel-Tangel, variety
theaters, Animierkneipen” for the white slave trade and for spreading “sexual
licentiousness and debauchery throughout the world.”10
Conservative Christians and Social Democrats in fact to some extent shared
an understanding of the moral status of capitalism. Most Social Democrats
argued that prostitutes were, as one put it in 1884, “victims of an all-devouring,
demoralizing money-culture”; as Die Gleichheit argued twenty-eight years
later, prostitution was “only the last and most heinous consequence of an economic system that rests on the exploitation of one human being by another.”11
Socialists frequently argued that the morality campaigners were simply hypocrites; but they were in fundamental agreement on the nature and consequences of “mammonism.” Even the metaphors Social Democrats used were
sometimes the very ones favored by conservative Christians. In 1899 the prominent socialist-feminist journalist Wally Zepler, writing in the flagship journal of revisionism, Sozialistische Monatshefte (Socialist Monthly), referred to
immorality as an “incurable organic sickness of our society.”12 Die Gleichheit
argued in 1912 that only social reform, not “Bible quotations, legal paragraphs
or the police saber,” could “dam up” the “rising waters of prostitution.”13 Such
rhetorical flourishes were hardly as common in Social Democratic as in Christian discourse; but socialists do appear to have treated this as the available
metaphorical vocabulary.
Second, however, many Social Democrats developed an assessment of the
sexual culture of the working classes that directly contradicted that of most
conservative Christians. They argued that, far from being dissolute and corrupt,
7

“Was dürfen unsere Kinder lesen?” Gleichheit 14 (1904): 58.
Roland, “Gegen die Frauenverblödung im Kino,” Gleichheit 23 (1912): 115. This article was
a response to a more explicitly political critique: Max Crempe, “Gegen die Frauenverblödung
im Kino,” Gleichheit 23 (1912): 70–72.
9 Bebel, Die Frau und der Sozialismus (Stuttgart: Dietz, 1910), pp. 167–168, 194, 198, 178.
10 “Mädchenhandel,” Gleichheit 22 (1911): 178, 230.
11 F. Domela Nieuwenhuis, “Die Frage der Prostitution,” Die Neue Zeit (hereinafter NZ) 2 (1884):
259; M.Kt. [Maria Kautsky], “Mädchenhandel,” Gleichheit 22 (1912): 229, 230.
12 Wally Zepler, “Die Frau der Gegenwart und das sexuelle Problem,” Sozialistische Monatshefte
(hereinafter SM) 5 (1899): 235, 238.
13 Ibid., p. 355.
8

140

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

working-class sexual mores both were healthy and pointed to the future of sex.
Particularly striking is an article in Die Gleichheit in 1896, which suggested that
it was perfectly moral for working-class women to “give themselves to the man
who wins their affections, without the blessing of the priest or the formulas
of the county registrar,” marrying only when the first or second child was
born. It was bourgeois marriage that was immoral – effectively itself a form of
prostitution, because middle-class women had no other means of supporting
themselves than to find a husband. In contrast, working-class women had
jobs and were not dependent on men. Die Gleichheit put this case even more
explicitly in an eight-part article on “Marriage and Morality” in 1906, asserting
that “love takes on vitality and substance above all in the marriages of those
who own nothing or little, because among them the power of property has
disappeared.”14
A debate in the pages of the leading orthodox Social Democratic journal Die
Neue Zeit in 1898 neatly sums up the tensions between these two positions. In
the opening salvo Willy Hellpach critiqued prostitution as a feature of the capitalist economic and social order, observing that “any sexual act is contrary to
nature which does not serve the purpose of the survival of the species.” Those
who masturbated, hired prostitutes, or sold sex “defiled” themselves; so did
any woman “who indulges in repeated sexual pleasure while self-consciously
preventing conception.” If the use of contraception became widespread, he
warned, the result would be “indiscriminate and unrestrained” intercourse
and “sexual-psychological degeneration” among women.15 Several responses
took a very different position. One critic insisted that, from a “purely physiological” point of view, sex was not really about reproduction, conception being
merely a “secondary point”; on the other hand, many prostitutes were already
“morally degenerate creatures.”16 A second characterized Hellpach’s article as
“cant” and symptomatic of a disturbing “tendency toward prudery” in the
party. Hellpach was advocating a “purely animalistic existence” in which the
individual was “merely a member of his species,” ignoring both the real imperatives of working-class life and working-class people’s aspirations to material
well-being and intellectual self-improvement. The triumph of socialism would
clear aside such outdated and crabbed moral precepts, bringing about an age
not of sexual “virtue” and abstinence but of sexual self-realization.17
Third, despite such disagreements, two fundamental ideological commitments actually did generate a certain underlying consensus in Social Democratic
thought regarding the family, gender, and sexuality in this period. The first was
14

“Arbeiterinnen pflegen,” p. 40; “Ehe und Sittlichkeit,” Gleichheit 16 (1906): 100, 64.
Ernst Gystrow (Willy Hellpach), “Die Nachfrage beim Dirnenkauf,” NZ 16:2 (1898): 300,
297, 303; “Mein Schlusswort zur ‘Nachfrage beim Dirnenkauf,’” NZ 16:2 (1898): 730. On
Hellpach’s brief flirtation with socialism, see Claudia-Anja Kaune, Willy Hellpach (1877–1955)
(Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 2005), p. 45.
16 H.B., “Einige Bemerkungen über die ‘Nachfrage beim Dirnenkauf,’” NZ 16:2 (1898): 411.
17 S., “Die Nachfrage beim Dirnenkauf,” NZ 16:2 (1898): 522, 523, 525.
15

Social Democratic Sexual Ethics

141

the commitment to a natural-scientific worldview – to explanations derived
from an understanding of the natural requirements of the human organism.
The second was the commitment to historical materialism, to the understanding that social forms are determined by the fundamental requirements of the
mode of production, and that they accordingly change with it.
The locus classicus for the first position was Bebel’s Woman and Socialism.
It was, Bebel wrote, a requirement of normal development “not to neglect
the exercise of any organ of the body, not to deny any natural drive its satisfaction.” Repression would merely cause “atrophy and injury to the entire
organism,” indeed potentially “madness and miserable death.” The denigration of the body as “lower” and less legitimate than the spirit, he held, was
fundamentally mistaken and harmful: the “so-called animal passions are at no
lower a level than the so-called intellectual ones,” because both were “functions
of the same organism.”18 Sexual desire was the strongest, most vital expression of the “will to life,” and “the strongest force in human nature.” Every
human being, he asserted, “has a right to . . . satisfy those drives . . . which are
intimately connected with his innermost self, that are his self itself [das Sein
selbst].”19 By 1910 Bebel had found a formulation for this point calculated to
enrage conservative Christians: “Human beings do not stand above the laws
of nature; they are, physiologically, the most highly developed animals.”20
Other Social Democrats were explicitly dismissive of Christian conceptions:
one held in the leading revisionist socialist journal in 1896, for example, that
it was useless to discuss whether the sex drive could be repressed, because such
repression was clearly harmful and in any case simply wasn’t going to happen –
and “nothing is accomplished in this matter by ethical-moral preachments and
recriminations.”21
Equally scandalous to conservatives was the fact that Social Democrats also
consistently argued that ideas about sexuality were not immutable and timeless but changeable. As the foremost theorist of socialist revisionism, Eduard
Bernstein, put it in Die Neue Zeit already in 1895, “moral views are historical entities.”22 Henriette Fürth, another leading revisionist, was equally
blunt in 1912: morality, she asserted, is an expression of “economic circumstances and needs”; it was therefore “changeable, fluid, inconstant,” relative,
and debatable.23 Specifically, of course, socialists almost universally argued
18

Bebel, Die Frau in der Vergangenheit, pp. 36, 37, 38.
Ibid., pp. 37, 38.
20 Bebel, Die Frau und der Sozialismus, p. 146.
21 Albert Martens, “Das sexuelle Leben und seine Vorbedigungen,” Der sozialistische Akademiker
2 (1896): 95.
22 Eduard Bernstein, “Die Beurtheilung des widernormalen Geschlechtsverkehrs,” NZ 13:2
(1895): 229. On Bernstein, see Francis L. Carsten, Eduard Bernstein, 1850–1932 (Munich:
Beck, 1993).
23 Henriette Fürth, Staat und Sittlichkeit (Leipzig: Wehner, 1912), p. 65. See Henriette Fürth,
Streifzüge durch das Land eines Lebens (Wiesbaden: Kommission für die Geschichte der Juden
19

142

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

that the so-called Christian familial order was in fact the product of the emergence of private property and capitalism. As Die Gleichheit (presumably the
journal’s editor, the orthodox Marxist Clara Zetkin) put it in 1906, “the existing bourgeois marriage . . . is not a moral but an economic, a property-law
institution.” The patriarchal structure of the family, originally dictated by the
needs of household production and capital accumulation, was now breaking
down under the impact of industrialization and proletarianization; marriage in
the working class was increasingly a matter of love, not business.24
In this, all these authors were following the argumentation of Friedrich
Engels, whose extremely influential 1884 work, The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State, put prevailing legal and moral norms in long-term
historical and ethnographic perspective. The monogamous patriarchal family,
Engels held, was the product of the “world-historical defeat of the female sex,”
itself a corollary of the development of private property. It had in fact “absolutely nothing to do with individual sexual love.” With the disintegration of
capitalism, the extant form of marriage and the strict moral code it imposed –
on women – would cease to have any economic function and would collapse.25
Most socialists shared Bebel’s and Engels’s faith that the revolution would
establish a new and natural sexual culture in which the pathologies of the
repressive bourgeois sexual order would disappear. Biology and love, freed
from artificial constraints imposed by capital, would hold happy sway. In
the meantime, many Social Democrats were willing to define as natural and
therefore unobjectionable an extraordinary range of sexual behaviors that conservative Christians regarded as immoral and pathological. One socialist journalist in Berlin argued in 1893 that Social Democrats had happier marriages
than other workers because they practiced “rational production of children” –
that is, they used contraceptives.26 In 1895 Eduard Bernstein argued for the
decriminalization of homosexual acts between men and held that the personals advertisements that conservative Christians (and some Social Democrats)
found so disgusting were neither surprising nor necessarily immoral. In capitalist society, many young men simply could not get married, for financial reasons;
wanting to have sex anyway did not make one a “libertine.”27 Sozialistische
Monatshefte urged in 1896 that “we don’t need to wait for the collapse of capitalism” to solve the sexual problem, because the use of contraceptives would
allow unmarried couples to meet their sexual needs without having to fear
in Hessen, 2010); Angelika Epple, Henriette Fürth und die Frauenbewegung im deutschen
Kaiserreich (Pfaffenweiler: Centaurus, 1996).
24 “Ehe und Sittlichekeit,” Gleichheit 16 (1906): 64, 92, 120. On Zetkin, see Tania Puschnerat,
Clara Zetkin: Bürgerlichkeit und Marxismus (Essen: Klartext, 2003), esp. pp. 131–159.
25 Friedrich Engels, Der Ursprung der Familie, des Privateigentums und des Staates (Zurich:
Ring-Verlag, 1934), pp. 41, 50, 69.
26 Minna Wettstein-Adelt, “Sittliche Zustände,” in Niggemann, ed., Frauenemanzipation, p. 248.
27 Bernstein, “Die Beurtheilung,” p. 233, and “Die moderne Ehe und die Heiratsannonce,” NZ
13:2 (1895): 19, 20, 16.

Social Democratic Sexual Ethics

143

pregnancy.28 Die Neue Zeit pointed out in 1906 that there were 892,684 more
women than men in Germany (or 103 women per 100 men) and asked “what
they . . . are supposed to do” with their “reproductive organs?” The implication
was obviously that one could really not judge unmarried women for having
children.29 And of course many Social Democrats held that prostitution was
not evidence of individual moral turpitude but rather of the fundamentally
corrupt nature of class society, “a necessary social institution” in bourgeois
society, as Bebel put it, “just like the police, the standing army, the church,
business, and so on.”30
In contrast, many Social Democrats were contemptuous of bourgeois marriage. For Engels, it was clear that so-called monogamous marriage had rested
from its inception on a falsehood, because monogamy was in fact only imposed
on women. The sexual order of capitalism consisted of “monogamy complemented by adultery and prostitution.” And because bourgeois marriages were
at bottom “marriages of convenience” and did not actually rest on mutual love,
they usually created at best “a state of leaden boredom, which we call marital
bliss.”31 The socialist doctor and activist Hope Bridges Adams-Lehman argued
in an article in Die Neue Zeit in 1897 that “at least 90 percent . . . of respectable
bourgeois ladies . . . are engaged in exactly the same trade in their bodies as the
most depraved street-whore, with the sole difference that their cowardice in
the face of life is greater, and they sell their wares more dearly.”32 The radical
sociologist Ladislaus Gumplowicz even argued in 1900 that only “indolence,
cowardice and low hypocrisy” explained the “continued existence of a barbarity long since recognized to be senseless” – namely Christian marriage. Comparing traditional, single-earner marriages to the family life of chimpanzees, he
suggested – playing on the symbolic association between Catholicism and the
color black – that marriage was a “barbarity of the various blacks in Bavaria
and Central Africa.”33
Social Democrats generally believed, in fact, that the future belonged to
“free love,” but in a very specific sense: love under socialism would be freed
from money. As the socialist social policy expert Lily Braun put it, free love
was the freedom to choose a spouse “free from any material considerations,
solely out of love.”34 Under socialism, the party program of 1891 held, men
28

“Rücklblick auf die Sexualitätsdebatte,” Der sozialistische Akademiker 2 (1896): 369, 371,
373.
29 Franz Workman, “Statistisches zum ‘Recht auf Mutterschaft,’” NZ 24:1 (1906): 493, 497.
30 Bebel, Die Frau in der Vergangenheit, p. 78.
31 Engels, Ursprung, pp. 50, 56, 60–61.
32 H. Adams-Lehmann, “Das Weib in seiner Geschlechtsindividualismus,” NZ 15 (1897): 745.
See Marita Krauss, Die Frau der Zukunft: Dr. Hope Bridges Adams Lehmann (1855–1916),
Ärztin und Reformerin (Munich: Buchendorfer 2002).
33 Ladislas Gumplowicz, Ehe und freie Liebe (Berlin: Socialistische Monatshefte, 1900), pp. 3, 4.
34 Quoted in Heinz Niggemann, Zwischen Sozialismus und Emanzipation: Die sozialdemokratischen Frauenbewegung im Kaiserreich (Wuppertal: Hammer, 1981), p. 244; Lily Braun, Frauenfrage und Sozialdemokratie (Berlin: Vorwärts, 1896), p. 12. See Dieter Borkowski, Rebellin
gegen Preussen: Das Leben der Lily Braun (Frankfurt: Fischer, 1984).

144

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

and women would form relationships, as autonomous equals, on the basis of
mutual regard; both prostitution and “meal-ticket marriages” (Versorgungsehen) would disappear.35 Socialism, in short, would realize the moral ideals that
bourgeois society preached but did not practice. Monogamy, as Engels put it,
would not disappear under socialism; “rather it will be for the first time fully
realized” for both sexes.36
And yet, on the whole Social Democrats had a somewhat unconventional
understanding of what monogamy would be like in socialist society. For many
of them held that the ideal of lifelong marriage was outdated and harmful.
Among the more orthodox Marxist leadership, this belief took the form merely
of a demand for what would today be called no-fault divorce.37 But others went
much further, arguing that under modern social conditions, the dissolution of
a growing number of marriages was in fact to be expected, and even welcomed.
As Die Gleichheit put it in 1898, although modern people expect “that love
and marriage coincide,” fluid, dynamic, modern social conditions generated
“greater mental and moral differentiation of personalities” and made people’s
emotional lives more complex and unpredictable. The natural result would be
that marriages might not last.38 Wally Zepler, too, held that people changed
more over their lifetimes under modern social conditions; and “the more differentiated . . . a person’s construction, the richer his personality, the . . . greater
the possibility that paths that initially ran parallel will widely diverge in the
end.”39 As civilization advanced and both individuals and their ways of loving became more refined, divorce would flourish. That was fine, Gumplowicz
argued, because “the easier it is to dissolve a marriage, the more frequently a
married couple will also be a loving couple.”40
In some cases, Social Democrats even went so far as effectively to argue
for toleration of promiscuity. This was a position implicit in their vehement
adherence to the general principle that people’s private lives were their own
business. August Bebel’s formulation is a good example: “The satisfaction
of the sex-drive,” he argued in Woman under Socialism, “is each individual’s
personal business. . . . Nobody is accountable to anyone else for it.”41 Henriette
Fürth spelled out the potentially radical implications of this doctrine in 1908,
arguing that although marriage based on love was the “only form of sexual
intercourse compatible with human dignity,” it was also true that

35

Karl Kautsky, Das Erfurter Programm in seinem grundsätzlichen Teil erläutert (Stuttgart: Dietz,
1907), p. 37.
36 Engels, Ursprung, p. 62.
37 See, e.g., the discussion in Niggemann, Zwischen Sozialismus, pp. 239, 241; Oda Olberg,
“Polemisches über Frauenfrage und Sozialismus,” SM 11 (1905): 309; Engels, Ursprung, p. 69.
38 “Ehescheidung und Sittlichkeit,” Gleichheit 8 (1898): 58, 59.
39 Zepler, “Die Frau der Gegenwart,” pp. 292, 242.
40 Gumplowicz, Ehe, pp. 11, 12, 14–15.
41 Quoted in Niggemann, Zwischen Sozialismus, p. 249.

Social Democratic Sexual Ethics

145

in the area of sexual morality, too, there is only one fundamental truth, which is:
be true to yourself, to the requirements and laws of your innermost nature! . . . The
one is by nature monogamous . . . , another is polygamous, a third loves monogamously but temporarily. We have to . . . concede the right to these various forms
of expression. The sexual life of every individual must remain sacrosanct . . . , his
own private business.42

In particular, some Social Democrats believed that marriage was a matter for
mature people, whereas youth had to be free to experiment and to search.
Zepler, for example, held that under socialism people would enter into varied
and changing sexual relationships in youth, and monogamous marriage only
in maturity.43
Again, this preference for tolerance in principle was supported by an important pragmatic consideration: the fact that all these positions largely corresponded with what the working classes already practiced. As Zepler put it in
1899, those who clung to conservative Christian conceptions of sexual propriety “have not even been able to imagine in theory the change in moral
conceptions that is already taking place practically under our very eyes.” One
could already observe in practice the “emergence of a more liberal concept
of sexual morality in the future.”44 Conservative Christians might believe, in
other words, that industrial capitalism was creating sexual disorder and moral
disaster; Social Democrats believed that they could see it creating, under their
very noses, a new, more moral, more democratic, and happier sexual culture.
As revisionism gained influence among German Social Democrats after
about 1905, however, there were growing disagreements about precisely what
that better socialist future would be like in detail. One feature of revisionist
thought in particular led some of its advocates into sometimes embittered conflicts with more orthodox Social Democrats: its openness to biologistic ideas,
and to considering gender no less important than class.45
A striking example is contraception. In an influential essay on “Woman and
Intellectual Life” published in 1902, the socialist journalist Oda Olberg rejected
the arguments of those who saw the use of contraceptives as unhealthy and a
threat to national power. Instead, birth control was “a rational corrective to
degeneracy,” because if people who couldn’t handle modern life didn’t have
children, that was all to the good. But more important, she held that most who
used contraceptives were simply people whose sense of their responsibility as
parents led them to keep the number of their children small, so as to be able to
raise well those they did have. The more intensive care possible in such families
42

Henriette Fürth, Das Geschlechtsproblem und die moderne Moral (Leipzig: Dietrich, 1908),
pp. 20, 21–22.
43 Zepler, “Die Frau der Zukunft und die freie Liebe,” SM 5 (1899): 291.
44 Ibid., p. 291.
45 On the debates between orthodox and revisionist women in the SPD, see Quataert, Reluctant
Feminists, pp. 76–82, 97–99, 107–133.

146

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

had a “race-hygienic value,” whereas large families too often produced “weak
individuals, marked by constitutional diseases, who have received insufficient
sunshine, air, and love.”46 By 1913 this position was not uncommon among
Social Democrats – and this at the height of the conservative panic over the
birthrate. And it could sometimes be combined with almost messianic hopes
regarding the benefits of using contraceptives to achieve the aims of eugenics,
to prevent the birth of “inferior” or “defective” individuals – as when, for
example, Henriette Fürth observed that “we are mastering death in ever greater
degree” and that “it’s high time that we also master life. That we decide what
should be brought to life, and when.”47
But this kind of optimism stuck in the craw of more orthodox Marxists,
who still expected the revolution to be born of immiseration, not of growing social rationalization. In 1913 the issue of contraception and the birthrate
sparked an intense debate within the party over the “birth strike” – the idea
that deliberately reducing fertility could be a means to alleviate working people’s material suffering and even perhaps to undermine capitalism itself by
depriving capitalists of the reserve army of labor that kept wages low (and
profits high). The orthodox party leadership rejected this position vehemently,
because it smacked of mere meliorism. Clara Zetkin, for example, responded
by denouncing as mere “quackery” the idea that the birth strike was an alternative to “the political struggle for the realization of social reforms”; and
Luise Zietz was “saddened and ashamed” that such reformist views should
be so common in the party.48 Some even argued that the birth strike was
an expression of moral weakness. Olberg, for example, held that a “happy,
healthy optimism” was part of the socialist personality; overuse of birth control would be an expression of “selfishness” and “meager faith in oneself and
in the future.” Like Christian nationalists, in other words, she demanded high
fertility as a proof of loyalty and good character.49 Those who supported the
idea of the birth strike saw in such remarks evidence of a reactionary moralist
spirit within Social Democracy, and that reading seems to have struck a chord
with the rank and file.50 In any case, ultimately the introduction of legislation
to restrict the availability of contraceptives just before World War I moved
socialist women, in particular, to close ranks – because although they might
46

Oda Olberg, Das Weib und der Intellektualismus (Berlin: Edelheim, 1902), pp. 38, 49, 50, 55.
Ibid., p. 760.
48 “Gegen den Gebärstreik,” printed in Niggemann, ed., Frauenemanzipation, pp. 271–273;
K. Kautsky, “Der Gebärstreik,” NZ 31:2 (1913): 908; Ludwig Quessel, “Die Ökonomie des
Gebärstreiks,” SM 19 (1913): 1324; Ludwig Quessel, “Die Philosophie des Gebärstreiks,” SM
19 (1913): 1615.
49 Oda Olberg, “Zur Stellung der Partei zum Gebärstreik,” NZ 32 (1914): 52, 53, 55.
50 Eduard Bernstein, “Geburtenrückgang, Nationalität, und Kultur,” SM 19 (1913): 1497; Minna
Güldner, “Zum Geburtenrückgang in Berlin,” Gleichheit 23 (1912): 374; Königliche Polizeidirektion München to Königliche Regierung von Oberbayern, 24 April 1914, Tätigkeitsbericht,
Sicherheitspolizei und Sittlichkeitspolizei, Staatsarchiv München, RA 3830 no. 58113, p. 79.
47

Social Democratic Sexual Ethics

147

differ as to the political functions of birth control, they could virtually all agree
that women, as private individuals, had the right to control their own fertility.51
But the gulf between revisionism and orthodoxy on sexual questions was
clear.
The debate over the birth strike, moreover, was only the last of a series
of similar debates within the party reaching back to the turn of the century.
Arguably even more important, for example, was an ongoing discussion of the
problem of women, work, and motherhood. This issue had riled the socialist
women’s journal Die Gleichheit already in 1901, when Clara Zetkin ripped into
Lily Braun for suggesting that collective households could liberate workingclass women from the double burden of housework and paid employment
even before the revolution. Braun, Zetkin suggested, had created merely an
“abstract utopia”; in fact she was one of those “unclear or overly clever social
reformers” who were currently “infiltrating . . . the proletariat” in order to try
to undermine its revolutionary élan.52 In response, Braun compared Zetkin
to narrow-minded Christian defenders of orthodoxy and observed that it was
“pretty comical how customary it has recently become to accuse those people of
utopianism who seek to translate the ideals of Social Democracy from the stage
of preachments to the stage of deeds.”53 As editor of Die Gleichheit, Zetkin
gave herself the last word, calling Braun’s witticisms “cheap and tasteless.”
Thereafter, Braun was systematically excluded from the journal.54 But the
same issue was revisited in the revisionist journal Sozialistische Monatshefte five
years later, when the leading revisionist (and longtime member of the national
parliament) Edmund Fischer argued that the orthodox model, in which women
“liberated” from excessive demands of child care and homemaking could lead
working lives just like men’s, was nonsense, because women didn’t want those
lives. This “old” feminist standpoint, he held, “contradicts feminine nature
and human nature itself” and had been simply “borrowed from the vocabulary
of the bourgeois women’s rights advocates.” In working-class circles, the fact
that men worked in the factories while women did the housework “is regarded
as an equal division of labor”; for nine-tenths of the working class, the “lifegoal of woman, deeply rooted in female nature, is to be mother, and to live
through the care and education of children.” The socialist society of the future
would therefore achieve the “liberation from the evil of capitalism, which forces
women to work in factories.”55
Critics dismissed such ideas as “the familiar petit-bourgeois ideal,” “backwardness,” and “reactionary sentiments,” arguing among other things that
work was a precondition for “personal independence” and hence for “full
51

Luise Zietz, “Gegen den staatlichen Gebärzwang,” Gleichheit 24 (1914): 227, 229, 242.
Clara Zetkin, “Die Wirtschaftsgenossenschaft,” Gleichheit 11 (1901): 122.
53 Lily Braun, “Die Wirtschaftsgenossenschaft,” Gleichheit 11 (1901): 140.
54 “Der Entgegnung zur Antwort,” Gleichheit 11 (1901): 142.
55 Edmund Fischer, “Die Frauenfrage,” SM 11 (1905): 259, 262, 263, 264, 265, 266.
52

148

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

humanity,” and that in any case most mothers did not in fact have the “special
understanding for the child’s soul” or any natural talent or training as educators. What was needed in child rearing, as anywhere else, was specialization and
professionalization.56 Clara Zetkin did not spare the rod: she found Fischer’s
views shameful, philistine, wrong headed, banal, frivolous, petit bourgeois,
narrow and shortsighted, and ill informed. Children should be “democratized
and socialized” from earliest childhood in public institutions by the “best pedagogical influences, the most superior pedagogical resources”; that would be
fine with mothers, who had no interest in being reduced to purely reproductive
beings.57 And Wally Zepler even found it “crass absurdity” to confine children to house and school, when what they needed was freedom of movement
and social interaction with other children; being “chained” to parents and
siblings, so far from fostering “peace and happiness,” was very frequently an
“inexhaustible source of suffering and inner unfreedom.”58
There were similar divisions within the party over the problem of prostitution. The orthodox position was that prostitution resulted from the impoverishment of the working classes, the destruction of working-class family life,
alcoholism as a product of misery and desperation, and the moral dangers generated by the capitalist entertainment industry – what Oda Olberg, in 1903,
called “a social environment that over-excites sensuality.”59 Prostitution was
most common in cities of mixed social makeup, where men with purchasing
power encountered women without it.60 The solution, of course, was to destroy
capitalism; and Social Democrats sometimes poked fun at bourgeois abolitionists for their lack of realism and advocacy of mere palliatives.61 Yet in fact
many socialists tacitly or explicitly supported abolitionism. Already in the late
1890s, for example, socialist women played an important role in protests over
arrests of innocent women by the morals police.62
But here too revisionists created a furor by calling both positions into question. Edmund Fischer again penned the most important statement of their
position, arguing in 1906 that “a mentally and morally normal woman is not
turned into a prostitute by any degree of poverty.” Instead, selling sex was “a
mark of degeneration”; women who did so were “morally sick” and “born
prostitutes.”63 “Prostitution,” he argued in 1909, “has nothing to do with
56

Therese Schlesinger-Eckstein, “Prostitution und Frauenfrage,” NZ 23 (1905): 820; Irma Ihrer,
“Die proletarische Frau und die Berufstätigkeit,” SM 11 (1905): 444, 445, 447, 448, 449.
57 “Aus Krähwinkel” I and II, Gleichheit 15 (1905): 31, 36.
58 Wally Zepler, “Das Mutterschaftsproblem,” SM 12 (1906): 585, 586, 587, 588.
59 Oda Olberg, “Der Kampf gegen die Geschlechtskrankheiten,” SM 9 (1903): 278.
60 Paul Kampffmeyer, “Über Prostitution und Volkserziehung,” SM 12 (1906): 772, and “Das
Problem der Prostitution,” SM 19 (1913): 237.
61 See, e.g., Paul Kampffmeyer, “Abolitionismus und Sozialdemokratie,” SM 11 (1905): 54.
62 Ulla Wischermann, Frauenbewegungen und Öffentlichkeiten um 1900: Netzwerke–
Gegenöffentlichkeiten–Protestinszenierungen (Königstein: Helmer, 2003), pp. 240–241.
63 Edmund Fischer, “Die Überwindung der Prostitution,” SM 12 (1906): 238–239, 240, 246.

Social Democratic Sexual Ethics

149

class differences.”64 Fischer was not alone in this view; indeed in 1906 Die
Neue Zeit even carried a piece on “Wages and Prostitution” in which Wilhelm
Hammer pointed out that both the men who paid for sex and the women
who sold it were socially diverse groups, so that it could not be material need
that created prostitution.65 Critics responded that Hammer’s own notes on the
young women he had examined showed that they were bitterly poor, even if not
actually starving to death. Poor education, inadequate housing, and inability
to pay for a minimum of “indispensable pleasures” were no less real problems than actual starvation. As the leading venereal disease expert (and Social
Democrat) Alfred Blaschko put it, “human beings simply need a little more to
keep them alive than bread and a spot in the city’s homeless shelter!”66
Not surprisingly, this disagreement extended to the assessment of “race
hygiene,” or eugenics, as well. Henriette Fürth was a particularly vehement
advocate, arguing, for example, in 1911 that the “pathological or incurable
degenerates” could be allowed to have sex if they used contraceptives but
could “never be granted the right to reproduce.”67 In 1913 she argued in favor
of decriminalizing abortion in cases of rape or for the “prevention of degenerate births” and regarded as “incomprehensible” the position of those who
opposed “voluntary or compulsory sterilization” of “defective” people.68 In
contrast, August Bebel himself had ridiculed early eugenic thought as implying that reproduction in the future socialist society would resemble that “in
the [monarchical] state’s stud farms.”69 In 1910, the social policy expert, ethnologist, and race hygiene theorist Hans Fehlinger held in the Sozialistische
Monatshefte that “any legislative regulation of reproductive life” would deliver
a “terrifying instrument of power” into the hands of “officialdom,” while also
being “detrimental to the community in question” because the breeding preferences of bureaucrats would tend toward the suppression of “independence
and individuality.” The real eugenic threat, in any case, was the inheritance of
private property, because it gave some people material advantages they did not
biologically deserve.70
At bottom the central issues in each of these controversies were the same.
After the turn of the century revisionists inched away from the economistic
and revolutionary materialism of orthodox Marxist theory, seeking instead
64

Edmund Fischer, “Die sexuellen Probleme,” SM 15 (1909): 959, 963.
Wilhelm Hammer, “Über Arbeitslöhne und Dirnentum,” NZ 24:2 (1906): 208.
66 Therese Schlesinger-Eckstein, “Über Arbeitslöhne und Dirnentum,” NZ 24:2 (1906): 298, 299;
A. Blaschko, “Arbeitslöhne und Dirnentum,” NZ 24:2 (1906): 296. On Blaschko, see Volkmar
Sigusch, Geschichte der Sexualwissenschaft (Frankfurt: Campus, 2009), pp. 247–253.
67 Henriette Fürth, “Die soziologische Seite des Geschlechtsproblems,” SM 17 (1911): 1478.
68 Henriette Fürth, “Der Rückgang der Geburten als soziales Problem,” Jahrbücher für
Nationalökonomie und Statistik 45 (1913): 756, 758.
69 August Bebel, “Kritische Bemerkungen zu Katzensteins kritischen Bemerkungen über ‘Die Frau
und der Sozialismus,’” NZ 15 (1897): 331–332.
70 Hans Fehlinger, “Über Rassenhygiene,” SM 16 (1910): 968, 970.
65

150

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

to develop a meliorative program defined and guided by biologistic ideas.
The two sides still had much in common, obviously; but specifically with
regard to sexuality, Social Democracy was increasingly divided after about
1905. Revisionists accused the orthodox of simple-minded adherence to a onedimensional version of Marxist social theory that was both increasingly clearly
wrong and overly influenced by bourgeois moralism; the orthodox accused
revisionists of being bourgeois social reformers whose obsession with biology
was leading them politically and ideologically astray.71
There was a good deal of truth to this last accusation, for these conflicts
within Social Democracy were to a large extent the product of the growing interpenetration between revisionist Social Democracy and the sex-reform
movement. Revisionists played important roles in the radical sex-reform movement; and much of the élan of that movement derived precisely from the near
euphoria that resulted from the convergence, in many sex reformers’ thinking, between the economic teleology of Marxist historical materialism and
the biological teleology (as they understood it) of Darwinian evolutionary
thought. Again, Social Democrats generally were less intensely interested in
sex and morality than either conservative religious men and women in the various morality organizations or the liberal Protestant and Jewish women in the
nonconfessional women’s movement. There was no Social Democratic journal devoted to issues of sexual morality and public decency comparable to Der
Volkswart, the Korrespondenzblatt, or the Abolitionist; and Social Democratic
journals like Die Gleichheit, Die Neue Zeit, and the Sozialistische Monatshefte
did not publish on these issues with the frequency that – for example – Die
Frau, Die Frauenbewegung, or the journal of the BDF did.72 Nevertheless,
revisionist Social Democrats in particular made a critical contribution to the
thinking of the radical sex-reform movement after the turn of the century.
The reasons for this are obvious. The basic postulates of socialist thought
offered an alternative to Christian moral discourse that appeared both to be
realistic and to promise transformative improvement. Social Democracy offered
a vision of moral purification every bit as righteous and as ambitious as that of
conservative Christians, but on the foundation of a natural- or social-scientific
worldview. What was more, whereas Christians saw modern society as fundamentally corrupt, pathological, and dangerous, Social Democrats argued that
the pathologies of the present were merely side effects of positive and progressive developments – the birth pangs of a new, more moral, and more rational
society. Sex reformers saw themselves as deliberately championing just that
development.
It is worth considering finally, however, just how frightful that socialist optimism seemed to conservative Christians. For religious moralists, marriage was
a sacrament, not an agreement between two people, to be dissolved when it
71
72

On this point, see Niggemann, Zwischen Sozialismus, p. 252.
See Wischermann, Frauenbewegungen, pp. 65–70.

Social Democratic Sexual Ethics

151

no longer served their purposes. The vision of a future in which people formed
and then dissolved marriages at will was for them a vision of a world in which
marriage was spiritually and morally meaningless. The idea that young people
might engage in a period of experimentation and exploration with sexual and
emotional ties was equally alarming – because, as we have seen, conservative
Christians viewed sexuality as a potentially destructive force that could easily
come to dominate the moral personality altogether. A period of promiscuity or
even of serial monogamy in early adulthood would therefore be the worst imaginable preparation for responsible sexual adulthood, or indeed for the capacity
for moral responsibility of any kind. The communal child-rearing practices
that some socialists envisioned as enabling their moral utopia were anathema
to conservative Christians, who regarded life in the nuclear family as the only
soil in which the moral personality, capable of self-denial in the interests of
others, could thrive. Most fundamentally, finally, the philosophical materialism foundational to both Social Democratic positions on sexual morality –
orthodox and revisionist – was simply not a viable foundation for any kind of
morality at all. For Christians, morality was rooted in man’s spiritual nature;
neither cupidity nor greed and neither biology nor political economy could be
so organized as to be the source of morality.
In that sense conservative Christians actually were right about the relationship between socialism and immorality: the ideas of Social Democrats did form
a key theoretical justification for what conservative Christians saw as sexual
disorder. It therefore cannot have surprised conservative Christians that Social
Democrats played leading roles in two movements that, in their view, defended
sexual behaviors that were exceptionally immoral and corrosive: the homosexual emancipation movement and the medical campaign against venereal
diseases.
Chapters 7 and 8 treat these movements.

7
Homosexual Rights

I. Brain Science and Morality
Nothing better illustrated the profound implications of the philosophical materialism underlying socialist perspectives on sexuality than the emergence of the
homosexual rights movement in Germany at the turn of the century. The prejudice against homosexuality was so intense among educated Germans in this
period that the mere existence of an organized movement against the criminalization of homosexual acts potentially called every other sexual taboo into
question as well. If this issue was debatable, then so was everything. At the
same time, the arguments advanced against §175 of the Criminal Code, which
punished sex between men, represented so profound a revision of prevailing
conceptions of sexuality that they had implications far beyond this one issue.
A concatenation of developments contributed to the emergence of the homosexual emancipation movement. The most important of these lay in the development of psychiatry and of the theory of heredity. The foundation of psychiatry
was the understanding that human consciousness is the product of organic
processes in the brain – that mind, or spirit, is material. This belief led psychiatrists to assume that all kinds of behaviors, attitudes, and character traits
were rooted in the organic structures of the brain. At the same time, it also led
them to believe that these same behaviors, attitudes, and traits were shaped by
heredity.
The central ideas of the German homosexual emancipation movement of
the early twentieth century can be traced to the publications of Karl Heinrich
Ulrichs in the 1860s. Because all human beings, Ulrichs argued, are the product
of a union between a man and a woman, it follows logically from hereditarian
principles that all human beings are fundamentally hermaphrodites (Zwitter) –
a fact reflected in the undifferentiated sexuality of human embryos in the early

152

Homosexual Rights

153

months of their development. Homosexuality was a product not of immorality or willful perversity but of a rare variant or expression of this fundamental hermaphrodism. Homosexuals were people who had developed male
bodies, but female souls, or brains; homosexuality was a biological anomaly,
not a moral failing. The criminalization of homosexual acts was therefore, in
Ulrichs’s view, “a direct violation of human rights.”1
When Ulrichs attempted to present his ideas before an important congress
of natural scientists in 1867, he was literally shouted down; he eventually
immigrated to Italy and died in obscurity. Nevertheless, his ideas were picked
up almost immediately by the new science of psychiatry, and particularly by a
number of influential figures in that discipline who in the 1880s and 1890s laid
the foundations for sexual science (Sexualwissenschaft), or sexology.2 By the
late 1880s and early 1890s, psychiatry was sufficiently developed to produce
a growing number of studies specifically of the psychiatry of sex. The most
influential of these works not only concluded that homosexuality was a product
of an organic defect but also explicitly concluded that §175 was – therefore –
both pointless and unjust.
A particularly important case was that of Richard von Krafft-Ebing, a
German psychiatrist resident in Vienna. In his Textbook of Forensic Psychopathology, published in 1875, Krafft-Ebing concluded that although homosexual acts were rooted “for the most part in moral depravity,” actually there
were cases in which homosexual desires were the product of “a primary and
instinctively perverse sex drive,” which was in turn produced by a pathology of
the brain.3 He associated homosexuality with pederasty and held that homosexuals were characterized by “perversity and monstrosity . . . , imprudence . . . ,
cruelty” and “perverse lusts and selfish impulses”; they were “a severe menace
to society as long as they live” and “should be kept under lock and key for
life.” Nevertheless, they should not be “branded as criminals,” because they
were in fact “unfortunates who deserve pity.”4
1

Quoted in Rolf Gindorf, “Wissenschaftliche Ideologien im Wandel,” in Der unterdrückte
Sexus, ed. Joachim Hohmann (Lollar: Achenbach, 1977), p. 134. See James D. Steakley, The
Homosexual Emancipation Movement in Germany (New York: Arno, 1975), p. 8; Sabine
Mehlmann, “Das doppelte Geschlecht: Die konstitutionelle Bisexualität und die Konstruktion
der Geschlechtergrenze,” Feministische Studien 18 (2000): 36–51.
2 See Manfred Herzer, “Hirschfelds Utopie, Hirschfelds Religion und das dritte Geschlecht der
Romantik,” in Durch Wissenschaft zur Gerechtigkeit? ed. Andreas Seeck (Münster: Lit, 2003),
p. 158; Tilmann Walter, “Begrenzung und Entgrenzung: Zur Genealogie wissenschaftlicher
Debatten über Sexualität,” in Von Lust und Schmerz: Eine Historische Anthropologie der Sexualität, ed. Claudia Bruns and Tilmann Walter (Cologne: Böhlau, 2004), p. 146.
3 Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Lehrbuch der gerichtlichen Psychopathologie (Stuttgart: Enke, 1875),
pp. 11, 15, 18, 160, 161, 163. On Krafft-Ebing, see Harry Oosterhuis, Step-Children of Nature:
Krafft-Ebing, Psychiatry, and the Making of Sexual Identity (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2000); Klaus Müller, “Aber in meinem Herzen sprach eine Stimme so laut” (Berlin: Rosa
Winkel, 1991).
4 Krafft-Ebing, Lehrbuch der gerichtlichen Psychopathologie, pp. 162, 163.

154

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

Twelve years later, however, Krafft-Ebing’s views had substantially changed.
He prefaced his influential Psychopathia sexualis of 1886 with a kind of confession of faith in conservative Christian sexual ethics, arguing that Christianity had done more than anything else to make sexual relationships more
ethical and warning that despite its teachings people were permanently “in
danger of sinking from the luminous heights of pure and chaste love into the
swamp of low lust.” The human spirit was the site of an “unremitting struggle
between . . . sensuality and morality,” always threatening to bring about “the
collapse of the state and material, moral and political ruin.”5 And he still held
that homosexuals were suffering from an “abnormal psychosexual character”
or “hereditary neuropathic taint,” indeed that they were so degenerate that
“many even lack a consciousness of the pathology of their condition.”6 And
yet, Krafft-Ebing now also argued in effect that there were no cases of acquired
homosexuality. This conclusion derived from a newly clarified understanding
of sexuality itself, which he held to be defined by feelings rather than acts.
Homosexuality was a “feeling toward one’s own sex,” not “sexual acts with”
them; it was a perversion, not perversity. In fact, Krafft-Ebing argued that
sexuality was so deeply rooted in selfhood that it could not be changed by
any behavior. The “sexual personality” was among the “most firm constitutive
elements of self-consciousness”; it was inextricably bound up with the “whole
personality and even the physical mode of feeling” of the individual. When genuine homosexuality appeared later in life, therefore, it could do so only on the
basis of a “pre-existing disposition,” of “latent homo- or at least bisexuality.”
Men who turned to homosexual sex as a result of excessive masturbation or
libertinage were, therefore, actually merely perverted heterosexuals.7 In short,
Krafft-Ebing now regarded genuine homosexuality as an authentic form of
sexual subjectivity, or selfhood – as Bebel had put it, “self itself.”
Accordingly, sexuality was not a permanent threat to decency, the family,
and the state but rather the source of almost everything good in human life.
Sex was closely related to religious feeling and to aesthetic sensitivity; it could
inspire heroism, manly self-confidence, and statesmanship. It was an essential
and productive component not only of individual personhood but of human
culture as well. In fact, Krafft-Ebing believed he was engaged in the “rescue of
the honor of humanity,” because his work revealed that so much that “insults
the ethical and aesthetic sensibilities” was rooted not in normal but in pathological sexuality.8
This was his goal specifically with respect to homosexuality as well. He
argued that in cases of “originary” homosexuality, “the anomaly is limited to
5

Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Psychopathia sexualis mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Conträren
Sexualempfindung (Stuttgart: Enke, 1892), pp. 6, 7.
6 Ibid., pp. 190, 227, 228.
7 Ibid., pp. 191, 188, 190.
8 Ibid., pp. 9, 11, V.

Homosexual Rights

155

the vita sexualis alone,” without corrupting the “character and entire spiritual
personality.” Accordingly, “the vita sexualis is among homosexuals . . . exactly
the same as in normal heterosexual love.” Anal intercourse was practiced
“only rarely and clearly only among morally defective . . . individuals”; most
homosexuals practiced merely mutual masturbation, and for many “a mere
embrace is sufficient to bring about ejaculation.” And unlike “depraved libertines,” genuine homosexuals were attracted not to boys but to adult men.9
Homosexuals did have an abnormally strong sex drive; but that merely further
excused their actions, because suppressing it would make them neurasthenic
and depressive.10 Krafft-Ebing still believed that most homosexual acts were
the product of libertinism; but in cases of genuine homosexuality, sex between
men should not be illegal. The genuine homosexual was, in fact, “a mentally ill
person” and hence “not legally responsible,” not a criminal; he was suffering
from “pathological perversion” and not a “moral deviance (perversity).”11 In
an essay on “The Homosexual in Criminal Court” published in 1894, KrafftEbing further elaborated on the implications of his findings. He still argued
that homosexuals “suffered” from a disorder that “is quite incomprehensible
to the normal person and fills him with horror.” But §175 was simply “unjust
and cruel,” because it punished “unfortunate people” who were merely following their “pathological . . . natural urges.” It “is based on false assumptions, is incompatible with the findings of scientific research, has done a great
deal of harm by driving useful and respectable citizens into scandal, distress
and death,” and must be abolished “in the interests of truth, justice, and
humanity.”12
A number of other researchers followed Krafft-Ebing’s lead in the 1890s. The
most influential was Albert Moll, who would become the leading sexologist of
his day by the turn of the century. Moll’s study of Die konträre Sexualempfindung (contrary sexual feeling), published in 1891, found that homosexuality was
an authentic sexual identity – “a pathological instinct that permeates the individual.” In consequence “we who study the question objectively really cannot
find in the homosexual instinct as such anything depraved.”13 The “unsavory
and often contemptible personal characteristics” of homosexuals, their (as he
saw it) tendency to be liars, their moodiness, their love of gossip, and their
vanity and envy, were in fact not signs of moral corruption but merely proof
that the “character” of the homosexual man displayed “more similarity with

9

Ibid., pp. 231, 256, 257, 258.
Ibid., pp. 191, 227, 317, 257, 231.
11 Ibid., pp. 408, 409, 410.
12 Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Der Konträrsexuale vor dem Strafrichter (Leipzig: Deuticke, 1895),
pp. 3–4.
13 Albert Moll, Die konträre Sexualempfindung (Berlin: Fischer, 1893), pp. 103, 139, 134–135,
142, 143, 145, 126, 98. On Moll, see Volkmar Sigusch, Geschichte der Sexualwissenschaft
(Frankfurt: Campus, 2009), pp. 197–233.
10

156

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

that of the woman than that of the man.” Homosexual men were not corrupt, but merely womanish. But the negative image of the homosexual man
was also a product of the fact that it was only the most histrionic types who
were recognizable as homosexuals at all. Many homosexuals were actually
of “irreproachable character,” and some even “outstanding men of culture
and upright character.”14 As for the idea that homosexual sex was disgusting,
Moll simply observed that “normal intercourse with a woman surely has little
that is aesthetic about it” either.15 He therefore rejected the criminalization
of homosexual acts between men out of hand. Section 175 was unjust, it did
not deter homosexual men, punishment did not cure them, abstinence would
merely make them sick or neurotic, and because it was impossible to convert
a heterosexual into a homosexual, the law could not serve any public health
purpose.16
The arguments of Moll and Krafft-Ebing were certainly not universally
accepted. Some psychiatrists believed homosexuality was the product of chance
influences such as example, seduction, exposure to indecent pictures or texts,
mutual masturbation among boys, or, as the forensic psychiatry professor
Gustav Aschaffenburg argued, even the “flood of literature about sex” of recent
years.17 Most argued that some homosexuality was inborn and some acquired,
although they differed as to the proportions, the absolute number of homosexuals, and so on.18 Nevertheless, the historian Florian Mildenberger has
concluded both that most psychiatrists agreed on the inborn nature at least of
some homosexuality and that there was “substantial consensus . . . regarding
the senselessness of §175.”19
In the course of the mid-1890s, a number of factors helped to bring this
emerging psychiatric perspective on homosexuality to the attention of a broader
public. One was the trial of Oscar Wilde in London in 1895, which in
Germany as elsewhere in Europe created an opportunity for sexual radicals
to put their views forward.20 Public policy toward homosexuality was also one
14

Moll, Die konträre, pp. 99, 303, 275, 276, 102, 303.
Ibid., pp. 201, 98, 297, 305, 308.
16 Ibid., pp. 311, 304–312, 296.
17 Gustav Aschaffenburg, Handbuch der gerichtliche Psychiatrie, Erster Theil: Die rechtlichen
Grundlagen der gerichtlichen Psychiatrie, A: Strafrecht und Strafprozess, ed. Alfred Hoche
(Berlin: Hirschwald, 1909), pp. 486, 492. See Magnus Schmid, “Aschaffenburg, Gustav,” in
NDB, vol. 1 (1953), p. 410.
18 See, e.g., Benjamin Tarnovsky, Die krankhaften Erscheinungen des Geschlechtssinnes (Berlin:
Hirschwald, 1886), p. 66; Albert von Schrenck-Notzing, Die Suggestions-Therapie bei
krankhaften Erscheinungen des Geschlechtssinnes (Stuttgart: Enke, 1892), pp. xi, 149; Friedrich
Wachenfeld, Homosexualität und Strafgesetz (Leipzig: Weicher, 1901).
19 Florian Mildenburger, “ . . . in der Richtung der Homosexualität verdorben”: Psychiater, Kriminalpsychologen und Gerichtsmediziner über männliche Homosexualität 1850–1970 (Hamburg:
Männerschwarm, 2002), p. 53.
20 Os. Sero, Der Fall Wilde und das Problem der Homosexualität (Leipzig: Spohr, 1896),
p. 75; Manfred Herzer, Magnus Hirschfeld (Hamburg: Männerschwarm, 2001), p. 94; Magnus
15

Homosexual Rights

157

more issue Social Democrats could use to point to the hypocrisy of bourgeois
sexual mores, and to elaborate their own naturalist alternative. The leading
revisionist Social Democrat Eduard Bernstein, for example, did precisely that
in his reporting for German audiences on the Wilde case in London (where
he was living as a journalist).21 The debate over the lex Heinze gave Social
Democrats an opportunity to raise the issue in Parliament; and August Bebel
sought out Magnus Hirschfeld, the leader of the most influential homosexual
rights organization, in the summer of 1897 and volunteered to support his petition against §175 in parliament, perhaps as a way to poke the advocates of the
lex Heinze in the eye.22 And more broadly, finally, the growth and consolidation of a homosexual subculture particularly in Berlin played an important role
in changing attitudes, particularly after 1900 – including among psychologists
and criminologists (a topic we will return to subsequently).23
In 1896 and 1897 this concatenation of factors produced the two initiatives in Berlin that would dominate the homosexual emancipation movement
for the next two decades. One was the loose coteries of radical activists and
literati around the journal Der Eigene, started in 1896 by Adolf Brand; from
1903 this group called itself the Community of the Peculiar (Gemeinschaft der
Eigenen [GE]). Its members largely eschewed scientific claims, ignoring developments in psychiatry and sexology in favor of more libertarian, rights-based,
Nietzschean-aesthetic argumentation.24 The Scientific-Humanitarian Committee (Wissenschaftlich-humanitäre Komitee [WHK]), founded in 1897 under
the leadership of Magnus Hirschfeld, was more influential; it cast its advocacy for the repeal of §175 – the central focus of its activities – explicitly in
medical-scientific terms.
Hirschfeld first laid out his ideas in 1896 in a pamphlet titled Sappho and
Socrates. Here he staked out the central message of all his later publications on
homosexuality over the next four decades: that human sexuality was not fixed
in two or a few immutable categories or oppositions (man/woman, male/female,
Hirschfeld, Von einst bis jetzt: Geschichte einer homosexuellen Bewegung 1897–1922 (Berlin:
Rosa Winkel, 1986), pp. 67–68.
21 Eduard Bernstein, “Aus Anlass eines Sensationsprozesses” and “Zur Beurtheilung des widernatürlichen Geschlechtsverkehrs,” NZ 13:2 (1895): 176, 229, 232, 233.
22 See Hirschfeld, Von einst, pp. 104, 106; Herzer, Magnus Hirschfeld, p. 70; Mildenberger,
“ . . . in der Richtung,” pp. 11–12.
23 See, e.g., Wolfgang Theis and Andreas Sternweiler, “Alltag im Kaiserreich und in der Weimarer
Republik,” in Eldorado: Homosexuelle Frauen und Männer in Berlin 1850–1950; Geschichte,
Alltag und Kultur, ed. Michael Bollé (Berlin: Frölich & Kaufmann, 1984), pp. 48–73.
24 On Brand, see the essays in Marita Keilson-Lauritz and Rolf F. Lang, eds., Emanzipation
hinter der Weltstadt: Adolf Brand und die Gemeinschaft der Eigenen (Berlin: Müggel-Verlag
Rolf F. Lang, 2000); Joachim S. Hohmann, ed., Der Eigene: Ein Blatt für männliche Kultur: Ein Querschnitt durch die erste Homosexuellenzeitschrift der Welt (Frankfurt: Foerster,
1981); Marina Schuster, “Antiker Eros um 1900,” in Liebe, Lust und Leid: Zur Gefühlskultur
um 1900, ed. Helmut Scheur and Michael Grisko (Kassel: Kassel University Press, 1999),
pp. 123–146.

158

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

hetero/homo, etc.) but rather was a continuum of countless individual variants, and that within this “immeasurable variety” of love, all sexualities were
morally equal. Reviving Ulrichs’s argument, Hirschfeld reasoned that “in their
basic heredity all people are physically and spiritually hermaphrodites.” Remnants of masculinity were present in all women, and of femininity in all men –
and in varying, entirely individual degrees. The “qualitative differences”
between apparently distinct sexualities were in fact only of “quantitative
nature.” Homosexuals, bisexuals, and heterosexuals were thus all the same
in kind, although not in degree. Deviations from “the normal instinct” were
equivalent to “a congenital deformity,” a “birth defect” or a “developmental disorder” similar, say, to cleft palate. Homosexuality was not a pathology
but “a deeply rooted constitutional natural instinct.”25 A further implication,
obviously, was that there was actually no such thing as acquired homosexuality. What was not there at least in latent form could not be developed by any
external influences. It was possible to “awaken slumbering instincts” through
education, example, seduction, or suggestion; but in such cases “‘acquisition’
is just manifestation.”26 Accordingly, §175 was completely senseless – it was
in fact “a judicial crime” ( Justizverbrechen); and homosexuals could demand
legalization “not as a favor, but as their right.”27
Hirschfeld would return again and again in subsequent years to three central
themes set out in Sappho und Sokrates. The first was the authenticity and irreducibility of sexual identity – that sexual preferences were rooted in “the entire
personality” of the individual, were “inborn and unchanging characteristics.”28
He was particularly vehement in his prewar magnum opus on “Homosexuality
in Men and Women” (1914), going to enormous length to identify sexuality
as discernible in the entire physical and psychic personality of the individual –
from temperament to taste in furniture to facial expressions, gait, or the way
people sat. In sum, sexuality was “fused most intimately with the entire essence
of the personality.”29
Second, the fundamental hermaphrodism of all people similarly appeared
over and over in Hirschfeld’s work. In 1905 he would go so far as to assert
baldly that “seen from a very strictly scientific standpoint one can . . . not
really speak of men and women, but rather only of people who are primarily
Th. Ramien [Magnus Hirschfeld], Sappho und Sokrates oder Wie erklärt sich die Liebe der
Männer und Frauen zu Personen des eigenen Geschlechts? (Leipzig: Spohr, 1896), pp. 9–10,
11, 13, 15, 21, 29.
26 Ibid., p. 18.
27 Ibid., pp. 30, 33, 34, 31, 34–35.
28 Magnus Hirschfeld, “Vom Wesen der Liebe,” Jahrbuch für sexuelle Zwischenstufen (hereinafter
JSZ) 8 (1906): 68; Magnus Hirschfeld, “Ursachen und Wesen des Uranismus,” JSZ 5:1 (1903):
26.
29 Magnus Hischfeld, Die Homosexualität des Mannes und des Weibes (Berlin: Marcus, 1920),
pp. 78, 125, 317.
25

Homosexual Rights

159

masculine or primarily feminine.”30 By 1912, in “Natural Laws of Love,”
Hirschfeld would even suggest that “it is in no sense clear yet what is masculine and what is feminine,” and that in any case there were many characteristics
of any individual “which one cannot label . . . with the adjective ‘masculine’ or
‘feminine’ at all.”31
Finally, Hirschfeld also recurred over and over to the theme of the “endless
variety” (1906) or “almost limitless” diversity (1910) of sexual variants. In
“Homosexuality in Men and Women” (1914), he actually did calculate the
number of possible variant sexualities: 43,046,721. But the logic of Hirschfeld’s
ideas was driving him toward the conclusion that actually there were just
people, each and every one of whom effectively constituted a sexual type or
category – that “love is as varied as people are.”32
Just as radical as these ideas were two fundamental assumptions related to
them. The first was that the only legitimate foundation of social order was
individual rights. He elaborated on this position particularly in his study of
“The Nature of Love” (1906), pointing out that because “the modern state
protects the individual, his life, his property, and his honor . . . interfering in
the sexual life of adults, the invasion of the bedroom,” was “an attack on
individual rights” – and hence should itself be punished.33 In 1906 he compared
the homosexual rights movement to the movement for the abolition of slavery
in the United States; in 1908 he even ridiculed §175 as “state regulation of
ejaculation.”34
This assumption rested, ultimately, on a second: that only science could
provide a legitimate and viable foundation for morality. As it became apparent that the clergy could not be won over, and as attacks from the Christian
morality movement mounted, Hirschfeld gradually grew more frank about
this view; and he put his cards fully on the table in “Natural Laws of Love”
in 1912. The title itself was a good indication of his intention here; but for
good measure Hirschfeld dedicated the book to Ernst Haeckel, the central figure in the German monist movement. Hirschfeld characterized love as a set of
automatic reactions of the “soul, brain and nervous system” to stimuli from
the senses. The upward spiral of the stimulus-response cycle culminated in
the “automatism” of the later stages of sexual intercourse, which Hirschfeld
30

Hirschfeld, quoted in Manfred Herzer, “Drei dritte Geschlechter: Magnus Hirschfeld, Adolf von
Harnack und Leo Baeck,” in Der Sexualreformer Magnus Hirschfeld, ed. Elke-Vera Kotowski
and Julius H. Schoeps (Berlin: be.bra, 2004), p. 159.
31 Magnus Hirschfeld, Naturgesetze der Liebe (Berlin: Pulvermacher, 1912), pp. 136–137.
32 Magnus Hirschfeld, “Vom Wesen der Liebe,” JSZ 8 (1906): 5, 63, 282; Magnus Hirschfeld,
“Die Zwischenstufen-‘Theorie,’” SP 6 (1910): 129; Hirschfeld, Naturgesetze, pp. 154–155;
Hirschfeld, Die Homosexualität des Mannes und des Weibes, p. 360.
33 Hirschfeld, “Vom Wesen,” p. 283.
34 Magnus Hirschfeld, “Jahresbericht 1905–1906,” JSZ 8 (1906): 922, 923; Magnus Hirschfeld,
Sexualpsychologie und Volkspsychologie (Leipzig: Wigand’s, 1908), p. 29.

160

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

went so far as to compare to the “mechanical” responses biologists had studied in animals whose brains had been removed.35 By the end of the book,
the antireligious thrust of this mode of thinking was explicit. Europeans had,
he explained, been “in the grip of anti-hedonist exaggerations for two thousand years,” thereby committing psychic “self-mutilation.” Christianity was
essentially sadomasochistic, delighting in the pain of ascetic self-denial. Not
surprisingly, among Christians the “excesses of abstinence” frequently gave
way to “excesses of debauchery”; thus Christian asceticism was the root of
the sexual misery and sexual anarchy of his times. Fortunately, humanity was
progressing toward a sexual culture that made more sense; morality was being
“liberated from prejudices” and rebuilt on “that natural foundation . . . , upon
which alone moral codes can be constructed.”36 In short, Christianity was
repressive and destructive ignorance and superstition; science was liberating
truth.37
Most involved in the homosexual rights movement agreed at least in principle with these fundamental elements of Hirschfeld’s perspective. The terminology of rights and of liberation in particular was virtually universal, appearing
frequently both in the WHK’s journal (the Jahrbuch für sexuelle Zwischenstufen [ JSZ]) and in the publications of those closer to the GE. The leading
intellectual figure in the radical wing of the movement, Benedict Friedländer,
would, for example, make much the same argument in the JSZ 1906, pointing
out that “criminal law is not the guardian of virtue, but rather has the aim of
punishing injuries,” and concluding that §175 was “a codified crime against
individual liberty.”38
It is more difficult to find evidence that others in the movement embraced
Hirschfeld’s project of developing a post-Christian scientific morality, his
understanding of the authentic originary sexual identity of the homosexual,
or his understanding of the endless variety of sexuality. But such views were
often at least implicitly present in texts by others. Thus, for example, the Dutch
student of homosexuality Lucien Römer developed a classificatory system for
describing homosexuals that was even more elaborate than Hirschfeld’s own,
including 423 basic types (each described by a Latin neologism).39 One author
35

Hirschfeld, Naturgesetze, dedication, pp. 15, 47, 152, 46.
Ibid., pp. 206, 207, 238–239, 259–260.
37 Magnus Hirschfeld, Die Kenntnis der homosexuelle Natur eine sittliche Forderung (Berlin:
Stolt, 1907), p. 23.
38 Benedict Friedländer, “Kritik der neueren Vorschläge zur Abänderung des §175,” JSZ 8
(1906): 313, 310. On Friedländer, see Bernd-Ulrich Hergemöller, Mann für Mann: Biographisches Lexikon zur Geschichte von Freundesliebe und mannmännlicher Sexualität im deutschen
Sprachraum (Hamburg: MännerschwarmSkript, 1998), pp. 244–245.
39 Max Katte, “Die virilen Homosexuellen,” JSZ 7:1 (1905): 95–96; L. S. A. M. von Römer,
“Vorläufige Mitteilungen über die Darstellung eines Schemas der Geschlechtsdifferenzierungen,” JSZ 6 (1904): 334, 348–349. See Marita Keilson-Lauritz, Die Geschichte der eigenen
Geschichte (Berlin: Rosa Winkel, 1997), p. 46.
36

Homosexual Rights

161

in Brand’s Der Eigene described himself and his circle as having “won through
to the free, sunny world-view of modern science.”40 Friedländer was even convinced that Christian sexual morality had originated in a plot on the part of the
priests to convince poor, suffering humanity that they were sinful and in need of
clerical guidance – it was a “trick” and a “monstrous fraud of world-historical
proportions . . . , for the purpose of usurping power.”41
The level of prejudice against homosexuality was massive and devastating,
and both wings of the movement were rather secretive. The WHK was not
a legal entity, in part because legal incorporation as an association (Verein)
would have involved submitting a list of members; the GE was even more
loosely organized. Many of those who published in the journals of either group
did not publish under their own names; they used initials or pseudonyms.42 In
1904 Benedict Friedländer observed that many respectable men did not even
dare to attend meetings of the WHK, “so great is the odium that is still associated with the matter.”43 When some well-to-do supporters of the WHK offered
a prize for the best educational essay on homosexuality in 1906, they did so
anonymously; and the winning entry was published under a pseudonym.44
Even so, some key figures did fall foul of the law. In 1902 the police in Berlin
forbade the open sale of the WHK’s educational pamphlets (for example, in
newspaper kiosks) as likely to give moral offense.45 In 1904 Hirschfeld was prevented by the police from speaking in Leipzig, on the grounds that his message
might persuade some in his audience to commit immoral acts “or at least to
consider them entirely unobjectionable.”46 In the same year, the WHK mailed
a questionnaire on sexual preferences to 3,000 students at the Charlottenburg
polytechnical institute (Technische Hochschule). Apparently at the instigation
of Wilhelm Philipps of the AKDS, six of them brought suit against him for libel
(Beleidigung, or insult), on the grounds that asking them whether they were
attracted to men implied that they might be. Hirschfeld was convicted and paid
a heavy fine.47 Adolf Brand’s deliberate provocations brought him a total of
two and a half years in jail for libel and assault; he was repeatedly charged
with distributing indecent materials; he and two colleagues faced hefty fines in

40

Dr. Lucifer, “Zur Erziehung des homosexuell veranlagten Knaben,” Der Eigene (1903),
reprinted in Hohmann, ed., Der Eigene.
41 Benedict Friedländer, “Mitteilungen der Sezession des wissenschaftlich-humanitären Komitees,” in Friedländer, Die Liebe Platons im Lichte der modernen Biologie (Berlin: Zack, 1909),
p. 238.
42 See Keilson-Lauritz, Die Geschichte, pp. 35, 68, 96.
43 Benedict Friedländer, Renaissance des Eros Uranios (Berlin: Lehmann, 1904), p. 92.
44 Hirschfeld, Von einst, p. 58.
45 Kai Sommer, Die Strafbarkeit der Homosexualität von der Kaiserzeit bis zum Nationalsozialismus (Frankfurt: Lang, 1998), p. 128.
46 Mitteilungen des wissenschaftlich-humanitären Komitees (hereinafter MWHK) 3:3 (March
1904).
47 “Jahresbericht 1903–1904,” JSZ 6 (1904): 695, 694, 696.

162

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

1900 and 1903 (along with two months in jail and confiscation of issues of
Der Eigene); and there were further legal cases in 1905 and 1906.48
Not surprisingly, then, the homosexual emancipation movement remained
small. The WHK reported in its newsletter in late 1906 that it had 450 members
or contributors; the Brand circle was probably considerably smaller.49 Both
organizations were focused in Berlin; there appear to have been branches of
the WHK in southwest and south Germany (Munich and Frankfurt) and in
the Rhineland, but they were small and low profile.50 The historian James
D. Steakley estimated that the organization had more than 1,000 members by
1914.51 In 1905 the WHK sent out 1,800 copies of its monthly newsletter to
members and sympathizers; that number rose to 3,000 in late 1907.52 In 1905,
at an early high point in the WHK’s development, 300 attended its annual
conference.53 Der Eigene appeared only sporadically; circulation numbers do
not appear to be available, although at least one issue had a print run of
1,000.54 All in all, it appears likely that the number of active supporters of the
two organizations together was probably around 3,000.
In the absence of membership lists, a useful indicator of who these people
were is the list of 830 signatories to the WHK’s petition for the repeal of
§175 in 1899. Just more than a third were employed in the arts, music, the
theater, publishing, and journalism, and a further 5 or 6 percent were employed
in museums, archives, and libraries or were academics; a third were doctors;
and about 9 percent were in the legal professions. Just more than 1 percent
were members of the clergy.55 The twenty-eight officers (Obmänner) of the
WHK in 1907 had a similar social profile: ten were doctors (plus one dentist),
four lawyers, three businessmen, three writers, two members of the nobility,
one a theologian, one an engineer, one a druggist (and two not identified by
profession).56 The WHK was dominated, in short, by doctors, lawyers, and
members of the white-collar middle class in what we might call the culture
industry. The professions dominant in the morality movements were virtually
absent.
An early focus for the activity of the WHK was the publication and circulation of its petition against §175, which was first submitted in 1897 with
48

See Keilson-Lauritz, Die Geschichte, pp. 85–112.
MWHK 5:11 (November 1906): 202.
50 MWHK 3:3 and 6 (March and June 1904), 4:7 (July 1905): 18, and 4:10 (October 1905):
14; Marita Keilson-Lauritz and Friedemann Pfäfflin, eds., 100 Jahre Schwulenbewegung an der
Isar: Die Sitzungsberichte des wissenschaftlich-humanitären Komitees München 1902–1908
(Munich: Forum Homosexualität und Geschichte Munich, 2003).
51 Steakley, Homosexual Emancipation Movement, p. 60.
52 Sommer, Die Strafbarkeit, pp. 111, 129; Hirschfeld, Von einst, p. 52; MWHK 6:8/9 (1907)
and 6:12 (December 1907).
53 MWHK 4:11 (November 1905): 4.
54 Keilson-Lauritz, Die Geschichte, p. 98.
55 “Petition,” pp. 242–265.
56 MWHK 6:3 (March 1907): 41–42.
49

Homosexual Rights

163

200 signatures; it was resubmitted in 1899, 1904, and 1907, in the latter year
with 6,000 signatures.57 The petition itself gave mostly medical grounds for the
decriminalization of sex between men, concluding that §175 was “incompatible
with advanced scientific knowledge”; from 1899 onward it was accompanied
by a supplement that gave primarily juristic grounds, arguing that §175 was
“in contradiction with the principles of the constitutional state, which must
only punish where rights are injured.”58 From 1899 the JSZ brought scholarly
and informational articles. From 1902 the WHK also put out informational or
agitatorial pamphlets – about 100,000 copies by 1914.59 In 1898 Hirschfeld
published a new edition of the works of Karl Heinrich Ulrichs; other members
of the WHK published translations of novels with homosexual themes, and
works of Oscar Wilde.60 Hirschfeld’s 1904 study of the homosexual subculture
of Berlin (“Berlin’s Third Sex,” a term commonly in use at the time), published
in a popular series on Germany’s big cities, sold some 28,000 copies.61
Meetings of the WHK in Berlin appear to have been relatively frequent,
although small; the meetings of the Gemeinschaft der Eigenen were sporadic
and even smaller – one source reported meetings of fifteen or eighteen people
in 1904. From 1905, Hirschfeld and others addressed public and medical and
scientific meetings in major provincial centers around Germany.62 Probably
more significant in influencing public opinion in the long run was the WHK’s
survey among students in Charlottenburg and another sent to metalworkers in
Berlin. These yielded what was for the time an astonishing result: something
like 2 percent of men were attracted only or primarily to men, and another 3
or 4 percent to both women and men. Previous estimates had been far lower:
Ulrichs and the leading sexologists Iwan Bloch and Albert Moll believed that
perhaps 1 in 2,000 men were homosexual, and Krafft-Ebing estimated perhaps
1 in 1,000. As Hirschfeld pointed out, these survey numbers suggested that
there were some 1.2 million homosexuals in Germany, and 56,000 in Berlin

57

See Angela Taeger and Rüdiger Lautmann, “Sittlichkeit und Politik: §175 im deutschen Kaiserreich (1871–1919),” in Männerliebe im alten Deutschland, ed. Rüdiger Lautmann and Angela
Taeger (Berlin: Rosa Winkel, 1992), pp. 22–246; Gesa Lindemann, “Magnus Hirschfeld,” in
Homosexualität: Handbuch der Theorie- und Forschungsgeschichte, ed. Rüdiger Lautmann
(Frankfurt: Campus, 1993), p. 100.
58 “Petition,” p. 241; “Nachtrag” to the petition, JSZ 1 (1899): 266.
59 Keilson-Lauritz, Die Geschichte, pp. 44–45; Manfred Baumgardt, “Die HomosexuellenBewegung bis zum Ende des Ersten Weltkrieges,” in Bollé, ed., Eldorado, p. 19; an English
translation of the first, 1902 pamphlet appears in Mark Blasius and Shane Phelan, eds., We
Are Everywhere: A Historical Sourcebook of Gay and Lesbian Politics (New York: Routledge,
1997), pp. 139–142.
60 Herzer, Magnus Hirschfeld, p. 103; Hirschfeld, Von einst, pp. 61, 66.
61 Magnus Hirschfeld, Berlin’s Drittes Geschlecht (Berlin: Rosa Winkel, 1991/Seemann, 1904),
p. 74.
62 Keilson-Lauritz, Die Geschichte, p. 96; “Jahresbericht 1905/1906,” JSZ 8 (1906): 919;
Hirschfeld, Von einst, pp. 173–178.

164

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

alone.63 These figures suggested how unrealistic was the idea (or ideal) of
punishing all these miscreants.
Particularly in the years before 1907, these activities enabled the homosexual rights movement to generate a lively discussion of their agenda. As the
annual report of the WHK pointed out in 1906, as late as 1895 there had
been about a half dozen substantive publications in Germany on the subject of
homosexuality annually; by 1905 there were some 320.64 In Hirschfeld’s view,
this in itself was “no small thing: the period of silencing, of ignoring, is over,
definitively past. . . . Public opinion, which before fearfully avoided anything
even related to the topic, now concerns itself intensively with homosexuality.
It is, so to speak, on the public agenda.”65
The movement was also able to achieve some rather remarkable successes
in winning over psychiatrists and sexual scientists. A particularly striking case
is that of Iwan Bloch. In a 1902 study of the etiology of sexual disorders,
Bloch insisted that “‘inborn’ cases of homosexuality probably don’t exist at
all”; the whole idea was a product of the lies of homosexuals (“Priapus is a
god of lies”). Instead, homosexuality and other perversions were caused by the
natural or “physiological” need for sexual variety or by “external influences”
like suggestion or association.66 In fact, he feared that perversions could be
sparked by any form of deviation from a rational and respectable bourgeois
mode of life – sexual overindulgence, idleness among the wealthy, the influence of servants (who were from the lower classes and hence were primitive
and more likely to be perverts), the perversions common in brothels, mutual
masturbation among boys, indecent literature, pornography, nude statuary,
the ballet, variety-theater acts, circus acts, and so on and so forth.67 In the
case of women, he mentioned the role of the women’s movement, which gave
women masculine sensibilities and built solidarity among them. But the “primary etiological factor” was, for Bloch, “homosexuals themselves.” For “most
homosexuals are satisfied only by sexual intercourse with sexually normal people, whom they try to seduce for this purpose” – and it was a “sad truth” that
many homosexuals were particularly attracted to young boys. A repeal of §175
would be a “potent encouragement of the ruination of youth” and the consequence would be “inevitably a progressive moral and physical degeneration
63

Magnus Hirschfeld, “Das Ergebnis der statistischen Untersuchungen über den Prozentsatz der
Homosexuellen,” JSZ 6 (1904): 165, 170, 176; Bernhard Egger, “Iwan Bloch,” in Lautmann,
ed., Homosexualität, p. 87; Krafft-Ebing, Psychopathia, p. 232; Moll, Die konträre, p. 75.
For a later study, see Johannes Dück, “As dem Geschlechtsleben unserer Zeit,” SP 10 (1914):
754–755.
64 “Jahresbericht 1905–1906,” JSZ 8 (1906): 898–899.
65 “Jahresbericht 1904–1905,” JSZ 7 (1905): 952.
66 Iwan Bloch, Beiträge zur Aetiologie der Psychopathia sexualis, 2 vols. (Dresden: Dohrn, 1902),
vol. I, pp. 11, 12; vol. II, p. 190. On Bloch, see Günter Grau, Iwan Bloch: Hautarzt, Medizinhistoriker, Sexualforscher (Berlin: Hentrich & Hentrich, 2007).
67 Bloch, Beiträge, vol. 1, pp. 170–214.

Homosexual Rights

165

of the human race.” Homosexuals should therefore be confined to “special
institutions” where “all therapeutic methods for the real extirpation of this
unhappy instinct can be tried.”68
By the time of the publication of his very influential study, “The Sexual Life
of Our Times,” in 1907, Bloch had performed a complete about-face. He now
distinguished between genuine homosexuality and “pseudohomosexuality,”
the latter denoting primarily homosexual acts among heterosexuals in singlesex institutional settings. But the former was the norm and was not a pathology
or sickness at all. Instead, “genuine homosexuality like heterosexuality has the
character of an instinct rooted in the essential nature of the individual.” Having
called Hirschfeld’s estimates of the number of homosexuals “pure nonsense”
in 1902, Bloch now accepted the “approximate correctness” of Hirschfeld’s
numbers and observed that they meant that homosexuals had to be viewed as
“a curious anthropological variation on the genus Homo.” As for §175, it was
no longer the shield of youth but a “codified injustice,” even a “sacrilege.”69
One key reason for Bloch’s change of perspective appears to have been
that Hirschfeld introduced him to actual, live homosexuals in Berlin; his earlier
work, apparently, was entirely theoretical, based on secondhand information.70
Nor was this a unique case. The psychiatrist Paul Näcke, for example, regarded
homosexuality as a pathology in his early publications, but after visiting Berlin’s
homosexual scene in the company of Hirschfeld in 1904, he reported that he
was now “very much inclined to see homosexuality as a normal, infrequent
variation of the sex drive.”71 In other words, Hirschfeld’s knowledge of and
access to the thriving homosexual subculture of Berlin was an important factor
in reshaping medical opinion.
In contrast, the legislative response to the WHK’s petition against §175
might have been taken as rather discouraging: it was killed in committee twice
and debated in the plenum twice but on both occasions rejected (in 1898
and 1905).72 Hirschfeld, however, regarded the mere fact that parliament discussed the question in 1898 as a sign of progress – indeed, it was enough to
convince him that “truth is on the march.”73 By 1905, the debate was much
more heated. In that session the Social Democratic spokesman adopted most
of the arguments of the homosexual emancipation movement – for example,
that the treatment of homosexuals was the modern equivalent of the persecution of witches in the Middle Ages; that science had discovered that there
were not only men and women but “a great number of intermediary steps”;
68

Ibid., pp. 248, 238, 251–252, 254.
Iwan Bloch, Das Sexualleben unserer Zeit (Berlin: Marcus, 1907), pp. 16, 56, 541–542, 543,
544, 549, 558, 577, 591.
70 Egger, “Iwan Bloch,” p. 90; Iwan Bloch, in MWHK 6:8/9 (August 1907): 164.
71 P. Näcke, “Ein Besuch bei den Homosexuellen in Berlin,” AKAK 15 (1904): esp. 248–250,
260.
72 “Bericht der IX. Kommission,” SBVR, vol. 164, no. 191, pp. 1763–1765.
73 “Petition,” JSZ 1 (1899): 277.
69

166

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

and that homosexuality was not even a disease and, in any case, was not
immoral, because “naturalia non sunt turpia.”74 Not surprisingly, Hirschfeld
again judged the debate “an important step for our movement; this is the first
time that the German parliament, perhaps the first time that any parliament
has discussed the well-being and woes of homosexuals in open session.”75 It
may have seemed significant, too, that Hirschfeld in particular was able to
make himself a resource, serving as an expert witness for individuals suffering
from the nasty effects of §175. Without citing figures, Hirschfeld had claimed
already in 1901 that “in a whole series of cases” he had been able to convince
the courts that the defendant did not have free will “with respect to the sexual
instinct,” thereby securing acquittal (by reason of diminished responsibility) or
even dismissal.76
Finally, particularly after 1905, the homosexual rights movement was able to
build alliances with a growing number of organizations pursuing related goals.
The WHK had a particularly close relationship, for example, with the leading
sex-reform organization in Germany, the League for the Protection of Motherhood (BfM), which was formed in 1905; a number of leading figures in the
WHK were early members.77 Both organizations had ties to the German Monist
League (Deutscher Monistenbund [DMB]). Hirschfeld was one of the signatories to the public invitation to join the DMB at its founding in 1906, as was
Helene Stöcker, the key personality in the BfM.78 Leading members of all three
groups were close to the SPD as well. Hirschfeld himself became a Social Democrat while at university, and one historian has suggested that he was effectively
“the great retailer of Social Democratic sexology.”79 The WHK and Hirschfeld
in particular also cultivated ties to the emerging psychoanalytic movement; and
Hirschfeld was among the founding members of the Berlin Psychoanalytic Association in 1908.80 Sigmund Freud himself held that homosexuality should not
74

Magnus Hirschfeld, “Jahresbericht 1905–1905,” JSZ 7 (1905): 973, 974, 975, 980, 981, 984,
983.
75 Ibid., p. 1037.
76 “Jahresbericht 1900,” JSZ 3 (1901): 605 (quotation), 606.
77 See Cornelie Usborne, “Geburtenkontrolle in der Weimarer Republik und Magnus Hirschfelds
widersprüchliche Interessen,” in Kotowski and Schoeps, eds., Der Sexualreformer, p. 114; Kurt
Hiller, Leben gegen die Zeit (Reinbek: Rowohlt, 1969), p. 73.
78 Marielouise Janssen-Jurreit, “Nationalbiologie, Sexualreform und Geburtenrückgang,” in Die
Überwindung der Sprachlosigkeit, ed. Gabriele Dietze (Darmstadt: Luchterhand, 1979), p. 143;
Florian Mildenberger, “Magnus Hirschfeld und der Monismus: Wechselseitige Befruchtung
oder Austausch von Irrtümern?” Würzburger medizinhistorische Mitteilungen 26 (2007): 83–
85; Mildenberger, “ . . . in der Richtung,” p. 69n25; Iwan Bloch, “Sexualwissenschaftlicher
Kursus in Jena,” Zeitschrift für Sexualwissenschaft (hereinafter ZSW) 1 (1914): 292–294.
79 Volkmar Sigusch, “Eugenisches Denken in der Sexuologie,” in Durch Wissenschaft zur
Gerechtigkeit? ed. Andreas Seeck (Münster: Lit, 2003), p. 59; Herzer, Magnus Hirschfeld,
pp. 56, 68, 75; Hiller, Leben, p. 18; Steakley, Homosexual Emancipation Movement, pp. 43,
56.
80 Herzer, Magnus Hirschfeld, p. 179.

Homosexual Rights

167

be classified as a disease, and at least before 1910 he argued that it must have
some foundation in the constitution of the individual.81 Finally, Hirschfeld
was also able to build ties to the broader emerging discipline of sexology,
among other things by cofounding the short-lived Journal of Sexual Science
in 1908, and then the successful Medical Society for Sexual Science (Ärztliche
Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft und Eugenik [ÄGSE]) in 1913, in collaboration with Iwan Bloch and the prominent sexologist Albert Eulenburg.82
In short, increasingly after 1905 the homosexual emancipation movement
appeared to be part of a rapidly expanding and ramifying spectrum of reform
movements explicitly and self-consciously founded on a shared commitment to
a scientific worldview, and particularly to a social and sexual ethics based on
natural science. The formation in 1907/1909 of the Weimar Cartel, a coalition
of organizations committed to a secular and libertarian worldview (including
the BfM, the DMB, the Society for Ethical Culture, the League for Secular
Schools, and several other organizations), helped to foster the sense that what
supporters considered modernity – the scientific view of the world, individual
rights, and some form of democratic and socialist politics – was on the march.83
II. Hypervirilism, Scandal, and the Emergent Monist Reform Milieu
As it turned out, however, the march of progress was anything but smooth. The
entire period from 1906 to 1910 was, in fact, one of painful reversals. The first
of these was a split within the WHK itself. Differences between Hirschfeld’s
relatively moderate WHK and the more radical grouping around Adolf Brand
and Der Eigene had divided the movement from its inception; and in 1906
the influential radical Benedict Friedländer led a self-styled “secession from the
WHK.” The WHK’s reliance on medical and above all psychiatric authority,
he argued, had produced “a certain one-sidedness” in the movement, encouraging the view that homosexual desire was primarily a sexual pathology.84
In fact, however, sexual orientation and sexual activity were not problematic
for the normal homosexual or bisexual; and such people did not need medical
experts to speak for them. “In a matter in which the subjective feelings play
a key role,” he pointed out, “it is obvious that only those can be counted
as experts who know that subjective feeling from their own experience.” The
81

See Martin Dannecker, “Sigmund Freud über Inversion und Homosexualität,” in Lautmann,
ed., Homosexualität, p. 161; Sigmund Freud, “Die ‘kulturelle’ Sexualmoral und die moderne
Nervosität,” SP 1 (1908): 116.
82 See Andreas Pretzel, “Disziplinierungsbestrebungen: Magnus Hirschfeld und die Ärztliche
Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft,” in Kotowski and Schoeps, eds., Der Sexualreformer,
p. 138. On Eulenburg, see Volkmar Sigusch, Geschichte der Sexualwissenschaft (Frankfurt:
Campus, 2009), pp. 234–246.
83 On the Weimar Cartel, see Horst Groschopp, Dissidenten: Freidenkerei und Kultur in Deutschland (Berlin: Dietz, 1997), p. 20.
84 Friedländer, Renaissance, pp. 57, 81, 75.

168

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

people best able to represent the interests and analyze the feelings of homosexuals and bisexuals were not “crazy-doctors” (Irrenärzte) but homosexuals and
bisexuals themselves.85 And the proper basis for the homosexual emancipation
movement was not natural science but natural law; it was primarily a question
of the “axiomatic principle of personal freedom,” not of medicine.86
Friedländer associated his own, primarily political argumentation with
manliness, claiming to speak for those with “virile” character – not for the
“Urnings” (Ulrichs’s term), those with a woman’s soul in a man’s body. Real
men would not “beg for pity” by characterizing themselves as suffering from
a “disease” or a “deformity” or even an “anomaly.”87 The time was ripe,
instead, for principled opposition. The movement had now grown so large and
influential that it could “probably no longer be held back by any power.”88
And it was only one part of the “whole modern movement for sexual freedom”
(Friedländer mentioned particularly the BfM) against the “fraud,” the “ascetic
delusion,” of “the Christian priests of the Middle Ages” who had labeled
“everything sexual as suspect and sexual pleasure as such . . . as sinful.”89 In
concrete terms, Friedländer supported the idea of a mass self-outing of homosexual men – a strategy discussed but rejected at the 1905 meeting of the
WHK.90
Friedländer’s advocacy of this “manly” approach was rooted in an alternative understanding of the nature of homosexuality. In his Renaissance des
Eros Uranios of 1904, Friedländer reasoned that human beings were higher
primates, animals with social instincts; and those instincts had “‘carnal’ or
physiological” foundations, “physiological forces of attraction . . . independent
of sexual difference.” In contrast, sexual attraction between males and females
had nothing to do with the higher functions of sociality; it was merely the
foundation of reproduction, a “primitive” urge humans shared with all
animals.91 The indiscriminate physiological attraction binding social animals
together, in contrast, was the foundation of everything higher – for example,
love of friends, patriotism, and humanitarianism. Same-sex attraction was “a
special, inborn, specifically human affect sui generis,” and it was what made
human beings civilized.92
The boundary between sexual attraction and “physiological friendship”
(as he called the bonds created by men’s social instincts) was, Friedländer
85

Ibid., pp. 4, 5, 56.
Benedict Friedländer, “Denkschrift für die Freunde und Fondszeichner des wissenschaftlichhumanitären Komitees im Namen der Sezession des wissenschaftlich-humanitären Komitees,”
in Friedländer, Die Liebe Platons, pp. 226, 200, 202.
87 Ibid., p. 203.
88 Ibid., p. 209.
89 Ibid., pp. 228, 227.
90 MWHK 4:11 (November 1905): 3.
91 Friedländer, Renaissance, pp. 214, XIII, 213.
92 Ibid., pp. 216, 153.
86

Homosexual Rights

169

conceded, “more or less fluid”; men sensually attracted to each other would of
course sometimes slip over into sexual acts. That was unfortunate; but there
were of course endless instances of “cruder instincts” and “animalistic passion”
in heterosexual relations as well. The whole matter was in any case “really not
such a frightful affair.”93 Fundamentally the situation was that “two people
who like each other give each other pleasurable sensations” without injury to
each other or anyone else; the idea that the state should get involved in that
scenario was “as absurd as any taboo of primitive peoples.”94
The persecution of homosexual men in fact rested on absurd superstition,
foisted on humanity by priests and women. The prevailing Christian code of
morality consisted of “remnants of a cunning clerical fraud and sinister delusion,” designed to make men believe that they needed priests to intercede for
their sinfulness.95 But its primary supporters were actually “females” (Weiber),
for the simple reason that women were inferior and slavish creatures. As the
“lesser sex,” the “mentally inferior half of humanity,” women needed something to stifle men’s superior energy, intellect, and creativity.96 The unholy
alliance of the “woman-worshipping tradition of the priest-ridden Middle
Ages” and “modern, misdirected revolutionary egalitarian fanaticism” subjected men to “permanent female surveillance,” which “prevents any real, even
merely intellectual, much less physical intimacy among men from arising.” With
solidarity among men sabotaged, the “social tyranny of women, supported by
custom and priests” was crippling the whole of European culture. Love was
one of the main sources of joy in human life, and joy lent people “energy and
inclination to think, above all to independent scientific or artistic . . . thought.”
Small wonder, then, that the Greeks, who had not denied men the better, more
spiritual half of their opportunities for love, were so creative, whereas modern
Europeans were merely “materialistic and commercial.”97 What was more,
men were by nature characterized by “independence, freedom and productive
work,” and friendship between them was thus a “source of strength and the
sense of self-reliance” and a “bulwark of individual and in particular masculine
freedom.” Women, in contrast, were characterized by “dependence and obedience.” The “tyranny” of women was therefore the great obstacle to democratic
political progress.98 This was also why Social Democracy – as an “authoritarian
Marxist distortion” of real socialism – supported women’s rights.99
Hirschfeld would later (in 1914) dismiss Friedländer’s secession as an
“extremist side-show.”100 But the roots of the split in the WHK were actually
93

Ibid., pp. 219, 196, 197, 223.
Ibid., p. 226; Friedländer, “Denkschrift,” p. 226.
95 Ibid., pp. XII, XIII.
96 Ibid., pp. 294, 277, 146, 149, 152, 151.
97 Ibid., pp. 71, 244.
98 Friedländer, Renaissance, pp. 270, 297, 298.
99 Friedländer “Denkschrift,” p. 181; Friedländer, Renaissance, pp. 318, 310, 271, 294.
100 Hirschfeld, Die Homosexualität des Mannes und des Weibes, p. 1007.
94

170

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

quite deep.101 The concept of the “supervirile” homosexual, who was so manly
that he was “the highest flower of humanity,” intellectually, spiritually, and
physically superior (and attractive) to other men, had been advanced already
by the zoologist and Darwin-popularizer Gustav Jäger in 1880.102 And ideas
similar to Friedländer’s had been standard in Der Eigene’s circle for a decade by
1906. In 1898 the poet and anarchist John Henry MacKay echoed Friedländer’s
later rejection of medical authority, remarking that “I will not let others prescribe . . . the target of my feelings.”103 Elisar von Kupffer, poet and editor of
an anthology of homosexual literature published in 1900, denounced his times
as “unmanly,” calling for the “emancipation of men” and the “revival of masculine culture.”104 In 1902 the ethnologist Heinrich Schurtz published a study
of “Age-Groups and Male Associations” around the world, establishing that
men had a “purely social instinct” that bound them to other men and made
them the “bearers of almost all higher social development.”105 And in concrete
terms Friedländer was apparently able to attract a number of major WHK
donors, thereby cutting painfully into the organization’s financial base (at least
until his death in 1908).106
The timing of Friedländer’s initiative, however, could scarcely have been
more unfortunate. For in 1907 the movement was overtaken by a snowballing
series of homosexual scandal trials involving high government officials, and
by the wave of public anger they inspired. In late 1906 the editor of the liberal journal Die Zukunft, Maximilian Harden, published a series of articles
attacking the court intrigues of a close associate of the emperor, Prince Philipp
zu Eulenburg, and his friends; in particular he suggested that Eulenburg was
homosexual, and that this explained his preference for a conciliatory approach
101

See Harry Oosterhuis, “Homosexual Emancipation in Germany before 1933: Two Traditions,” in Homosexuality and Male Bonding in Pre-Nazi Germany, ed. Harry Oosterhuis and
Hubert Kennedy (New York: Haworth Press, 1991), esp. pp. 9–10; Claudia Bruns, Politik
des Eros: Der Männerbund in Wissenschaft, Politik und Jugendkultur (1880–1934) (Cologne:
Böhlau, 2008).
102 Gustav Jäger, Die Entdeckung der Seele (Leipzig: Günther, 1880), p. 266, in Karl Maria
Kertbeny: Schriften zur Homosexualitätsforschung, ed. Manfred Herzer (Berlin: Rosa Winkel,
2000), p. 254. See Georg Uschmann, “Jäger, Gustav,” in NDB, vol. 10 (1974), p. 26.
103 MacKay, quoted in Yvonne Ivory, “The Urning and His Own: Individualism and the Finde-Siècle Invert,” German Studies Review 26 (2003): 345. See Walter Fähnders, “Anarchism and Homosexuality in Wilhelmine Germany,” Journal of Homosexuality 29 (1995):
117–153; Hubert Kennedy, John Henry MacKay (Sagitta): Anarchist der Liebe (Hamburg:
Männerschwarm, 2007).
104 Elisar von Kupffer, Lieblingminne und Freundesliebe in der Weltliteratur (Leipzig: Spohr,
1900), pp. 1, 2, 3, 4–5, 13. Fabio Ricci, Ritter, Tod und Eros: Die Kunst Elisar von Kupffers
(1872–1942) (Cologne: Böhlau, 2007).
105 Heinrich Schurtz, Altersklassen und Männerbünde (Berlin: Reimer, 1902), pp. iv, v. On
Schurtz, see Bruns, Politik, pp. 79–106.
106 See Magnus Hirschfeld, “Jahresbericht 1906/1908,” JSZ 9 (1908): 630. For an instance of
support for Friedländer’s ideas, see Keilson-Lauritz and Pfäfflin, eds., 100 Jahre Schwulenbewegung, pp. 53, 57–58.

Homosexual Rights

171

in foreign relations. Two members of this same grouping were accused of
homosexual activities at the same time, and an unofficial investigation suggested that scores of prominent aristocrats were homosexual.107 Adolf Brand
made a particularly ill-advised attempt to “out” the chancellor, Bernhard von
Bülow, who took him to court for libel, and Kuno von Moltke – a prominent figure at court – sued Harden. The resulting court cases dragged out over
two years, complete with surprise witnesses, overturned convictions, perjury
charges, and a courtroom heart attack; in the end one key trial was indefinitely
postponed for health reasons, and the government paid the cost of a settlement
to make the other go away.108
As this whole affair dragged on and on, a growing number of opinion makers
appear to have concluded that the whole business was a farce, had embarrassed
the nation before the international public, and was – somehow – the fault of
homosexuals. The liberal press, which had previously seemed to support repeal
of §175, turned sharply against the homosexual rights movement.109 Some
academic sexologists, too, now turned against the movement. Albert Moll,
although still supporting the repeal of §175, argued that the trials proved that
it was a terrible mistake to combine agitation with science, as Hirschfeld and
his colleagues did.110 And the scandal provided an opportunity for reactionary
figures to return to well-worn arguments that homosexuality was a “communicable disease” (in the words of Friedrich Wachenheim) or the product of
excessive masturbation (as Otto Ammon saw it).111
This complex of events had a profound impact on the homosexual rights
movement.112 Already in May 1908, the AKDS was celebrating the fact that
public opinion had turned against the WHK and its ideas, a development it
saw as evidence that “God the Father still rules the world.”113 Hirschfeld,
shocked at the vehemence of homophobia in the press and public, spoke of a
“collapse” and blamed Brand and Friedländer for alienating the public. The
WHK’s income fell by two-thirds, and the number of contributors by half.
107

See James D. Steakley, “Iconography of a Scandal: Political Cartoons and the Eulenburg Affair
in Wilhemin Germany,” in Hidden from History: Reclaiming the Gay and Lesbian Past, ed.
Martin B. Duberman, Martha Vicinus, and George Chauncey, Jr. (New York: New American
Library/Penguin, 1989), p. 239.
108 See MWHK 6:11 (November 1907): 213–214; Hirschfeld, Von einst, pp. 143, 148–149;
“Jahresbericht 1906/1908,” JSZ 9 (1908); “Einleitung und Situationsbericht,” Vierteljahrsberichte des wissenschaftlich-humanitären Komitees (hereinafter VBWHK) 1 (1909).
109 See Baumgardt, “Die Homosexuellen-Bewegung,” p. 22; “Jahresbericht 1906/1908,” p. 637.
110 See Hirschfeld, Sexualpsychologie, p. 4.
111 Friedrich Wachenfeld, “Zur Frage der Berechtigung einer Agitation gegen §175 Str. G. B.,”
Deutsche medizinische Wochenschrift 34 (1908): 157; Otto Ammon, “Der Ursprung der
Homosexualität und die Deszendenzlehre,” Archiv für Rassen- und Gesellschaftsbiologie
(hereinafter ARGB) 6 (1909): 651, 65.
112 On later cases, see “Materialien. A. Die angeblichen Skandalaffären in Bremen, Leipzig, und
München,” VBWHK 1 (1909): 379.
113 Quoted in “Jahresbericht 1906/1908,” pp. 633, 656–657, 655, 660.

172

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

The JSZ was not published at all in 1907 and from 1908 appeared only in
slimmed-down format as a quarterly report. The GE virtually disappeared, as
did Friedländer’s secession.114
It was particularly unfortunate that this crisis came just as the government and parliament were beginning deliberations on a reform of the Criminal
Code. When the national parliament’s committee on petitions discussed the
WHK petition once again in late 1907, rather than considering legalization,
it recommended new and more severe penalties for male prostitution and for
those who used positions of authority to secure homosexual favors.115 A first,
informal “pre-draft” (Vorentwurf ) of the new Criminal Code, published in
October 1909, adopted these suggestions, explaining that homosexuality was
a “danger to the state, since it is suited to damage men most severely in their
character and in their civil existence, to wreck family life, and to corrupt male
youth” and would “seldom remain without influence on the whole moral personality of these deviants.” It even extended the prohibition on homosexual
acts to women, as well as men.116
And yet, the crisis was relatively short lived. By 1909, it appears that the
public was beginning to grow tired of the whole matter. Albert Eulenburg,
commenting on the belief of the authors of the pre-draft that popular opinion demanded punishment of homosexual acts, held that “in truth public
opinion . . . is very little concerned with the matter” and asked, “Why all the
fuss?”117 In late 1911 the journal of the WHK claimed that increasingly “people
sense the absurdity, the injustice, in part even the ridiculousness of” §175.118
The attempt to extend §175 to women, in particular, backfired; much public
commentary found the idea at best laughable, and at worst outrageous. In late
1909, for example, one conservative newspaper commented that
in an age in which behind the scenes the fate of Europe, the well-being and
destiny of peoples is being negotiated . . . , the parliament of the German empire is
solemnly debating whether one boarding-school girl is allowed to slip into the bed
of another, whether they are allowed to kiss each other on the lips, and whether
114

“Einleitung und Situationsbericht,” VBWHK 1 (1909): 10, 29; Hirschfeld, Sexualpsychologie,
p. 18; “Jahresbericht 1906/1908,” p. 629; Steakley, Homosexual Emancipation Movement,
p. 38.
115 “Neunundfünfzigster Bericht der Kommission für die Petitionen,” SBVR, vol. 187, no. 604,
pp. 4, 2.
116 “Aus der Zeit,” VBWHK 2 (1910): 115, 116, 117, 118, 121; Vorentwurf zu einem Deutschen
Strafgesetzbuch (Berlin: Guttentag, 1909), p. 50; Vorentwurf zu einem Deutschen Strafgesetzbuch: Begründung (Berlin: Guttentag, 1909), p. 690. See Tracie Matysik, “In the Name of
the Law: The ‘Female Homosexual’ and the Criminal Code in Fin de Siècle Germany,” Journal
of the History of Sexuality 13 (2004): 26–48.
117 WHK, Gewichtige Stimmen über das Unrecht des §175 unseres Reichsstrafgesetzbuchs (§250
des Entwurfs zu einem neuen Deutschen Reichsstrafgesetzbuch) (Leipzig: Spohr, 1914),
pp. 14, 13.
118 “Schutzalterfrage,” VBWHK 3 (1911): 13.

Homosexual Rights

173

further caresses are to be permitted by the state, and if so then which, and if not
then what should be done with the miscreants.119

In fact, one effect of the proposed extension was to rally women’s organizations openly to the cause of the WHK. The women’s movement was divided
by the issue. Marie Stritt, chair of the BDF until 1910, expressed “horror” at
male homosexuality, and the organization’s legal committee, rather perversely,
even welcomed the extension of criminalization to women as a step toward
equality before the law. But others saw that step as proof of male hypocrisy,
voicing their “disgust at what thousands of men call ‘normal’ feelings” even as
they continued to visit brothels.120 In simple, practical terms, however, because
many single women lived together (to save money on housing and to preserve
their sexual honor), extending the law to cover sex acts between women would
expose a large number to potential blackmail, false accusations, and police
harassment. Organized women were therefore often vehement in their opposition even when they found homosexuality morally or aesthetically objectionable. Katharina Scheven of the IAF, for example, feared that homosexuality
was an “infectious mania” but argued that the DZIAF “cannot limit itself, so
far as it takes a position on the question of homosexuality at all, to demanding
that female homosexuality remain unpunished; rather, it must . . . demand the
abolition of §175 full stop” (although she did support a higher age of consent
than for heterosexual acts). The fundamental principle held here too: “The
state is not the guardian . . . of individual morality.” Anna Pappritz described
homosexuality as “reprehensible, repulsive and disgusting,” but she too held
that “private relationships between adults are not subject to the criminal law.”
And the BDF adopted a resolution holding that “sexual aberrations without
injury to legal rights of third persons must remain unpunished (§175).”121
Legal academics were equally skeptical. In 1911 a number of prominent
jurists published their own “counter-draft” to the government’s initial draft of
the Criminal Code revision, arguing that consensual sex between adults posed
no threat to society and therefore was not grounds for punishment. Sex between
men should only be punished when one was under age twenty-one, when
the younger was in a position of dependence (for example, a student, ward,
119

Quoted in “Kritische Äusserungen in Tagespresse u. Zeitschriften über den Homosexualitäts-Paragraphen 250 (bisher §175) des Vorentwurfs zu einem Deutschen Strafgesetzbuch,”
VBWHK 1 (1910): 239.
120 Elsbeth Krukenberg, “Normales Empfinden,” CBDF 9 (1907): 123; Käthe Schirmacher, “§175
des deutschen Strafgesetzbuches,” Abolitionist 10 (1911): 3. On Stritt, see Elke Schüller, Marie
Stritt: Eine kampffrohe Streiterin in der Frauenbewegung (1855–1928) (Königstein: Helmer,
2005).
121 WHK, Gewichtige Stimmen, pp. 42, 43, 45; Katharina Scheven, “Homosexualität und
Strafrecht,” Abolitionist 11 (1912): 3; Anna Pappritz, “Zum §175,” Abolitionist 10 (1911):
10; Petition des Bundes Deutscher Frauenvereine zur Reform des Strafgesetzbuches und der
Strafprozessordnung (n.p.: n.p., 1909), p. 69.

174

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

apprentice, etc.), or when one was motivated by the “profit motive.”122 This
did not actually amount to equal treatment of homosexual and heterosexual
offenses, because the age of consent for girls was only sixteen. Nevertheless, as
the historian Kai Sommer has pointed out, this draft “was . . . very similar . . . to
the demands of the WHK’s petition.”123
Despite such dissent, the legislative process ground toward adoption of a
more repressive approach before World War I. The official commission convened by the government in 1911 abandoned the idea of criminalizing sex
between women and adopted a more restrictive definition of homosexual acts
between men (“intercourse-like acts” rather than, say, mutual masturbation).
But it suggested that men should be punished even for merely offering sex
for pay, as well as for actually performing sexual acts for material reward.
In parliamentary committee, by 1913, further provisions were added setting
very severe penalties for male prostitution, for homosexual acts with minors,
or even for merely offering homosexual sex. The reform of the Criminal Code
was dropped with the outbreak of World War I; but supporters of homosexual
rights had no reason to be optimistic about the legal future.124
Nevertheless, the WHK in particular made a rapid recovery. By 1910
Hirschfeld reported that the WHK had “resumed its activities in full measure since before the beginning of the year.”125 Some opponents agreed: Der
Volkswart carried one report in 1910 that agitation against §175 “is being
pursued with undiminished energy.”126 Hirschfeld himself produced arguably
his most impressive and radical work to date with “Natural Laws of Love”
in 1912 and “Homosexuality in Men and Women” in 1914. And the WHK’s
journal did not give the impression of being the mouthpiece of a chastened
organization after 1910; instead, it appeared to seek a rapprochement with
the radical wing of the movement. Thus, for example, in October of 1911 it
carried an article defending the adult male homosexual’s love for “the youth
between about 14 (15) and 23 (24) years of age” as comparable to a heterosexual male’s attraction to teenage girls, and suggesting that “physical friendship”
with an older, “respectable homosexual” was healthier for male youths than
the alternatives.127 In 1913 the journal went further still, publishing an update
(in three parts) of the ideas of Friedländer and other radicals by the youthmovement activist, philosopher, and psychologist Hans Blüher, who held that
122

W. Kahl et al., Gegenentwurf zum Vorentwurf eines deutschen Strafgesetzbuches (Berlin:
Guttentag, 1911), pp. 239–240.
123 Sommer, Die Strafbarkeit, pp. 153, 156–157.
124 “Weitere kritische Äusserungen über den Homosexualitäts-Paragraphen 250 (bisher §175) des
Vorentwurfs zu einem Deutschen Strafgesetzbuch,” VBWHK 13 (1913): 132–133; Entwurf
zu einem Deutschen Strafgesetzbuch nach den Beschlüssen der Strafrechtskommission (Berlin:
n.p., 1913), GSAPKB, Rep. 84a, no. 8410, fol. 271, pp. 84–87.
125 “Komitee-Mitteilungen,” VBWHK 2 (1910): 342.
126 Cato, “‘Die Homosexuellen und die Frauen,’” Volkswart 3 (1910): 147–150.
127 “Schutzalterfrage,” VBWHK 3 (1911): 15, 17, 23, 12.

Homosexual Rights

175

the remnant of homosexual desire repressed in heterosexual men was the “real
unifying bond of humanity” and that pedagogical excellence rested at bottom
on sexual attraction to boys. As for the churches and their morality, they were
a write-off: the “whole sphere of life and ideas that Christianity represents is in
collision with modernity, and there’s not much to be saved of it.”128 The high
point was reached with an article by Kurt Hiller, a rising second-generation
homosexual rights activist with close ties to Social Democracy, who argued
once again for a mass self-outing as the best way to break the taboo on homosexuality once and for all.129
Equally important, both Hirschfeld and the WHK were more active than
ever in building alliances within the broader progressive reform milieu. Two
leading members of the BfM, for example, became officers of the WHK: the
organization’s most influential activist, Helene Stöcker, in 1912 and the early
lesbian feminist Johanna Elberskirchen in 1914.130 Ties between the DMB and
the WHK also became closer after 1910, with Ernst Haeckel himself contributing a lead article to the JSZ in 1913, and Hirschfeld speaking before the DMB
on the errors of the “theological sex-dictators” and the evil effects of their
“system of sexual coercion.”131 Hirschfeld was one of the three founders and
chairmen, with Iwan Bloch and Albert Eulenburg, of the Medical Society for
Sexual Science and Eugenics (ÄGSE) formed in 1913.132 After 1910 relations
between the homosexual rights movement and psychoanalysis were disrupted,
with leading psychoanalysts arguing that homosexuality was merely a neurotic
compulsion and was hence curable if only the sufferer were truly willing.133
Freud himself, however, continued to deny that homosexuality should be classified as a disease, and to regard homosexuality effectively as an object choice
comparable to that underlying heterosexuality.134 And both he and a number
of other prominent psychoanalysts were members of the ÄGSE – as were, for
128

Hans Blüher, “Die drei Grundformen der Homosexualität,” VBWHK 13 (1913): 326, 327,
335, 338, 339, 143–144, 431. On Blüher, see Bruns, Politik, pp. 215–466.
129 Kurt Hiller, “Ethische Aufgaben der Homosexuellen,” VBWHK 13 (1913): 400, 401, 402,
404, 408. See Hiller, Leben; Hergemöller, Mann für Mann, pp. 356–358.
130 Herzer, Magnus Hirschfeld, p. 114. See Johanna Elberskirchen, Die Liebe des dritten Geschlechts: Homosexualitat, eine bisexuelle Varietät keine Entartung – keine Schuld (Leipzig:
Spohr, 1904); Norbert Oellers, “Die Bonner Schriftstellerin Johanna Elberskirchen – von der
Zeit verschluckt?” in Bonn und das Rheinland, ed. Manfred Rey and Dietrich Höroldt (Bonn:
Bouvier, 1992), pp. 526–544.
131 Mildenberger, “Magnus Hirschfeld und der Monismus,” pp. 82–86; Ernst Haeckel, “Gonochorismus und Hermaphrodismus,” VBWHK 13 (1913); “Die Jenenser Pfingstkurse des D.
M. B.,” Das monistische Jahrhundert 3 (1914): 341.
132 Pretzel, “Disziplinierungsbestrebungen,” pp. 138–139. On the ÄGSE, see Andreas Pretzel,
“Zur Geschichte der ‘Ärztlichen Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft’ (1913–1933),” Mitteilungen der Magnus-Hirschfeld-Gesellschaft 24/25 (1997): 35–122.
133 See Herzer, Magnus Hirschfeld, pp. 183–184; Isidor Sadger, “Ketzergedanken über Homosexualität,” AKAK 59 (1914): 321, 323, 326.
134 See Martin Dannecker, “Sigmund Freud über Inversion und Homosexualität,” in Lautmann,
ed., Homosexualität, pp. 161, 164, 166.

176

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

example, Helene Stöcker and the leading SPD expert on public health and
eugenics, Alfred Grotjahn.135 After faltering briefly during the scandal trials,
the Social Democratic periodical press too continued to support the WHK and
its petition in the years before the war.136 The WHK, in other words, was
not only increasingly radical but also increasingly well connected in the years
following the scandal trials.
Beyond such organizational efforts, however, more fundamentally, by 1914
the movement had played a crucial role in definitively establishing a new model
of authentic sexual identity. As Blüher put it, whereas the “old school fixed the
concept [of sexuality] to the direct activity of the genitals and called an action
‘sexual’ only if it intended a pleasurable excitation of the sexual organs,” the
new model was that “sexual acts” in this sense were “special cases . . . of a
broader and lastingly influential field of action” – one that was central to
individuality as such, and to social life as well. Indeed, Blüher argued, “it can
indeed no longer be doubted that sexuality is the most powerful motive force
on the road to greater refinement” of civilization; sexuality underlay all cultural
achievement, all social order, the existence of the state, and in short everything
that conservative Christians thought it threatened.137
In an odd sense, in fact, the situation of the homosexual rights movement
by about 1910 appears to parallel that of the Christian morality movement.
Building on intellectual roots that reached back at least to the 1860s and
1870s, in the 1890s and 1900s new organizations had been able to generate
a vibrant public discussion of their conceptual, social, and even legal agendas.
But they were not able subsequently to control that discussion – neither in the
broader public nor even internally within their own circles. Obviously, this
latter problem was one that also paralleled the division between orthodox and
revisionist Social Democratic views on sex.
The evolution of the medical campaign against venereal disease is a fourth
example of the same pattern. At its outset, that campaign attempted to gather
together all those concerned with the sexual health of German society – from
conservative Christians through to abolitionists. By the years before the war,
it had alienated its conservative allies, done much to spark the emergence of
the sex-reform movement, and was increasingly being pulled in two different
ideological directions: toward Social Democracy on the left and toward radical
authoritarian race theory on the right.
That process is the subject of Chapter 8.

135

Pretzel, “Disziplinierungsbestrebungen,” pp. 138–139.
See particularly Adolf Thiele, “Die Homosexualität in der Gesetzgebung,” SM 15 (1909):
1486–1493.
137 Blüher, “Die drei Grundformen,” pp. 151, 336.
136

8
Syphilis and Salvation

By the early twentieth century, important advances in medical science revealed
the extraordinary extent of venereal infection in German society and the prevalence of long-term and secondary consequences of sexually transmitted diseases
(such as infertility or paralysis). Partly as a result of and partly in response
to criticisms of regulation from the various morality movements, shortly after
1900 medical men made a concerted organizational effort to gain control of the
issue of prostitution. The organizational vehicle for this effort was the National
Society for the Combating of Venereal Diseases (Deutsche Gesellschaft zur
Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten [DGBG]), which was formed by dermatologists and venereologists in 1902 and held its first conference in 1903.1
It was immediately successful in attracting a great deal of attention in the
press, and it grew very rapidly. Already by the end of 1904, it had twenty-four
local chapters; by the outbreak of the war it had thirty-seven. Membership
climbed to 4,000 by early 1905 and then planed off, reaching 5,000 by 1912.2
The organization saw its primary task as to spread basic knowledge about
venereal diseases in the population at large, and its activities were above all
informational. From 1904 onward it distributed pamphlets and leaflets in large
numbers and for various audiences, often in cooperation with the public health
insurance system; by 1906, 3 million such informational documents had been
distributed.3 Local chapters offered evening lectures for parents, young men,
1

On the background to the formation of the DGBG, see particularly Lutz Sauerteig, Krankheit,
Sexualität, Gesellschaft: Geschlechtskrankheiten und Gesundheitspolitik in Deutschland im 19.
und frühen 20. Jahrhundert (Stuttgart: Steiner, 1999), pp. 28–68 (here 38, 39), and Siegfried
Borelli, Hermann-Joseph Vogt, and Michael Kreis, eds., Geschichte der Deutschen Gesellschaft
zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten (Berlin: Blackwell Wissenschaft, 1992).
2 Sauerteig, Krankheit, p. 101, and Borelli et al., eds., Geschichte, p. 28.
3 A. Blaschko, “Unser neues Merkblatt,” MDGBG 2 (1904): 25; “Drei Millionen Merkblätter,”
MDGBG 4 (1906): 65.

177

178

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

workers, domestic servants, and students; cooperated with societies for popular
education and charity organizations; lobbied in favor of sex education classes
(although with limited success); and offered seminars for teachers. In the last
years before the war, a traveling exhibition on STDs visited numerous German
cities and was uniformly well attended – in Munich and Hamburg in 1913
by more than 30,000 in each city.4 Public readings of a play dramatizing the
dangers of venereal infection were also well attended.5
It was not immediately apparent that the DGBG would be a competitor
and opponent, rather than an ally, of the morality movements. At the outset
the organizers of the DGBG appeared to be determined to create a genuinely
comprehensive organization for people concerned with the issue. More than
half of the members of the committee convened to found the organization
were doctors (and one-fifth were professors of medicine), and the three leading venereal diseases experts of the day were chosen as chairman, general
secretary, and vice-chair. But the initial organizing committee also included
Ludwig Weber of the AKDS; Otto von Leixner; the leading liberal Protestant
theology professor in Germany, Adolf von Harnack; leading academics in the
social sciences; and the liberal jurist and criminologist Franz von Liszt. Other
members included the sexologist Albert Eulenburg; Kurt Eisner, editor of the
Social Democratic newspaper Vorwärts; Alfred Grotjahn, the SPD’s leading
public health expert; and Max Taube, a key pioneer in child welfare in Leipzig.
Only 12 of the 157 members of the organizing committee were women; but
they included both Katharina Scheven and Anna Pappritz (DZIAF), Hanna
Bieber-Böhm (VJS), Marie Stritt (BDF), Lida Heymann (VFF), and the Social
Democrats Wally Zepler and Hope Bridges Adams-Lehmann. Thirty-seven city
governments joined.6
The membership of the organization itself was less diverse, however. Some
two-thirds of the initial general membership were medical doctors or medical academics; about a sixth were in business or the law (lawyers and some
judges); some 10 percent were women (including a few doctors); 5 or 6 percent
were in journalism, the arts, or non-medical academic fields; and some 6 percent were in city, state, or national government. Civil servants, the clergy, the
military, and the nobility – dominant in the morality organizations – together
4

“Ortsgruppe München,” MDGBG 11 (1913): 78; “Ortsgruppe Hamburg,” MDGBG 12 (1914):
8; “Ausschusssitzung,” MDGBG 12 (1914): 89.
5 See “Mitgliederversammlung der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” MDGBG 6 (1908): 101; Neuberger, “Wie können die Ärzte durch Belehrung der
Gesunden und Kranken der Verbreitung der Geschlechtskrankheiten steuern?” ZBG 1 (1903):
107; O. Rosenthal, “Über die sexuelle Belehrung der Abiturienten,” ZBG 12 (1911): 265; Martin Chotzen, “Unsere sexualpädagogische Aktion,” MDGBG 11 (1913): esp. 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9;
“‘Die Schiffbrüchigen’ von E. Brieux,” MDGBG 9 (1911): 22.
6 See Sauerteig, Krankheit, pp. 104–110; “Aufruf zur Begründung einer Deutschen Gesellschaft
zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” MDGBG 1 (1903): 3–5; “Vorstands- und Ausschussmitglieder sämtlicher Ortsgruppen und Zweigvereine,” MDGBG 6 (1908): 15–17.

Syphilis and Salvation

179

made up well under one-tenth of DGBG membership.7 There were, furthermore, a dozen socialists in the organizing committee; and Alfred Blaschko,
its general secretary, was a longtime sympathizer and would join the party in
1919.8
The organizers of the DGBG nevertheless attempted to build consensus
around the public health issue of venereal diseases, in particular by arguing
that the spread of STDs was a crisis that affected the nation as a whole.
At the same time, they attempted to reassure the morality movements. The
organization’s new chairman, Albert Neisser, perhaps the country’s leading
venereal disease expert (who, among other accomplishments, had identified
the gonorrhea bacillus in 1879), was extremely careful in this regard in his
speech to its first meeting. Neisser argued that because STDs were primarily
spread through sex outside marriage, “we cannot shy away from taking up
this struggle too, the struggle against extramarital sex as such . . . we cannot
neglect the moral-ethical side.” What was more, “we will make it our business
as well to eradicate or reduce those phenomena in our social life that are suited
to have a sexually inflaming effect.” And “comprehensive progressive social
reform” to raise the “material and thereby moral condition of the female
population” was needed to cut off recruitment into the sex trade. Clearly the
message was effectively that the DGBG could be everyone’s friend.9 And in fact
a number of leading medical men in the organization were even sympathetic
to the abolitionist position.10 Alfred Blaschko rejected both the abolitionists’
opposition to compulsory medical measures and the moralism of the “pious
abolitionists” (that is, conservative Christians). But he also offered a blistering
condemnation of regulation as “discriminatory legislation” and as worse than
useless from a medical perspective.11 In an address to the annual conference
of the VFF in 1903, he argued that the best form of prophylaxis would be
“to improve the economic condition of women” – which would be possible
only “in a genuinely free, democratic state . . . in which the well-being of all
is the goal, and equal participation the means.”12 And Albert Neisser, the

7

“Mitgliederverzeichnis,” MDGBG 1 (1902/1903): 190–219.
Sauerteig, Krankheit, p. 111; see Alfred Blaschko, “Die moderne Prostitution,” NZ 10 (1892):
10–18.
9 Albert Neisser, “Die Aufgaben der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” MDGBG 1 (1903): 32, 33, 34. See Eberhard Wormer, “Neisser, Albert,” in
NDB, vol. 19 (1999), pp. 51–52.
10 Alfred Blaschko, Syphilis und Prostitution vom Standpunkte der öffentlichen Gesundheitspflege
(Berlin: Karger, 1893), pp. 165, 63, 143, 145.
11 Ibid., pp. 144–145.
12 Alfred Blaschko, “Hat die heute übliche Reglementierung der Prostitution einen nachweislichen Einfluss auf die Häufigkeit und die Verbreitung der venerischen Krankheiten ausgeübt?”
Deutsche Vierteljahrsschrift für öffentliche Gesundheitspflege 32 (1900): 274; Alfred Blaschko,
Die gesundheitlichen Schäden der Prostitution und deren Bekämpfung (Berlin: Loewenthal,
1904), pp. 17, 20.
8

180

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

DGBG’s chairman, largely agreed that regulation was in practice a failure, and
in particular that it was medically ineffective.13
Controversy broke out already at the end of the founding meeting in October
1902, however, when one doctor objected to the election of Anna Pappritz
to the organization’s executive board on the grounds that “we are not here
to found a morality association.”14 At the DGBG’s first formal conference
in March 1903, it became clear that this was actually the majority view in
the organization. Albert Neisser’s keynote speech laid out the problem in a
nutshell. Neisser advocated social reforms such as public housing policy, child
welfare laws, vocational education, temperance, and so forth and suggested
that unless the system of regulation were drastically overhauled “it would be
better to drop the whole system.”15 What Neisser proposed to put in its place,
however, was neither criminalization nor abolition but Kasernierung. Modern
medical science, he held, made it possible to cure both syphilis and gonorrhea;
and it was therefore theoretically possible, if all prostitutes could be subject
to adequate medical examinations and then required to undergo treatment,
virtually to eliminate STDs among prostitutes. Something approaching this
ideal state could be accomplished through a number of reforms. Regulation
should be put in the hands not of the police but of a new “sanitary commission”
housed not at police headquarters but in a hospital. The police would play only
a secondary role in this reformed, sanitary/medical system, by finding women
who tried to avoid treatment. But they would also have a crucial role outside
the system; for they would be used to “drive prostitution . . . so far as possible
from the streets.”16 It was not true, Neisser held, that demand from men
created prostitution; the “decisive factor for the dimensions of prostitution at
any given time” was the “seduction to engage in sexual intercourse beyond any
natural need, which proceeds from the female side.” Prostitutes were not only
socially underprivileged and economically vulnerable women but were “antisocial elements . . . , aggressive, provocative”; clearing them from the streets
was necessary to protect men and public decency.17
Logically, if prostitutes were driven from the streets, “brothels . . . should
be permitted under law.” Neisser argued that confining prostitutes to brothels would have substantial hygienic benefits, because it would permit more
regular medical examinations and more closely supervised treatment; in fact,
he suggested daily examinations. In effect, then, Neisser advocated creating a
giant system of compulsory confinement – although he assured his audience
that close public supervision would prevent the kind of egregious exploitation
13

A. Neisser, “Nach welcher Richtung lässt sich die Reglementierung der Prostitution reformieren?” ZBG 1 (1903): 176, 177, 198, 216–217.
14 Katharina Scheven, “Die Deutsche Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,”
CBDF 4 (1902): 118, 119.
15 Neisser, “Nach welcher Richtung,” pp. 164, 217, 234, 198.
16 Ibid., pp. 217, 234, 235, 237.
17 Ibid., pp. 281, 164, 214, 215, 213–214, 318, 166.

Syphilis and Salvation

181

to which women in existing brothels were subject.18 Anticipating objections
to this plan from the women’s movements, Neisser suggested simply that if
doctors should ever “be in the position to exercise ‘tyranny’ in the interests of
eliminating infection and disease, that would only prove the necessity of such
a new tyrannical organization.”19 He apparently did not regard his own proposal as an instance of such tyranny; but clearly he was effectively proposing
an immense expansion of the level of coercion and control to which women
working in the sex trade were subjected.
Neisser’s model was well received by the medical men in the DGBG. A
number of those who spoke during the discussion after his presentation argued
that municipal or state-run brothels should be established, contending, for
example, that people should be less concerned with the rights of women and
more with the rights of the “young men who are seduced and infected by
women,” or that prostitutes were “often morally and psychologically inferior,
half-idiots, ‘born’ prostitutes.”20
Such plans were by no means uncontested within the DGBG. In fact,
Neisser’s address was followed by a rebuttal by Anna Pappritz, who warned
that the “sanitary commissions” he envisioned would be no different from the
existing vice police; predicted that any such scheme would “require an army of
bureaucrats”; and pointed out that in Berlin alone introducing Kasernierung
would effectively require the creation of an entire “brothel-city” with some
10,000 inhabitants. The whole idea was, she held, not only laughable but also
a “monstrous injustice.”21 In the discussion Katharina Scheven accused Neisser
of trying to recreate “medieval conditions.”22 Blaschko argued that because in
practice most women in the sex trade escaped all efforts by the authorities to
find and control them, the question of whether or not to try to confine them to
brothels was “completely irrelevant.”23
These were not the views of the majority, however, who clearly favored
Neisser’s neoregulationism – or were happy with the system of regulation as
currently practiced.24 As the journal of the BDF put it in its report, the “nature
of the discussion among some men of medicine proves once again that men still
cannot get used to the idea of seeing women as having equal rights.” Katharina
Scheven concluded that “reactionary tendencies” were dominant within the
medical profession; Anna Pappritz considered the “realism” of the doctors,
who thought they could render prostitution hygienic, to be utopian hubris;
Marianne Weber referred darkly to the “ethically disoriented part of our male
18

Ibid., pp. 282–283.
Ibid., pp. 320, 303.
20 “Diskussion,” ZBG 1 (1903): 166, 317, 379, 387, 384, 393, 399, 397, 382.
21 Anna Pappritz, “Reglementierung der Prostitution,” ZBG 1 (1903): 362, 365, 367, 368, 369.
22 “Diskussion,” ZBG 1 (1903): 374, 375, 381, 385.
23 Ibid., p. 391.
24 “I. Kongress der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” Abolitionist 2 (1903): 34.
19

182

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

population, above all some medical men completely lacking in sexual-ethical
sensibility.”25 Women in particular continued to raise objections at the second
and third conferences of the DGBG, in 1905 and 1907.26
Nevertheless, it is clear that the idea of Kasernierung was steadily gaining
ground within the medical profession. Developments in medical knowledge
encouraged this trend – in particular the discovery of the spirochete bacterium
in 1905, the development of the Wassermann test for chronic syphilis in 1907,
and the introduction of Salvarsan as the first (minimally) effective treatment for
syphilis in 1910.27 The balance of opinion was clearly shifting, for example,
within the National Health Bureau, in which by 1908 six of thirteen members
of a special committee on epidemic diseases favored Kasernierung. In that year,
in fact, even the prime minister spoke in favor of legalizing brothels.28
Doctors’ desire for an intensification of state intervention in the sex industry
was underlain, furthermore, by a very particular understanding of the moral
status of sexuality. Most medical men were indifferent to the ethical concerns
of the morality campaigners, and in particular to their fears regarding the disruptive social potential of sexuality as a demonic, animalistic force. Instead,
they held simply that people wanted to have sex; that there was nothing particularly wrong with that; and that in any case there was nothing that one could
do about it.
This position became explicit in the course of a debate within the DGBG over
the precise wording of its first leaflet for mass distribution, in 1903 and 1904.
The first paragraph of the first published draft of that leaflet warned the reader
that “there are no really reliably effective prophylactics against infection with
venereal disease; all extramarital sexual intercourse can, even if precautionary
measures are taken, be dangerous. Nevertheless it is advisable . . . to make use
of such devices.” The DZIAF submitted a protest to the DGBG, arguing that
this last sentence “has . . . a dulling effect on the sense of personal responsibility and is a direct advertisement for sex with prostitutes.”29 But the IAF’s
25

“Sollen Schutzmittel gegen geschlechtliche Krankheiten empfohlen werden oder nicht?” Frauenbewegung 10 (1904): 43; Katharina Scheven, “Zur Heidelberger Bordellangelegenheit,” CBDF
5 (1903): 84; Anna Pappritz, “Bedeutsame Kundgebungen zur Sittlichkeitsfrage,” Frauenbewegung 10 (1904): 91; Marianne Weber, Ehefrau und Mutter in der Rechtsentwicklung
(Tübingen: Mohr, 1907), pp. 528–529.
26 “Zweiter Kongress der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechts-Krankheiten,”
Frauenbewegung 11 (1905): 50, 51; Lida Gustava Heymann, “III. Konferenz der Deutschen
Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” Frauenbewegung 13 (1907): 92.
27 See Heinrich Dreuw, “Sexuelle Gesundheitspolitik,” NG 13 (1917): 69.
28 See Reichsgesundheitsrat, “Aufzeichnung über die am 4. und 5. März 1908 abgehaltene Sitzung
des Reichsgesundheitsrats (Ausschuss für Seuchenbekämpfung), betreffend die Bekämpfung
der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” GSAPKB, Rep. 84a, no. 8406, p. 14; “Sitzung des königlichen
Staatsministeriums,” Berlin, 30 November 1908, GSAPKB, Rep. 84a, no. 8407, fol. 45–48,
p. 4.
29 “Eingabe der Vorsitzenden der internationalen Föderation an den Vorstand der Deutschen
Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” MDGBG 2 (1904): 2, 3.

Syphilis and Salvation

183

preferred, more negative version received only one of twenty votes within the
organization’s governing board.30 In the end the pamphlet was only slightly
revised, warning that the risk of infection could be “substantially reduced,
but not completely eliminated” by using prophylactics.31 Yet even this slight
change infuriated others in the DGBG membership, who argued that because
condoms were in fact effective, it was their duty as medical men to recommend
them explicitly. Even Max von Gruber, who was among the most conservative voices in the DGBG, argued in 1907 that knowledge of prophylactics
“must . . . be spread as widely as possible among the populace, without regard
to whether illegitimate intercourse might at first perhaps be encouraged” by
doing so.32 By 1910 the influential medical sexologist Max Marcuse in particular was so incensed by the willingness of the DGBG leadership to compromise
with the morality campaigners that he suggested that the organization would
have to change its name to “Society for Combating Extra-Marital Sex.”33
Blaschko made himself spokesman for this view in an article in the DGBG
newsletter in 1904. It was all very well to appeal to people’s sense of moral
responsibility, he argued; but it was well known that “in thousands of cases
this sense fails” to change behavior; and as doctors “we have to reckon with
the facts.” It was understandable that “a sensitive woman, who is unfamiliar
with real life,” would shrink from recommending the use of prophylactics; but
doctors familiar with “raw reality” could not be guided by such sentiments.
As for the Christian morality campaigners, he observed that the teaching that
extramarital sex was immoral and forbidden “has been the prevalent one for
millennia” but that history showed that it “takes no account either of the natural characteristics of humanity, nor of real life” and that “the mass of average
people have never known how to resist the vagaries of sensual desire.” In short,
the idea of “converting Germany’s male youth to chastity” was “madness.”34
The radical moral relativism underlying this pragmatic stance was made
clear in an exchange in the DGBG newsletter between Albert Neisser and
Gustav von Rohden, a rising young voice in the Inner Mission, in 1904. Von
Rohden had published an open letter in the newsletter in which he critiqued
a speech Neisser had delivered in Düsseldorf, again in support of regulation
and Kasernierung. The majority of those present, von Rohden believed, “took
home with them from what they heard quite powerful support for excusing their
dissolute way of living.”35 Neisser’s response was blunt. Sober and objective
observation, he suggested, showed that it was unrealistic to think that humanity

30

“Mitglieder-Versammlung,” MDGBG 2 (1904): 41, 39.
Alfred Blaschko, “Unser neues Merkblatt,” MDGBG 2 (1904): 26.
32 Max von Gruber, Kolonisation in der Heimat (Munich: Oldenbourg, 1907), p. 35.
33 Max Marcuse, “Die sexuelle Belehrung der Abiturienten durch die DGBG,” SP 6 (1910): 775.
34 Blaschko, “Unser neues Merkblatt,” pp. 28, 33, 30, 33, 32.
35 Von Rohden, “Offener Brief an Herrn Geheimrat Professor Dr. Neisser,” MDGBG 2 (1904):
103.
31

184

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

“will or even can live up to the demands of an idealistic sexual morality.”36
As for von Rohden’s commitment to Christian sexual ethics, Neisser held that
“from a purely scientific standpoint” there was no indication that there were
actually any “universally valid principles in the area of sexual morality at all.”
And he (Neisser) could “not simply without qualification and in every case
regard extramarital sexual intercourse as something reprehensible,” because
for “countless people it is and has been the source of the highest and purest
happiness and the foundation of their greatest creativity.”37 In fact, Neisser was
also an early signatory to the WHK’s petition for the legalization of sex between
men, apparently believing that sex was good for people in whatever form.38 In
purely pragmatic terms, finally, Neisser had argued already at the first DGBG
conference that prostitution was at bottom simply a market transaction. The
moralistic approach ignored the fact that prostitutes’ clients were simply seizing
on a “coincidental opportunity to pacify their sensual excitation,” whereas the
women involved were either “girls who occasionally have sex and happily
and gladly give themselves to a man, following their own sensual desires” in
return for some form of gift, or “genuine prostitutes” in it for the money. The
whole exchange was either mutual enjoyment or “pure business”; in either
case it was “completely legitimate,” and the moral pathos of the Christian
morality campaigners was irrelevant.39 Neisser was equally dismissive of the
abolitionists. Like Blaschko, he was actually quite friendly toward the women’s
movement; in fact, his sense of gender justice was acute enough to lead him to
observe that “from the standpoint of justice I have to agree . . . with the demand
that women too have the right to satisfy their sex drive before marriage.”40
But as for the rights of the individual over her own body, Neisser dismissed
the idea with the comment that “I cannot acknowledge the justification for a
right to be sick and to injure others through one’s sickness.” As much as he
would like to agree with the abolitionists, he understood only too well that the
“faults and vices of humanity” made it impossible to realize their “in and of
themselves correct ‘principles.’”41
Neisser was particularly brutal in his relativism – indeed, he appears to have
been proud of the fact, remarking that he was “certainly ‘brutal’ enough to take
brutal facts and brutal people for what they are.”42 But others within the DGBG
expressed similar views. The prominent Frankfurt gynecologist Max Flesch, for
example, remarked in the discussion of Neisser’s 1903 speech that the existence
of prostitution “proves . . . , that the uniquely legalized and licensed form of

36

Neisser, “‘Antwort’ to von Rohen,” MDGBG 2 (1904): 106.
Ibid., p. 107.
38 WHK petition, GSAPKB, Rep. 84a, no. 8098, fol. 65–72.
39 Neisser, “Nach welcher Richtung,” pp. 311, 315.
40 Neisser, “Antwort,” p. 108.
41 Neisser, “Nach welcher Richtung,” pp. 314, 304, 321.
42 Ibid., p. 302.
37

Syphilis and Salvation

185

marriage is not sufficient” to meet the demand for sex.43 In 1904 Wilhelm Erb,
a professor of neurology in Heidelberg, even advocated the view that “if nature
has implanted in people so powerful, so overwhelming a drive . . . then surely
people have . . . a clear natural right, indeed one can say . . . a duty, to satisfy
it.”44 Another member asserted in the same year simply that “the average man
can, under prevailing social conditions . . . , not remain chaste until marriage.”45
Over time exchanges on sexual morality at the DGBG’s conferences became
increasingly heated. At the second conference in 1905, for example, Katharina
Scheven remarked that “naturally it’s much more convenient to lock defenseless
girls in brothels than to take up the struggle against a pack of brutal and crafty
types” like the men who hired them. Friedrich Bohn of the AKDS observed that
“a lot is said about the protection of the sex-hungry man – this flower of our
nation – but little about the protection of girls,” whom the “brutal man” and
the “brutal state” conscripted for men’s pleasure.46 In contrast, the advocates
of Kasernierung were clearly in no mood to entertain kibitzing from people
they regarded as amateurs. One speaker even congratulated the conference on
the fact “that it is not really necessary to speak to doctors . . . of the usefulness
of regulation.”47 Wilhelm Hammer was equally blunt, arguing that “a point of
view that seeks to feed us pious wishes – e.g. elevation of the moral level
of humanity etc. – is useless.”48 Max von Gruber dissented, arguing that if
everyone were guided by this brand of realism “we’d still be at the level of
pithecanthropus erectus.”49 But he was clearly in the minority.
By the third conference in 1907, Blaschko in particular was clearly not in
a conciliatory mood. In an introductory address to the session devoted to sex
education, he conceded that “we may never go so far in our hygienic efforts
that we grossly insult the ethical sentiments of our fellow citizens.” He also,
however, remarked that “whoever . . . wants to make us believe that there is
one true sexual morality” should simply be “referred to the lessons of history
and ethnology”; whatever moral conservatives might think, “the demands of
nature are as unambiguous and constant as sexual-moral concepts are changeable, and we should be guided only by the former.”50 Others were equally
impatient. In the same session Henriette Fürth dismissed Friedrich Wilhelm
Foerster’s reflections on sexuality and spiritual life out of hand, remarking
43

Flesch in “Diskussion,” ZBG 1 (1903): 391, 391–392.
W. Erb, “Bemerkungen über die Folgen der sexuellen Abstinenz,” ZBG 2 (1904): 3. See Wilhelm
Katner, “Erb, Wilhelm Heinrich,” in NDB, vol. 4 (1959), p. 562.
45 “Mitglieder-Versammlung,” MDGBG 2 (1904): 43.
46 “Diskussion,” ZBG 4 (1905): 181, 187.
47 Johannes Fabry, “Über Bordelle und Bordellstrassen,” ZBG 4 (1905): 158.
48 “Diskussion,” ZBG 4 (1905): 178.
49 Max von Gruber in “Diskussion” on Fabry, “Über Bordelle und Bordellstrassen,” ZBG 4
(1905): 175, 176.
50 Alfred Blaschko, “Die aufgaben der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten auf dem Gebiete der Sexualpädagogik,” ZBG 7 (1907): 8, 9.
44

186

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

that “Christian-religious dogma has dominated our culture for two thousand
years. . . . And what’s the result? . . . An unprecedented moral impoverishment.”
The Berlin sexologist and birth control advocate Julian Marcuse too stated
bluntly, in the discussion period, that “in the matter of sexual ethics religion
has, since the very beginning, completely failed.” The sex reformer Maria Lischnewska argued simply that “only that can be moral which is in accord with
the laws of nature.”51
The debate within the DGBG over the use of prophylactics is a good illustration of the emerging principled pragmatism of many doctors. The tone was
set at the DGBG’s 1905 conference in an address on §184.3 of the Criminal Code (which after the passage of the lex Heinze in 1900 punished the
advertising of “objects intended for indecent use”) advocating “universal use
of condoms . . . , if necessary through free or very cheap distribution . . . with
simultaneous instructions for use” as likely to lead “almost to the eradication
of venereal diseases.” The belief that “moral preachments” could achieve the
same end, the speaker insisted, was based on “utopian sentiments” and a “failure to accept reality.”52 Despite some dissent, the majority in the organization
clearly favored this view; and in a petition to parliament in 1910, the DGBG
called legislation introduced that year that would ban advertising for contraceptives “extraordinarily dangerous . . . a serious endangerment of the health of
our own nation.”53 By 1913 Blaschko – the organization’s general secretary –
even recommended the “ruthless recommendation of prophylactics until the
whole population is fully informed from the onset of puberty.”54
Even more revealing was a discussion within the DGBG over the dangers or
benefits to individual health of sexual abstinence. The majority regarded abstinence as a harmless and effective method of avoiding venereal infection; but
in the years before World War I, a growing number of doctors began to argue
that long-term celibacy could have serious and even fatal consequences, particularly for men.55 The centerpiece of the debate was a kind of one-man crusade
against celibacy by Max Marcuse, who in an extended essay in the DGBG’s
journal in 1910 argued that the idea that abstinence was harmless was merely
a “brazen assertion” advanced by conservatives. In fact, long-term abstinence
could cause a whole panoply of ills ranging from insomnia, distraction, and
51

Henriette Fürth, “Zur sexuellen Diätetik und Erziehung,” ZBG 7 (1907): 251–252; “Diskussion,” ZBG 7 (1907): 263, 264, 265.
52 Otto Neustätter, “Die öffentliche Ankündigung der Schutzmittel,” ZBG 4 (1905): 236, 246,
247, 212, 213.
53 “Eingabe zum Entwurf eines Gesetzes gegen Missstände im Heilgewerbe an den Deutschen
Reichstage,” MDGBG 8 (1910): 5, 8, 9.
54 Alfred Blaschko, “Geburtenrückgang und Geschlechtskrankheiten,” ZBG 14 (1913): 403, 405;
Blaschko, “Unser neues Merkblatt,” p. 29.
55 Erb, “Bemerkungen,” pp. 7, 6. On the abstinence debate, see Andreas Hill, “May the Doctor
Advise Extramarital Intercourse?” in Sexual Knowledge, Sexual Science, ed. Roy Porter and
Mikulas Teich (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), pp. 284–302.

Syphilis and Salvation

187

moodiness to hysteria, depression, hallucinations, paranoia, and perversions of
all kinds (e.g., homosexuality, masochism, sadism, fetishism, and pedophilia).
The good news was that sexual intercourse could cure these ills almost immediately; the bad news was that “if sexual abstinence has gone on too long and
if the malady is too far advanced, then this cure too can come too late.”56
Marcuse was extreme, but many in the DGBG appear to have sympathized
with his views; and in 1911 the organization devoted half of its annual conference to the question. The keynote speaker on this issue, the sexologist Albert
Eulenburg, was decidedly moderate, regarding temporary celibacy as harmless
but considering longer-term celibacy as at best abnormal and an “undesirable,
inappropriate risk” and definitely dangerous for those with irregular sexual
dispositions.57 But a paper by the Swedish doctor Anton Nyström offered a
radically opposed perspective. Nyström delivered a blistering attack on Christian “abstinence fanatics” and “ignorant” doctors who, despite sexual abuse
scandals in the Church and mounting empirical evidence of the harmfulness of
not having sex, continued to peddle the “conventional lie” of the harmlessness
of abstinence and the myth that sex was a “low instinct.” Abstinence was an
“evil contrary to nature” that involved “serious dangers for body and spirit,”
whereas having regular sex made people more capable of leading a “useful and
noble life” by giving them “happiness and joy, health and energy for work.”
It was high time that a “natural morality” replaced the prevailing nonsensical
“spiritualistic morality.”58
The discussion following these papers was inconclusive. What is significant
about the debate, however, is not who won or lost but rather what it was
about. The DGBG had initially defined its brief very narrowly: it was concerned with venereal diseases, and how to control them. The first conference
in 1903 had focused primarily on two legal questions: whether the knowing transmission of venereal diseases should be criminalized and whether or
how prostitution should be regulated. The organization’s second conference,
in 1905, had been devoted to regulation, Kasernierung, and brothels, and to
the question of whether the principle of confidentiality in the doctor-patient
relationship should be modified in the case of venereal diseases. Thereafter, the
focus drifted. The third conference, in 1907, was devoted to sexual pedagogy
and sexual ethics, with Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster and Alfred Blaschko delivering the key addresses.59 By 1911, the organization had returned in part to the

56

Max Marcuse, “Die Gefahren der sexuellen Abstinenz für die Gesundheit,” ZBG 11 (1911):
102, 115, 99, and passim.
57 Albert Eulenburg, “Die sexuele Abstinenz und ihre Einwirkung auf die Gesundheit,” ZBG 13
(1911): 35, 36.
58 Anton Nyström, “Die Beziehungen der sexuellen Abstinenz zur Gesundheit und die sich daraus
ergebenden praktischen Folgerungen,” ZBG 13 (1911): 85, 90.
59 Lida Gustava Heymann, “III. Kongress der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der
Geschlechtskrankheiten,” Frauenbewegung 13 (1907): 92.

188

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

question of venereal disease, in that the debate over the legal status of prophylactics did address public health issues; but the centerpiece of the conference
was the discussion of the harmfulness or otherwise of abstinence. This debate
was carried out in purely medical terms.
By 1911, then, the DGBG had moved into new territory in two senses.
First, those who did not share the views of the doctors who dominated the
organization had largely stopped participating in its deliberations. Foerster’s
1907 paper on sexual pedagogy had been a kind of parting shot (although
debate in some local chapters continued).60 The organization did not entirely
abandon its early attempt to provide a broad forum for discussion and debate,
and a special commission it established in late 1912 to try to develop concrete
proposals for the reform of the law on prostitution included not only Neisser,
Blaschko, and other doctors but also abolitionists (Scheven and Pappritz) and
even conservative Christians (Pastor Mätzold of the AKDS and Mueller of the
DEF). But by that time relations between these groups had thoroughly soured.61
Second, the organization had drifted ever further from its original focus on
venereal disease and prostitution and was increasingly debating broader issues
of sexuality and sexual health. The DGBG was clearly contributing not only
to the popularization among medical men of a new strategy for the control of
venereal diseases but also to the elaboration of an alternative code of sexual
ethics more broadly – one that was explicitly naturalistic and pragmatic, rather
than religious and idealist.
In part, this development was driven by Social Democrats – for example,
Alfred Blaschko. But a growing minority of medical men were actually drifting
toward a radically biologistic, eugenic, ethnic-chauvinist völkisch, and often
racist sexual ethics. Thus, for example, in 1908 the DGBG journal published
a radically naturalistic, anti-Christian, and völkisch rebuttal to Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster’s 1907 address by the Munich doctor, monist, and race theorist
Friedrich Siebert. Siebert argued that “Christian abstinence-fanaticism” with
its “onanistic cult of virginity” was creating a pathological “condition of sexual over-excitation” with terrible consequences. The answer must come from
a radical embrace of the theory of evolution and of the ethical value of the
biological nation – that “higher whole” that “will come after the individual,
and stands above the individual.” In Siebert’s radically biologistic code of sexual ethics, “sin” lay “therein, that the soul has sought to elevate itself above
nature”; sex was clearly there “for the sake of the child to be conceived”; the
state was “in the final analysis nothing more than a contrivance of nature for
the care of the progeny of a species”; and the purpose of marriage was “care of
the young” rather than mutual appreciation of each others’ “precious individuality.” And of course the ultimate goal of national-biological life was military
60
61

See, e.g., “Ortsgruppe München,” MDGBG 12 (1914): 66, 67.
“Sachverständigenkommission der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten,” ADF, DEF, no. 7a.

Syphilis and Salvation

189

power. Pointing to the recent war in German Southwest Africa, Siebert asked
rhetorically “whether our soldiers there need asceticism.” What they needed,
instead, was “a taste for manly deeds.”62
Siebert’s ideas, obviously, were not likely to charm Christians – who believed
that developing a capacity for self-denial was the precondition for performing manly deeds, and who had vehemently criticized the lack of sexual selfdiscipline among German soldiers in colonial wars. In fact, Siebert’s essay was
followed by a brief rebuttal by the leading neo-Malthusian Hans Ferdy, who
observed that “the relationship between the German doctors and ethics as a
science does not offer us a hopeful prospect” and recommended that his medical colleagues “at least remain silent where they are unwilling to learn.” But as
Ferdy remarked, “Dr. Siebert does not stand alone among his colleagues with
his dilettantish ethical efforts.”63 As we will see in Chapter 11, similar ideas
were increasingly influential among medical men interested in sexuality more
broadly.
And yet, again, this drift to the radical nationalist and racist right was not
the only possible outcome of the engagement with eugenic and race-hygienic
ideas. In fact, the debate within the DGBG catalyzed the emergence of a far
different, and far more influential, alternative: democratic and socialist sexual radicalism. In part as a consequence of the debate over the DGBG’s first
pamphlet in 1903/1904, the abolitionist movement split in 1904. Whereas
Pappritz and Scheven remained committed to a conservative sexual ethic, some
spokeswomen – Helene Stöcker, Maria Lischnewska, Lida Gustava Heymann,
and others – adopted the “realist” position that, under prevailing social conditions, extramarital sex was going to happen, and that the risks had to be
contained.64 In 1905, these women would found their own sex-reform organization, the League for the Protection of Motherhood (Bund für Mutterschutz [BfM]). Thereafter, although the DGBG remained influential in policy
debates, the articulation specifically of a radical naturalist sexual ethics within
the DGBG became a mere sideshow. The main event in that respect was now
the sex-reform movement, and the intense debate over sexual ethics that it
generated.
Chapter 9 turns to that development.

62

F. Siebert, “Sexualethik und Sexualpädagogik,” ZBG 6 (1908): 245, 246, 248, 249, 250, 262,
253, 255.
63 Hans Ferdy, “Die Sexualethik des Herrn Dr. F. Siebert,” ZBG 6 (1908): 355, 352. On
Ferdy (whose real name was A. Meyerhof), see Christine Dienel, Kinderzahl und Staatsräson:
Empfängnisverhütung und Bevölkerungspolitik in Deutschland und Frankreich bis 1918
(Münster: Westfälisches Dampfboot, 1995), p. 193.
64 See “Mitglieder-Versammlung,” MDGBG 2 (1904): 44, and Lida Gustava Heymann’s response
to Elise Dosenheimer, “Nochmals der Kongress der ‘Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung
der Geschlechtskrankheiten,’” Frauenbewegung 13 (1907): 109.

9
Sex Reform

I. The Roots of Sex Reform
The sex-reform movement built on two major currents in late nineteenthcentury thought: the Romantic cult of the individual and monism – the belief
that matter and spirit are a unitary whole, that spirit is merely an expression
of man’s physical being. Helene Stöcker, longtime leader of the League for the
Protection of Motherhood (Bund für Mutterschutz [BfM]), pursued doctoral
and postdoctoral research on eighteenth-century aesthetics and on the great
Protestant theologian and theorist of romantic love Friedrich Schleiermacher;
and both she and her critics frequently pointed out the debt sex reform owed
to the Romantics. She found in the thought of Friedrich Nietzsche the “continuation and fulfillment of Romantic longing”; but she was also one of the
founding members of the DMB in 1906 (as was Magnus Hirschfeld) and would
later write that Ernst Haeckel had been “one of the most courageous, bold,
decisive and path-breaking leaders” in the “cultural struggle for the liberation of the individual” from outmoded social and moral constraints.1 Iwan
Bloch, a longtime member and officer in the BfM, held both that modern love
was “individualized” love and that “anyone who has scientifically researched,
philosophically explored, and really experienced love . . . must become a convinced monist and reject the dualist separation between the physical and the
1

Gertrud Bäumer, “Die neue Ethik vor hundert Jahren,” Frau 14 (1907): 452; Gustav von Rohden,
“Die sexuelle Frage im Protestantismus,” SP 6 (1910); Heinrich Meyer-Benfey, “Lucinde,”
NG 2 (1906): 172–179; Helene Stöcker, “Ehe und Sexualreform” (1911), in Resolutionen des
Deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz, 1905–1916, ed. Helene Stöcker (Berlin: BfM, n.d.), p. 55;
Marielouise Janssen-Jurreit, “Nationalbiologie, Sexualreform und Geburtenrückgang,” in Die
Überwindung der Sprachlosigkeit, ed. Gabriele Dietze (Darmstadt: Luchterhand, 1979), p. 143;
Helene Stöcker, in Was wir Ernst Haeckel verdanken, vol. 2, ed. Heinrich Schmidt (Leipzig:
Unesma, 1914), pp. 328, 327.

190

Sex Reform

191

spiritual as artificial.”2 This combination – Romanticism, Nietzscheanism, and
monism – can be found throughout the sex-reform movement.
As radical materialists, many sex reformers were also attracted to Social
Democracy; and in fact most of the ideas central to the sex-reform agenda
had been articulated in much less detail in Bebel’s Woman Under Socialism
at the end of the 1870s, or in the Social Democratic press as early as the
1880s.3 The BfM was never formally a socialist organization, and a number
of important figures in the movement rejected socialist ideas. But most of the
leading figures in sex reform were either Social Democrats or were attracted
to far left, semianarchist socialism. Some leading members of the SPD were
also members of the BfM – including the influential revisionist parliamentarian
Eduard David and August Bebel himself.4
Finally, sex reform was also a product of the broader and intensifying concern with social reform after about 1900, and in particular of the growing
interest in the birthrate, population policy, and infant mortality.5 Although the
leadership was primarily concerned with the effort to reform sexual morality,
many members of the organization’s local chapters were primarily interested
in welfare work with single mothers, and with agitation in favor of maternity
insurance (Mutterschaftsversicherung).
The BfM was founded in Berlin in January 1905 by sexual radicals who had
parted ways with more conservative abolitionists in 1904, partly as a result
of the debate over prophylactics within the DGBG and partly because Stöcker
in particular had antagonized leading moderates in the movement – among
other things by publishing, as editor of the feminist journal Frauenrundschau,
a laudatory review of the English sex reformer Edward Carpenter’s radical
sexual-libertarian views. When the VFF leadership refused to take up the cause
of sex reform (probably for fear of alienating more sexually conservative abolitionists), Stöcker and Maria Lischnewska joined with others in and outside
the women’s movement to form the BfM.6 Those initially involved included
Ruth Bré, who had been independently agitating for the formation of rural
colonies for unmarried mothers; the sexologist Max Marcuse; Walther Borgius,
2

Iwan Bloch, Das Sexualleben unserer Zeit (Berlin: Marcus, 1907), p. 5.
For a good example, see F. Domela Nieuwenhuis, “Zur Frage der Prostitution” and “Die andere
Seite der Prostitution,” NZ 2 (1884): 253–261, 544–549.
4 See Helene Stöcker, “Ein Freund der Frauen,” NG 9 (1913): 483; Rosemarie Schumann, “Helene
Stöcker: Verkünderin und Verwirklicherin,” in Alternativen: Schicksale Deutscher Bürger, ed.
Olaf Groehler (Berlin: Nation, 1987), p. 170.
5 See, e.g., “Was will der Deutsche Bund für Mutterschutz?” Bundesarchiv Koblenz (hereinafter
BAK), Nachlass (hereinafter NL) 173 (Adele Schreiber), no. 29, fol. 129–130.
6 See Söcker’s own “Lebensabriss,” in Feministische Studien 3 (1984): 152; Gudrun Hamelmann,
Helene Stöcker, der “Bund für Mutterschutz” und “Die Neue Generation” (Frankfurt am Main:
Haag + Gerchen, 1992), p. 26; Helene Stöcker, “Zehn Jahre Mutterschutz,” NG 11 (1915):
4–5; Minna Cauer, 25 Jahre Verein Frauenwohl, Gross-Berlin (Berlin: Loewenthal, 1913),
pp. 16–17; and “Die Tagung des Verbandes Fortschrittlicher Frauenvereine vom 27. September
bis 1. Oktober 1903 in Hamburg-Altona,” Frauenbewegung 9 (1903): 154–155.
3

192

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

anarchist pedagogue and general secretary of an influential free-trade lobby
group; Alfred Blaschko; the feminist theorist and novelist Hedwig Dohm; the
medical doctor Agnes Hacker; the sociologist Werner Sombart; Adele Schreiber,
a leading socialist social policy advocate, and several others.7 In February
this group held a public meeting in Berlin to announce the formation of the
BfM; speakers included Stöcker, Marcuse, Lischnewska, Schreiber, Lily Braun
(another important figure in Social Democratic social policy), Iwan Bloch,
Bruno Meyer, the Swedish social and sexual philosopher Ellen Key, and the
prominent Berlin trial lawyer and jurist Erich Sello.8
As these lists suggest, the BfM was initially conceived as a very broad-based,
catchall organization, and early on it had remarkable success in recruiting members from a quite broad spectrum on the political and cultural left. Early supporters included leading revisionist Social Democrats (Heinrich Braun, Eduard
David, and Hugo Boettger); influential left-liberals (Friedrich Naumann, intellectual godfather of left-liberalism; Anton Erkelenz, leader of the liberal trade
union movement; and the influential sociologist Max Weber); welfare advocates (Frieda Duensing, soon to be director of the private National Center
for Child Welfare, established in 1907); medical men (Alfred Blaschko, Albert
Neisser, and Max Flesch); sexologists (Albert Moll, Iwan Bloch, and Albert
Eulenburg); eugenics experts (Alfred Ploetz and Ludwig Woltmann, editors
respectively of the two leading eugenics journals in Central Europe); the philosophy professor and theorist of sex and race Christian von Ehrenfels in
Prague; the Swiss entomologist, temperance campaigner, moral reformer, and
sexual theorist August Forel; the penal reformer Franz von Liszt; and a panoply
of feminist activists and female doctors, including the chair of the BDF, Marie
Stritt. About one-third of members appear to have been men; so were half
the members of its governing board (which comprised usually seven or eight
members total) and almost two-thirds of its broader executive committee in
1905. Of the fifty-three members of the executive committee, twenty-two were
medical doctors (eight of these professors of medicine); seven had doctorates
in the humanities, social sciences, or theology; seven were jurists and judges;
and four were members of the national parliament (eleven were not identified
by profession, and two were a count and countess).9
7

See “Protokoll der 1. konstituierenden Ausschussitzung am 5. Januar 1905,” BAK, NL
(Schreiber), no. 25, fol. 524–526. On Borgius, see Walther Borgius, Die Ideenwelt des Anarchismus (Leipzig: Felix Dietrich, 1904); Bert Riechle, Eine neue Ordnung der Welt (Göttingen:
V&R unipress, 2009), pp. 164–165; and Ulrich Klemm, Anarchisten als Pädagogen (Vienna:
Monte Verita, 1996), pp. 31–34. On Schreiber, see Asja Braune, “Konsequent den Unbequemen Weg Gegangen: Adele Schreiber (1872–1957), Politikerin, Frauenrechtlerin, Journalistin,”
PhD dissertation, Berlin, 2003, available at http://edoc.hu-berlin.de/dissertationen/nraune-asja2003–01–27/PDF/Braune.pdf , accessed 12 May 2013. On Dohm, see Elke Frederiksen, ed., Die
Frauenfrage in Deutschland, 1865–1915 (Stuttgart: Reclam, 1981), pp. 465–470.
8 Helene Stöcker, Bund für Mutterschutz (Berlin: Pan, 1905).
9 See “Mitteilungen des Bundes für Mutterschutz,” NG 1 (1905): 254–260.

Sex Reform

193

The BfM initially grew rapidly and had some 4,000 members in nine local
chapters by 1909. These chapters operated nine information centers, which
helped single mothers find work and gave advice on contraception, pregnancy,
sexual problems, and so forth; they also founded eight shelters (“mothers’
homes”) with some 110 beds for single mothers and their children. Its journal,
titled Mutterschutz through 1907 and thereafter Die Neue Generation, quickly
became the most important sex-reform journal of the period. The organization
published and distributed some twenty pamphlets and petitions to various legislative bodies, on topics such as the training of midwives, motherhood insurance, public support for breast-feeding, venereal diseases, sexual abstinence,
sex education, and the radical New Ethic championed by the organization’s
leadership. In 1907 and 1908, the organization’s speakers offered fifty-two
public addresses in cities around Germany.10
The diversity of the BfM’s membership soon resulted in a raft of defections.
Ruth Bré felt the leadership was insufficiently focused on social work and left
almost immediately.11 Some eugenics enthusiasts also left soon after the BfM’s
formation, with Alfred Ploetz arguing, for example, that it “can . . . for the time
being not claim to have any race-hygienic value” because it seemed to him to
be unwilling to adopt strict eugenic criteria for assistance to single mothers.12
A whole phalanx of men defected in 1907 and 1908, as it became clear that the
organization would be dominated by radical women. A particularly important
instance was that of Max Marcuse, who left in late 1907 to pursue a more
10

Helene Stöcker, “Lebensabriss,” Feministische Studien 3 (1984): 154; Helene Stöcker, Krisenmache: Eine Abfertigung (n.p.: n.p., 1910), p. 7; Max Rosenthal, Zur Geschichte des deutschen
Bundes für Mutterschutz (Breslau: BfM, 1912), esp. p. 4, and “Mutterheime des Bundes,” NG
7 (1911): 305–306; “Mitteilungen des Deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz,” NG 5 (1910):
167–169. On the BfM, see Bernd Nowacki, Der Bund für Mutterschutz (1905–1933) (Husum:
Matthiesen, 1983); Hamelman, Helene Stöcker; Ann Taylor Allen, “Mothers of the New Generation: Adele Schreiber, Helene Stöcker, and the Evolution of a German Idea of Motherhood,
1900–1914,” Signs 10 (1985); Christl Wickert, Helene Stöcker (Bonn: Dietz, 1991); Helene
Stöcker, Zehn Jahre Mutterschutz (Berlin: Oesterheld, 1915), esp. p. 52, and “Mitteilungen des
Deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz,” NG 5 (1910): 247; Jens Flemming, “‘Sexuelle Krise’ und
‘Neue Ethik’” in Liebe, Lust und Leid: Zur Gefühlskultur um 1900, ed. Helmut Scheur and
Michael Grisko (Kassel: Kassel University Press, 1999), pp. 27–56; Ulrich Linse, “‘Geschlechtsnot und Jugend’: Über Jugendbewegung und Sexualität,” in “Mit uns zieht die neue Zeit”:
Der Mythos Jugend, ed. Thomas Koebner, Rolf-Peter Janz, and Frank Trommler (Frankfurt:
Suhrkamp, 1985), pp. 245–309.
11 See Ruth Bré, Staatskinder oder Mutterrecht? (Leipzig: Verlag der Monatsschrift für
Harnkrankheiten und sexuelle Hygiene, 1904), pp. 6–7, 60; Rosemarie Schumann, “Helene
Stöcker: Verkünderin und Verwirklicherin,” in Alternativen: Schicksale deutscher Bürger, ed.
Olaf Groehler (Berlin: Nation, 1987), p. 172. For her perspective on race hygiene, see “Hie
Stöcker – hie Bré,” Kultur der Familie 1 (1906): 148–151.
12 Walther Borgius, “Mutterschutz und Rassenhygiene,” NG 1 (1905): 208; Alfred Ploetz, “Bund
für Mutterschutz,” ARGB 2 (1905): 317; “Protokoll der Ausschuss-Sitzung vom 15. Mai
1905,” BAK, NL 173, no. 25, fol. 519–522. On Ploetz, see Peter Emil Becker, Zur Geschichte
der Rassenhygiene: Wege ins Dritte Reich (Stuttgart: Georg Thieme, 1988), pp. 57–136.

194

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

scientific program in contradistinction to Helene Stöcker’s utopian Nietzschean
humanism.13 Anton Erkelenz left after Helene Stöcker refused to, as he put
it, “pursue her Nietzscheanism outside the League.”14 After bitter personal
conflicts with Stöcker in 1908 and 1909, finally, a number of socialist women
also left – including Lily Braun, Henriette Fürth, and Adele Schreiber.15
Despite these fissures, the BfM continued to constitute the organizational
core of the spectrum of sex reform in the period before World War I. Many
who left the organization – in particular, socialist women such as Schreiber
and Fürth – continued to support and agitate for ideas very similar to those
championed by the BfM. And even some sex reformers not formally associated
with the BfM referenced its work and echoed its message very closely.16 Sex
reformers never achieved a degree of doctrinal unity comparable to that of their
Christian counterparts in the AKDS, the Catholic morality movement, or the
confessional women’s organizations. But there was a remarkable degree of
consensus among them both on fundamental postulates and on practical aims.
The guidelines adopted by the executive council of the BfM in 1910 are
a good summary of the practical measures on which almost all sex reformers agreed. They called for equal rights for children born out of wedlock;
the abandonment of the double standard of sexual morality; equal rights for
women within marriage; sex education in the schools; full legalization of the
production, advertising, and sale of contraceptives; the legalization of unmarried cohabitation; the liberalization of divorce law and legislation on public
decency; the abolition of the system of police regulation of prostitution; and
the creation of a public system of maternity insurance. Although opinions were
divided within the organization regarding abortion, key figures also supported
legalization, and in 1909 the organization as a whole declared the “current
form of §218” (which criminalized abortion) “not viable,” calling for milder
penalties.17 Almost all sex reformers were also agreed on two fundamental
philosophical postulates underlying such demands. First, sexual relationships
should be judged in moral terms not by their outward forms but by their
emotional content. Second, individual sexual relationships were important to
the wider community primarily because of the relationship between sex and
reproduction; in every other respect, sex was a private matter not subject to
outside interference. The fundamentals of the sex-reform program, then, can
13

See “An unsere Leser!” and “Geleitwort zum IV. Jahrgang,” NG 3 (1907): 501–504, and
discussion in Chapter 10, Section III.
14 Erkelenz to Bré, 22 April 1905, BAK, NL 173 (Adele Schreiber), no. 17, fol. 39.
15 Adele Schreiber, ed., Mutterschaft: Ein Sammelwerk für die Probleme des Weibes als Mutter
(Munich: Albert Langen, 1912), pp. 181–184.
16 Minna Kube, Weniger Menschen aber glücklichere (Berlin: Minna Kube, 1902); Minna Kube,
Sexuelle Anaesthesie: Empfindungslose Frauen (Berlin: Santias, 1908); Minna Kube, Liebe und
Ehe (Berlin: Reform, 1907), p. 35.
17 Helene Stöcker, “Strafrechtsreform und Abtreibung,” NG 4 (1908): 403; “Forderungen der
zweiten ordentlichen Generalversammlung in Hamburg vom 13. bis zum 16. April 1909,” in
Stöcker, ed., Resolutionen, p. 14.

Sex Reform

195

be summed up quite simply: sex reformers demanded the liberation from legal
restrictions of the individual as a sexual subject; and they favored the social
regulation of reproduction in the interests of the collective (which they defined
variously as society, the nation, the “race,” or the human species).
II. Sexual Repression, Sexual Perversion, and Sexual Exploitation: Sex
Reform’s Critique of Christian Morality
There was a very considerable overlap between the demands of the BfM and
those of radical and even moderate feminists, regarding, for example, family
and divorce law, access to education and the professions, and political rights;
and a number of women prominent in sex reform were active also in the
women’s suffrage movement in particular. Strikingly, however, in some ways
the sex reformers’ critique of their society’s sexual culture was very reminiscent
of conservative Christian views. Johanna Elberskirchen, for example, argued
in 1897 that “our entire civilization, our whole social order is infected with
priapism” and “sexual anarchy”; in 1904 she even wrote of the “swamp”
created by the “bestiality” and “animalization” of sexual life.18 In its petition
in favor of the introduction of sex education in the schools in 1906, the BfM
complained of the general “degeneration and depravity of sexual life.”19 Adele
Schreiber described the BfM in 1907 as a “protest association . . . against the
vulgarity, baseness and licentiousness that in fact prevail in the sexual life of
our times.”20 Ruth Bré believed her society was characterized by “whoredom
and whorish spirit wherever one looks.”21 The sex reformers, too, regarded
prostitution and venereal disease as – as Iwan Bloch put it – “the real heart,
the central problem of the sexual question.”22 They, too, saw prostitution
specifically as the product of men’s sexual brutalism and privilege – their “onesided domination” (as Hedwig Dohm put it), their double standard, and their
“sexual mendacity” (in the words of the Austrian writer and philosopher Grete
Meisel-Hess).23
The sex reformers also shared a sense that the moral crisis of their society was
very broad – that its symptoms included sexual abuse, the sexual precocity of
18

Johanna Elberskirchen, “Sozialdemokratie und sexuelle Anarchie,” in Frauen und Sexualmoral,
ed. Marielouise Janssen-Jurreit (Frankfurt: Fischer, 1986), p. 71; Johanna Elberskirchen, Was
hat der Mann aus Weib, Kind und sich gemacht? Revolution und Erlösung des Weibes (Leipzig:
Magazin, 1904), pp. 96, 87, 104, 99.
19 “Betrifft: Einfügung der geschlechtlichen Belehrung in den Schulunterricht,” BfM petition of
April 1906.
20 Adele Schreiber, “Der Bund für Mutterschutz und seine Gegner,” NG 3 (1907): 24.
21 Ruth Bré, Das Recht auf die Mutterschaft: Eine Forderung zur Bekämpfung der Prostitution,
der Frauen- und Geschlechtskrankheiten (Leipzig: Frauen-Rundschau, 1903), p. 69.
22 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, pp. 340, 448–449.
23 Hedwig Dohm, “Zur sexuellen Moral der Frau,” in Ehe? Zur Reform der sexuellen Moral,
ed. Hedwig Dohm et al. (Berlin: Internationale Verlagsanstalt für Kunst und Literatur, 1911),
pp. 11–12, 13; Grete Meisel-Hess, Die sexuelle Krise (Jena: Diederichs, 1909), p. 108. On
Meisel-Hess, see Ellinor Melander, “Toward the Sexual and Economic Emancipation of

196

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

school children and youths, the traffic in white slaves, the deplorable character
of popular film, the dangers of trashy popular literature, and so forth.24 Anita
Augspurg, for example, urged in 1911 that those cultural forms that directed
people’s attention to “the ecstasy of erotic relationships” (such as trashy literature and film) “have to disappear . . . from the field of view of . . . youth”; in
the same volume, Käthe Schirmacher deplored the current “cult of the sexual,
the erotic” in mass culture.25 In 1905 Maria Lischnewska held that “trashy
literature and vulgar entertainments exploit the whole field of sexual life to turn
people into beasts.”26 And Iwan Bloch delivered a denunciation of sexual disorder in 1907 that would have made any conservative Christian morality campaigner proud, deploring sexual anarchy, the “compulsive need for the greatest
possible sensation,” the universal desire for mere “entertainment,” all the various institutions of urban nightlife, the modern “relationship,” pornography,
Schmutz and Schund, and so on and so forth as the “cancer of our society.”27
Nor was it unheard of, finally, for sex reformers to voice opinions regarding
the place of sexuality in human life and psychology that were strikingly similar
to Christian and abolitionist views on the “dominion of the spirit over the
flesh.” The liberal Protestant pastor Ernst Baars, who was active in the BfM,
argued in Die Neue Generation in 1908 that the first commandment of a new
sexual ethic must be “thou shalt . . . bend your sensuality and all your drives
to thy will and thereby ennoble them.”28 Helene Stöcker cited approvingly
the belief of the Austrian painter, novelist, and women’s rights activist Rosa
Mayreder that “the origin and vehicle of all spiritual life lies in the conquest of
an instinct that can subjugate individuality.”29 And the BfM itself adopted, at
its second convention in 1909, the principle that truly ethical relations between
men and women depended – among other things – on “habituation to selfdiscipline and control of the sensual drives by both sexes.”30
Despite such similarities, however, the starting point of sex-reform thought
was actually a radical attack on what the sex reformers saw as the crabbed,

Women: The Philosophy of Grete Meisel-Hess,” History of European Ideas 14 (1992): 695–
713.
24 See, e.g., “Sittlichkeitsverbrechen,” NG 1 (1905): 44; “Ein ‘Addressbuch für Mädchenhändler’!” NG 3 (1907): 410; “Zeitungsschau. Zur Kritik des sexuellen Reformbewegung,”
NG 3 (1907): 453–454.
25 Anita Augspurg, “Reformgedanken zur sexuellen Moral”; Käthe Schirmacher, “Kultur und
freie Ehe,” in Dohm et al., eds., Ehe, pp. 32, 88. On Schirmacher, see Anke Walzer, Käthe
Schirmacher (Pfaffenweiler: Centaurus, 1991).
26 Maria Lischnewska, “Die geschlechtliche Belehrung der Kinder,” NG 1 (1905): 148.
27 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, pp. 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 325, 330, 798, 801.
28 Ernst Baars, “Du sollst nicht Ehebrechen,” NG 4 (1908): 370.
29 “Zur Kritik der Weiblichkeit,” NG 2 (1906): 301. On Mayreder, see Daniela Weiland,
Geschichte der Frauenemanzipation in Deutschland und Österreich (Düsseldorf: ECON, 1983),
pp. 171–173.
30 “Forderungen,” p. 15.

Sex Reform

197

cramped, and unnatural asceticism and prudishness of Christian sexual theory.
In the words of Helene Stöcker’s programmatic introduction to the first issue
of Die Neue Generation in 1905, the sex reformers rejected “the old morality,
which saw . . . the human being as a disobedient sinner and the sex drive as evil
incarnate,” an ethic of “renunciation and denial of life” that “brands the most
elemental vital urge after hunger as something evil.” As monists committed to
the essential unity of body and spirit, the sex reformers must “restore to the sex
drive its original innocence,” must “unite and blend it . . . ever more with our
entire mental and spiritual life.” The aim, as she had put it already in 1897,
was not the absolute rule of the spirit over the body but “harmony between
the intellectual and sensual natures of man . . . man and woman – reason and
sensuality.”31
Stöcker was particularly vehement in this respect; but this view of the unnatural, unhealthy, and destructive character of Christian “dualism” (as opposed
to monism) was common throughout the sex-reform community.32 As the
movement’s most influential philosopher, Ellen Key, argued in 1909, “‘to be
fully human’ does not mean . . . that the spirit suppresses sex, or sex the spirit”;
rather, it requires harmony and balance between the two.33
But Christian sexual morality was not merely crabbed and ascetic; it was
also misogynistic. The denigration of sexuality in Christian thought was, the
sex reformers argued, intimately associated with the denigration, oppression,
and exploitation of women. Christianity identified women with reproduction,
sex, the body, and nature, and thus with sin – which must be controlled,
contained, and repressed. Thus Helene Stöcker wrote in 1905 that whereas “the
great significance of woman for humanity lies in motherhood,” Christianity
had “marked motherhood with a stigma from the start” with the concept of
original sin.34 Iwan Bloch, too, argued in 1907 that “the real origin of modern
misogyny is Christianity, the Christian teaching of the originally evil, sinful,
demonic nature of woman.”35
At the heart of the sex-reform message, then, was an understanding of
the nature and potentials of sexuality, and of the place of sexuality in the
structure of the subject, of the person, that was diametrically opposed to that
31

Helene Stöcker, “Zur Reform der sexuellen Ethik,” NG 1 (1905): 4, 5–6, 10, 5; Helene Stöcker,
“Unsere Umwertung der Werte” (1897), in Helene Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (Minden:
J. C. C. Bruns, 1906), p. 27.
32 Maria Lischnewska, “Die geschlechtliche Belehrung der Kinder,” NG 1 (1905): 141; Heinrich
Meyer-Benfey, “Die Neue Ethik und ihre Gegner: Antikritische Randglossen,” NG 4 (1908):
157; Schreiber, “Der Bund für Mutterschutz,” p. 25.
33 Ellen Key, Die Frauenbewegung (Frankfurt: Rütten & Loening, 1909), p. 135. For an incisive critique of Key’s views on the women’s movement, see Rosika Schwimmer, “Ellen Keys
‘Frauenbewegung,’” CBDF 11 (1909): 173–174.
34 Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (1906), pp. 174–175 (also published as “Die Ziele der
Mutterschutzbewegung,” 1905).
35 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, p. 534.

198

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

underlying the morality movements. For conservative Christians, as we have
seen, the authentic subject was the moral subject; morality was the dominion
of the spirit over the anarchic, asocial, selfish, and indeed demonic flesh. In
contrast, the sex reformers held that sexuality was an integral element in the
human personality, and thus that the authentic subject was a sexual subject.
Sexuality, and specifically women’s sexuality, therefore had to be acknowledged as a legitimate and positive force in individual and social life. Sex was
not a dangerous and fundamentally destructive, antisocial force but rather a
creative, erotic force; it generated energy and built social bonds, rather than
dissipating energy and rupturing social bonds. Like any other human faculty,
it could be misused; but its normal exercise was necessary, beneficial, and thus
objectively good. Health, happiness, and individual and social well-being was
not a product of self-discipline and self-denial, of the suppression of anarchic,
egoistic, or destructive vital energies; rather, it was a product of the release and
engagement of creative vital energies – including sexual energies.
The sex reformers therefore saw the pursuit of sexual pleasure as a legitimate
goal in its own right, independent of procreation. In fact, quite frequently the
sex reformers defined sexual pleasure literally as a right. Thus in the third
pamphlet published by the BfM, Walther Borgius declared “sexual activity to
be a natural and self-evident right of every adult man and woman.”36 Henriette
Fürth was highly skeptical of this formulation (and left the BfM in part because
it seemed too unconditional); but she too called sexual desire a “right,” holding
that “in sexual matters too” a woman must “demand her rights.”37 Iwan Bloch
held in 1907 that “human beings have a natural, inborn right to satisfaction of
the sex drive,” within the bounds of social and individual responsibility.38 In
1912 Die Neue Generation defined the “right to sexual intercourse, love and
motherhood” as “one of the most elementary human rights.”39 The logic was
simple: sex is a need; therefore sex is a right.
But beyond the conception of sex as a legitimate need, as a precondition of
mere health, the sex reformers were fascinated by the dynamic, creative potentials of sexuality as the source of the vital energy that underlay human creativity
in every field of endeavor. Adele Schreiber wrote in 1907, for example, that
sexuality and the passions that it created were the “origin of crimes and vulgarities” but also “the inexhaustible wellspring of inspiration . . . , the roots
of art, the creative force behind great deeds!” In 1908 Ernst Baars called the
sex drive the “most powerful, essential creative drive in man” and observed
that sexuality was the root of “madness, cruelty, and brutality” but also of
36

Walther Borgius, “Mutterschutz und neuer Ethik,” Flugblätter des Bundes für Mutterschutz,
no. 3, BAK, NL 173 (Adele Schreiber), no. 29, fol. 31–32.
37 Henriette Fürth, Das Geschlechtsproblem und die moderne Moral (Leipzig: Dietrich, 1908),
pp. 14, 16; Fürth, Streifzüge durch das Land eines Lebens (Wiesbaden: Kommission für die
Geschichte der Juden in Hessen, 2010), p. 163.
38 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, p. 736.
39 “Lehrerinnenzölibat und Rassenhygiene,” NG 8 (1912): 103.

Sex Reform

199

“the most noble activities of intellectual life – religion, art, charity, humanity,
courage, the creative drive etc.” Helene Stöcker believed that “the sex drive
has the tendency to blend with all human abilities, to be sublimated. . . . The
Christian contempt for eroticism is so fateful precisely because the erotic plays
a role in everything human.”40 And in 1915 Leopold von Wiese, chair of a BfM
chapter in Düsseldorf, would argue that the suppression of sexuality amounted
to the suppression of “the best material for the construction of the social body,”
because “feeling, will, thought and action draw their energy from the blood,
from the rhythm of our primary and secondary sexuality.” The suppression of
instinctual drives, he believed, made people unhappy; and “happy people are
at the same time useful people; they are in harmony with their surroundings,
they are friends and willing builders of society.”41
Obviously, this vision of the centrality of sex to literally everything human
rested on the same conception of the authentic sexual self that was central
to the Social Democratic conception of sexual ethics and to the homosexual
rights movement. In 1912, for example, Helene Stöcker argued that “sexuality
is in our view something so inextricably bound up with our entire psychic and
physical being that it cannot ever be separated from our lives.”42 Iwan Bloch
similarly held that sexuality was the “heart and axis of all social life,” “the
inmost, the core of the individual,” the “main factor in human progress,” and
the “genesis” of the “metaphysical, religious, and artistic” elements in human
life.43
Ultimately, in fact, the sex reformers held that sexuality was the highest
expression of the deeper “affirmation of life” itself (Lebensbejahung) – a central concept in their thinking. It was the creative force, the essence of creativity, of “the eternal becoming, the creative and industrious force everywhere
in nature.”44 This idea had been formulated at the turn of the century by
Wilhelm Bölsche, an influential popularizer of Darwinism whose three-volume
study, Love-Life in Nature (1898–1901), had a major influence on the sexreform program. Bölsche detected in nature an “eternal law of love” driving
the evolution of ever greater complexity, sophistication, beauty, and harmony.
For Bölsche, sex was everywhere, a universal, joyful, benevolent fecundity at
the heart of nature, of being; in short, “everything is love.”45 The sex reformers
40

Schreiber, “Der Bund für Mutterschutz,” p. 30; Ernst Baars, Sexuelle Ethik (Berlin: Akademischer Bund Ethos, 1908), p. 3; Helene Stöcker, “Vom IV. Neumalthusianerkongress in Dresden,”
NG 7 (1911): 479.
41 Leopold von Wiese, “Soziologische Betrachtungen über das Wesen der Askese,” Archiv für
Sexualforschung 1 (1915): 39.
42 “Jenseits des weiblichen Bülowblocks,” NG 8 (1912): 159.
43 Eugen Dühring [Iwan Bloch], Das Geschlechtsleben in England (Charlotenburg: Barsdorf,
1901), p. 443; Iwan Bloch, Die Perversen (Berlin: Pan, 1905), pp. 9–11.
44 Stöcker, “Reform der sexuellen Ethik,” p. 6.
45 Wilhelm Bölsche, Das Liebesleben in der Natur: Eine Entwickelungsgeschichte der Liebe,
vol. 3 (Leipzig: Eugen Diederichs, 1903), pp. 372, 373.

200

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

were usually less ecstatic in their appreciation of sex than this; but the influence
of this notion was clear in their discourse. And it was central to their rejection
of what they saw as the ascetic negativity of Christianity – what Helene Stöcker
called its “denial of life.”46
Not surprisingly, the sex reformers were convinced both of the impracticability and of the undesirability of sexual abstinence for unmarried people –
both men and women. As Adele Schreiber wrote in 1907, “all those . . . who
think it is enough simply to assert the commandment of self-discipline have not
recognized . . . the elemental power of instinctive and emotional life in its thousand variations”; in 1912 she would assert bluntly that “prohibition and judgment, moralizing and preachments have no effect.”47 In fact, the sex reformers
believed that the moral crisis of their times was a product precisely of the
unrealistic and harmful moral code to which Christians adhered, and the institutional and legal forms founded on it. Prostitution, venereal disease, sexual
crimes, pornography, and widespread immorality in all its many forms was
for them evidence not of a falling away from right thinking and discipline but
rather precisely of the influence of those teachings in frustrating and diverting
normal, healthy, irrepressible sexual energies.
Men in the sex-reform movement in particular argued, for example, that
the restrictive moral code compromised sexual and mental health – that abstinence caused “anemic passivity and tired decadence in male youth” and “hysteria” in women (according to Kurt Hiller), “impairment of mental capacity, even . . . real maladies in both men and women” (in Max Flesch’s view),
“neurasthenia,” lowered resistance to “infectious diseases like tuberculosis and
typhus,” or even “outright insanity” (as the Dutch birth control and eugenics
advocate Johannes Rutgers claimed).48 Less dramatically, Leopold von Wiese
asserted that it made “morose out of laughing people, ugly out of beautiful,
cowards out of brave men,” and society as a whole “falls into ever greater boredom, dullness, and lack of inspiration.”49 And restrictive sexual mores were at
the root of the prevailing sexual disorder. Bruno Meyer, for example, held that
“wherever the natural satisfaction of a powerful instinct is forcefully hindered,
surrogates are sought and found.”50 Iwan Bloch blamed Christian prudery for
having “fed the lusts of the flesh in the first place,” arguing that “the real league
against immorality is the league against prudery.”51 Walther Borgius believed
46

Helene Stöcker, “Von neuer Ethik,” NG 2 (1906): 4; Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (1906),
p. 176 (also published as “Die Ziele der Mutterschutzbewegung,” 1905).
47 Schreiber, “Der Bund für Mutterschutz,” p. 30; Adele Schreiber, “Die Ansätze neuer Sittlichkeitsbegriffe im Hinsicht auf die Mutterschaft,” in Schreiber, ed., Mutterschaft, p. 180.
48 Kurt Hiller, “Ist Kuppelei strafwürdig?” NG 6 (1910): 453; Max Flesch, “Ehe, Hygiene, und
sexuelle Moral,” NG 1 (1905): 270; J[ohannes] Rutgers, Sexuelle Abstinenz und Lebensenergie
(Berlin: BFM, 1909) (also published as BfM, Schriften, vol. 17), pp. 8, 10, 18, 24.
49 L. von Wiese, “Erotik und Kultur,” NG 10 (1914): 15.
50 Bruno Meyer, “Der Reglementierungszwang der Prostitution,” NG 9 (1913): 17.
51 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, pp. 175, 176, 264, 307.

Sex Reform

201

that “the abuse of children is merely a . . . sad surrogate for the satisfaction of an
exuberant sex drive, in the satisfaction of which the guilty party has been frustrated by our sexual morality and our economic conditions.”52 Rutgers even
believed that sexual self-denial explained child sexual abuse by priests and
teachers, regarding abstinence therefore as “an outright menace to society.”53
Women shared such views at least in some degree. Helene Stöcker, for example, baldly asserted in 1908 that one of the “fateful consequences” of Christian
morality had been “depraved debauchery as a reaction against the unnatural
shackling of the sex drive.”54 Adele Schreiber believed that even if abstinence
did not cause physical infirmities, the repression of “the strongest craving of
nature” required an immense “expenditure of emotional and physical energy,
thought and joie de vivre” and could “turn an industrious and happy person
into one tired of living, a titan into a limp, ill-humored shadow, a bright and
sunny nature into a moody, morose” one. Ellen Key, too, deplored the waste of
“all the energy that is lost to every nation because the majority have to fritter
it away day by day and year by year in dull endurance of the inhibition of their
erotic life, or in secret struggle against it.”55
More broadly, however, the sex reformers argued specifically that the central institution of the Christian sexual and social order, monogamous marriage, was at the root of the sexual misery surrounding them. The rigid form
of marriage, imposed by civil law, social convention, and poor access to contraception, made it impossible for a very large proportion of adult, sexually
mature men and women to marry. Given the long period of education and
training and apprenticeship through which many had to pass to gain entry, for
example, into the professions, the civil service, or the skilled trades, workingclass men typically married sometime in their mid-twenties, and middle-class
men between their late twenties and middle thirties. As a result, a remarkable
proportion of young adults were not married: as early pamphlets circulated by
the BfM in 1905 pointed out, more than three-quarters of men aged eighteen to
thirty were single, as were almost half of men aged eighteen to forty, four-fifths
of women aged eighteen to twenty-five, and more than a third of women aged
eighteen to forty.56 It was hardly surprising, therefore, that so many people
sought sexual gratification outside of marriage. As Walther Borgius put it in
52

Walther Borgius, “Zur Frage der strafrechtlichen Behandlung von Sittlichkeitsvergehen an
Kindern,” NG 1 (1905): 380, 383.
53 Rutgers, Sexuelle Abstinenz, p. 18.
54 Stöcker, “Reform der sexuellen Ethik,” p. 7; Helene Stöcker, “Die sexuelle Frage und der
Katholizismus,” NG 4 (1908): 229; Helene Stöcker, “Die sexuelle Abstinenz und die Stützen
der Gesellschaft,” NG 5 (1909): 12.
55 Adele Schreiber, “Ehereform,” in Dohm et al., eds., Ehe, p. 74; Ellen Key, Liebe und Ethik
(Berlin: Pan, 1905), p. 23.
56 “Was will der Deutsche Bund für Mutterschutz?” Flugblätter des Bundes für Mutterschutz,
no. 1 (1905), BAK, NL 173 (Adele Schreiber), no. 29, fol. 30; Walther Borgius, “Mutterschutz
und Neue Ethik” Flugblätter des Bundes für Mutterschutz, no. 3.

202

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

1905, the “prevailing form of marriage . . . is not even remotely able any more
to encompass the whole of sexual life” in German society.57 The assumption
that women would and should be married helped keep their wages low, which
in turn drove many working-class women into prostitution. Single motherhood
plunged women and their children into poverty – and often, again, into prostitution. Moral prejudice and legal discrimination made illegitimate children
particularly vulnerable – as Frida Stéenhof put it, the institution of “marriage
harbors a . . . grave danger for the child: it risks being born illegitimate.”58
In the eyes of the sex reformers, therefore, prostitution was the necessary and
unavoidable complement of the legal institution of marriage; the two together
constituted the de facto sexual order of society. Prostitution existed not in spite
of marriage but “alongside it, with it, as its terrible complement.” It was in fact
the “frightful flip-side of our patriarchal marriage” (in the words of Helene
Stöcker).59
Even within marriage, moreover, many sex reformers – like Social Democrats
and the radical faction in the women’s movement – believed that the financial dependency of women often made the wife’s role not essentially different
from prostitution. The chairman of the BfM’s Breslau chapter, Max Rosenthal,
remarked, for example, that “a woman who sells herself to a rich man without
loving him is trafficking in her flesh just as much as a whore is.”60 Henriette
Fürth argued in 1911 that often the only difference between marriage and prostitution was that one was “sale for life, the other sale for an hour.”61 Bruno
Meyer deplored the fact that men’s financial and legal power forced women to
tolerate their husbands’ sexual whims, turning marriage into a “free haven for
lewdness!”62
Even if marriage were not motivated by base material considerations, moreover, many sex reformers rejected the patriarchal family as undesirable, indeed
corrupting, by its very nature. For example, Anita Augspurg published an
open letter in Die Frauenbewegung in 1905 that characterized marriage as,
for a woman, the “renunciation of her legal existence . . . , complete pecuniary
dependence and . . . complete abrogation of rights over her children”; “for a
woman with self-respect,” she concluded, “it is in my opinion impossible to
contract a legitimate marriage.”63 Henriette Fürth referred to bourgeois marriage simply as “life-long galley slavery,” and Ruth Bré held that marriage
under existing law turned women’s sexuality into the “obligatory tribute of a

57

Borgius, “Mutterschutz und Neue Ethik.”
Stéenhof, “Ehe- und Sexualreform,” NG 8 (1912): 419.
59 Helene Stöcker, “Der Segen der Form,” NG 1 (1905): 134; Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen
(1906), p. 180.
60 Thal [Rosenthal], Mutterrecht, p. 150.
61 Henriette Fürth, “Neue Ethik?” SM 17 (1911): 1612.
62 Bruno Meyer, “Zum Kulturkampf um die Sittlichkeit, I,” NG 1 (1905): 400.
63 Anita Augspurg, “Ein typischer Fall der Gegenwart,” in Janssen-Jurreit, ed., Frauen und Sexualmoral, p. 101.
58

Sex Reform

203

captive.”64 The inevitable moral effect on women of living in such an institution was, of course, disastrous. Hedwig Dohm, writing in 1911, believed
that “the complete power of the husband” under existing family law “ruins
the character of both sexes,” because power “brutalizes . . . his instincts, stifles
justice and self-knowledge in him” and forces wives to use the “weapons of the
oppressed: cunning, lies, hypocrisy.”65 And the BfM as a whole, at its 1909
congress, adopted the principle that “marriage is” – that is, should be – “a voluntary union of independent and equal individuals. Any subjection in principle
of one party under the other . . . is contrary to its moral essence.”66 The clear
implication was that marriage, as codified in German family law, was immoral.
In short, as Bruno Meyer wrote in 1905, Christian morality “has become a
cause of immorality through and through”; and in the following year Helene
Stöcker denounced the “whole grotesque cruelty” and the “giant bankruptcy”
of conservative Christian morality.67
The sex reformers took a somewhat ambivalent position with regard to mass
culture. On the one hand, they too saw suggestive and indecent entertainments
as morally deplorable. On the other, they also believed that the popular taste
for smut was a product of the denial and repression of sexuality. It might be
distasteful, therefore; but it was not threatening. It was, so to speak, a toxic
byproduct of the pathological workings of Christian morality and the patriarchal, repressive moral and social order, rather than itself a moral toxin. And
repression might merely make the problem worse – it might create “much more
harmful and dangerous diversions” of “excess energies of sexual origin,” as
Bloch put it.68 Bruno Meyer even held that pornography, as a relatively harmless diversion of repressed sexual energies, was “almost to be welcomed.”69
More important, a commitment to the sanctity of individual rights was
absolutely central to sex-reform thought. “We live,” as Johannes Rutgers put
it in Die Neue Generation in 1908, “precisely in an age . . . , in which the
right of the individual to be an autonomous personality is winning ever greater
acceptance.” Henriette Fürth, similarly (and in the same year) believed that
the “individualizing tendency . . . has given our time its stamp.” And Helene
Stöcker regarded Christian asceticism as an offense against the “natural right
of every adult person to healthy exercise of all his energies and functions.”70
Censorship, obviously, was not compatible with this position.
64

Henriette Fürth, “Neue Ethik?” p. 1613; Ruth Bré, “Zunächst andere Ehegesetze,” in Dohm
et al., eds., Ehe, pp. 178, 179; Bré, Staatskinder, p. 74.
65 Dohm, “Zur sexuellen Moral,” pp. 13, 14; Bré, Das Recht, p. 67.
66 “Forderungen,” p. 16.
67 Bruno Meyer, “Zur Psychologie der Geschlechtsmoral,” NG 1 (1905): 23; Helene Stöcker,
“Frauenbewegung und Mütterlichkeit,” in Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (1906), p. 97.
68 Bloch, Die Perversen, p. 17.
69 Bruno Meyer, “Zum Kulturkampf um die Sittlichkeit,” NG 1 (1905): 407.
70 Johannes Rutgers, “Sexuelle Differenzierung,” NG 4 (1908): 461; Henriette Fürth, “Mutterschaft und Beruf,” and Helene Stöcker, “Zur Psychologie der freien Hingabe,” both in NG
4 (1908): 461, 100, 193, 325.

204

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

This commitment to individual rights was part of a broader commitment
to the superiority of a democratic social and political order – one that was
articulated with growing clarity in the last years before World War I. In 1908
Helene Stöcker, for example, denounced the patriarchal familial social “order”
as “nothing but an act of violence by the dominant and owning classes and sex
against those who own nothing and are dominated.”71 In 1911, in an essay
decrying the proposed criminalization of lesbian sex, she observed that “in the
realm of sexual morality backward absolutism and intolerance still rule . . . we
cannot speak of a free political life . . . until we have achieved alongside legal
and social freedom [and] freedom of religion also the freedom of the individual in her most private of private life, in love-life.”72 In 1912 Frida Stéenhof
deplored the fact that, under current law, marriage was a “property-law relationship, where the man and father is the owner.” The current sexual order
was incompatible with “genuine justice and democratic freedom,” she held; the
“current barbarity of sexual life” must give way to a “democratic social order.”
Democracy was “the highest goal and aim of the times”; current family law
was a relic of “patriarchal and aristocratic ages of civilization,” contrary to the
“principle of moral freedom” and to the “constitutive principles” of the new
social order, “individuality and solidarity.”73 In an essay of 1914 on “Love
and Suffrage,” Gabriele Reuter suggested that at best the old form of (marital)
love was comparable to “the love of a ruler for his people – the king for his
subjects.” In contrast, the “true, highest, real love” would be selfless; it would
be achieved only through a “struggle up from darkness to the . . . highest light”;
and “we women see in the achievement of suffrage a stage in this struggle.”74
But already at its 1909 general conference, the BfM as a whole adopted – as
one of five suggested reforms that would help to eliminate prostitution – the
broader “transformation of our police state into a state of free citizens.”75
Obviously, there was an explicitly anticapitalist as well as antiauthoritarian
slant to this analysis. Most of the sex reformers regarded the existing sexual
order as a product of and natural complement to capitalism – and capitalism,
therefore, as the ultimate source of sexual disorder. Grete Meisel-Hess explicitly
argued, for example, that women would be liberated only with the “liberation
of economic values from capitalism.” Henriette Fürth observed that the existing
marital order rested on a “foundation of property law” that was no longer valid
for the great majority of the population.76 Iwan Bloch was particularly explicit,
writing in 1907 that “free love is simply love liberated from the dominance

71

Helene Stöcker, “Die alte Ethik und die Verantwortlichkeit,” NG 4 (1908): 43.
Helene Stöcker, “Die beabsichtigte Ausdehnung des §175 auf die Frau,” NG 7 (1911): 120–121.
73 Frida Stéenhof/Harold Gote, “Ehe- und Sexualreform,” NG 8 (1912): 415, 416, 418, 423, 414,
416, 422, 423.
74 Gabriele Reuter, Liebe und Stimmrecht (Berlin: Fischer, 1914), pp. 23, 34, 52.
75 “Mitteilungen des Deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz,” NG 5 (1909): 211.
76 Meisel-Hess, Die sexuelle Krise, p. 272; Henriette Fürth, “Die Lage der Mutter und die Entwicklung des Mutterschutzes in Deutschland,” in Schreiber, ed., Mutterschaft, p. 283.
72

Sex Reform

205

of the state and capital. It is therefore realizable only through an economic
transformation that will end the economic struggle for existence. . . . Economic
reform is the only way to a higher love.”77
This is not to say that all the sex reformers were Social Democrats; nationalist
liberals played a secondary but nevertheless significant role in the movement. A
particularly important example was Maria Lischnewska, who paired the antiCatholicism common in the movement with a more unusual antisocialism, class
bias, and ethnic-national chauvinism. And yet, her argument was precisely that
a “decisive energetic nationalism” would welcome the political participation of
women, “one half of the nation,” and would resurrect “the ancient Germanic
ideal of comradeship between the sexes” as a logical consequence of the political imperatives of the modern age, in which the state “depends . . . on the
participation, devotion, and sacrifice of every citizen.” Lischnewska’s chauvinism, in other words, was the chauvinism of liberal nationalists, not of authoritarians.78
It should be obvious that the sex reformers’ understanding of the connection between authoritarian politics and repressive sexuality – and between sex
reform and democracy – was actually rather similar to the political theory of
conservative Christians. The latter argued that the repression of sexual drives
was the necessary foundation for the ability to be obedient to one’s social
betters and political rulers, and hence the foundation of the existing political
order; and they feared that sexual disorder would feed the democratic spirit,
and specifically the Social Democratic revolution. The sex reformers made precisely the same argument – but, obviously, they regarded the collapse of the
authoritarian familial and political order and the creation of a new, democratic
one as a desirable outcome.
III. Freedom and Responsibility: The Positive Program of Sex Reform
The sex reformers regarded equality of the sexes within marriage and above
all the financial and social independence of women as one of the most important preconditions for this transformation. Helene Stöcker was particularly
eloquent on this point. Already in the 1890s, she had argued that “pecuniary
independence” was “the first precondition for every kind of freedom,” and
that without such independence love could never be pure – women could not
choose freely, according to the commands of their hearts, and men would not
be forced to treat them with respect.79 Only the “economic and intellectual
liberation of woman,” she wrote in 1904, “can make sexual relations between
77

Bloch, Das Sexualleben, p. 278.
Maria Lischnewska, Warum muss die Frau Politik treiben? (Munich: Nationalverein, 1910),
pp. 18, 22, 39, 1.
79 Helene Stöcker, “Die moderne Frau” (1893) and “Die Selbstbestimmung des Weibes” (n.d.),
in Helene Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen, second edition (Minden: J. C. C. Bruns, 1908),
pp. 20, 63.
78

206

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

men and women more worthy and more beneficial to society.”80 But others
in the BfM were no less explicit regarding this issue. The consensus was, as
one author summed it up in Die Neue Generation in 1909, that “the economic
independence of woman is the primary requirement for a healthy sexual life.”81
The BfM’s second general conference in 1909 adopted this position explicitly –
that “the foundation of all personal autonomy is economic independence,”
which therefore “has to be demanded for woman as well” if sexual relations
were to be purified.82
In this, of course, the demands of the sex reformers coincided quite closely
with those of the abolitionists and the mainstream feminist movement as a
whole. In fact, the BfM supported a panoply of reforms advocated in this same
period by the mainstream BDF (and sometimes even by more conservative
women): a special maternity insurance system (Mutterschaftsversicherung) for
new mothers, liberalization of marriage and divorce law, legal equality within
marriage, coeducation, equal access to higher education and to all professions,
reform of illegitimacy law, the expansion of the public child welfare system,
and so on.
What distinguished the sex reformers from the mainstream or moderate
feminists (as well as from conservative Christian moralists) was their understanding particularly of the nature of women’s sexuality. Whereas both the
secular feminist mainstream and conservative Christians held that men must
be educated up to the level of women’s morality, the sex reformers denied that
there was any difference between men’s and women’s sex drives.
Johanna Elberskirchen stated this view with unusual force in an essay on
“Sexual Feeling in Woman and Man” (1903). The sex drive in men and women
derived, she argued, from precisely the same physiological source, and both
“hungered” for sex equally. This sexual drive was not in itself evil or destructive; what explained the sexual and social misery of the day was the fact that
men had used their social and financial power to reduce women to a state
of “sexual slavery” and to establish themselves as “for the woman, in the
realm of sex, the capitalist,” the exploiter. As a result, “the sexual needs of the
man exceeded the physiologically necessary,” whereas those of some women –
those who were not, as prostitutes, required to service this “pathological, hysterical . . . sexual feeling in men” – were repressed. The solution was to return
both sexes to a normal or “physiological” level of sexual activity.83
Elberskirchen’s argument was particularly explicit but in its essentials typical. Ida Boy-Ed, a prolific author of women’s novels, for example, demanded
80

Stöcker, “Prostitution und Enthaltsamkeit” (1904), in Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (1908),
p. 130.
81 Margarete Lissauer, “Untreue bei Mann und Frau,” NG 5 (1909): 486–487.
82 “Forderungen,” p. 16.
83 Johanna Elberskirchen, Die Sexualempfindung bei Weib und Mann, betrachtet vom
physiologisch-soziologischen Standpunkte (Leipzig: Jacques Hegner, 1903), pp. 6, 7, 28–29,
25–26, 30, 31, 39, 47, 48, 38, 40, 52, 50, 53.

Sex Reform

207

the development of a healthy and natural understanding of female sexuality and suggested that child rearing, instruction, and literature should abandon prurience and repressive silence and “awaken in woman the courage to
be sensual!”84 Henriette Fürth too believed that women must demand their
“right” to be sexual creatures, while also braking men’s “hypertrophied sexuality” and returning men to a “healthy” degree of sexuality “that is in accord
with the aims of nature.”85 Stöcker even argued that women were more sexual
than men – that woman was “in fact born to love with all the fibers of her
being, with mind, heart and senses – with all her nerves – for she is in the
noblest sense . . . much more sexually needy than the man.”86 Ellen Key, too,
believed that “the sexual life of woman – if it has remained strong and healthy –
governs her . . . much more profoundly than it does the man.”87
Not surprisingly, therefore, the sex reformers contested men’s authority to
define sexuality and policy toward it. Like homosexual men, they rejected the
authority of one sexual population in matters pertaining to the feelings of
another. Already in the 1890s, Gisela von Streitberg (a pseudonym for the
radical Countess Bülow von Dennewitz) had argued that women should rely
on observation of “her own nature” rather than the “productions of belletristic
literature, or all the physiological, gynecological, ethnological, anthropological,
philosophical and social writings, which are authored mostly by and for men
and read by them.”88 In 1896 Johanna Elberskirchen delivered an impassioned
defense of the legitimacy of her own viewpoint, telling her male readers that
“your morality is not my morality. . . . I do not belong to the so-called objective
[ones]. In the final analysis objectivity has to admit everything, even vermin,
even swine, even – your morality . . . ! But not subjectivity – not I!”89 Again,
these views were particularly explicit, but not unusual. Stöcker summed up
the point in 1903, asserting simply that whatever male doctors might say,
“regarding what women feel, women will presumably best be able to judge for
themselves.”90
Whereas abolitionists and conservative Christians demanded that both
women and men practice self-restraint and self-denial, then, and whereas the
champions of regulated prostitution essentially defended sexual libertinism
for men only, the sex reformers championed instead the New Ethic of sexual liberation and sexual responsibility – a new regime of sexual freedom
for all.
84

Ida Boy-Ed, “Zwischen Scylla und Charybdis,” in Dohm et al., eds., Ehe, p. 122.
Fürth, Das Geschlechtsproblem, p. 17.
86 Helene Stöcker, “Die moderne Frau” (1893), in Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (1908),
p. 20.
87 Ellen Key, Über Liebe und Ehe (Berlin: S. Fischer, 1911), p. 204.
88 Gisela von Streitberg, Die falsche Moral im Leben des Weibes (Berlin: Fried, 1891), p. 17.
89 Johanna Elberskirchen, Die Prostitution des Mannes (Zurich: Verlags-Magazin, 1896), pp. 3–4.
90 Helene Stöcker, “Frauenbewegung und Mütterlichkeit” (1903), in Stöcker, Die Liebe und die
Frauen (1908), pp. 104–105; see also pp. 113, 115–116.
85

208

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

The sex reformers did not reject the ideal of monogamy as such; in fact they
repeatedly insisted that they regarded it as the highest and most desirable form
of relationship between a man and a woman. Helene Stöcker even insisted that
the “Holy Trinity of father, mother and children will always remain the highest
ideal,” whereas Iwan Bloch explained that the sex-reform movement favored
not “free sex” but “free love” – which, of course, would create its own bonds
of commitment and responsibility.91 At its conference in 1909, the BfM as a
whole adopted a similar statement, holding that “the ideal for marriage is a
physical and spiritual communion between husband and wife that is intended to
be permanent” – particularly because “the family founded on moral marriage,
the home and the intimately shared life of parents and children offers the best
conditions for the spiritual development of children.”92
As a matter of simple social reality, however, the BfM’s 1909 statement of
principles also argued that “in addition to this ideal, and in light of economic
conditions, other forms of sexual relationship should also be recognized as
morally justified . . . , on the condition that they are founded on spiritual communion of two people and fulfill [the parents’] duties toward [their] children.”93
A very large proportion of the sexually mature population was not married,
largely for various financial reasons; and most members of the BfM assumed –
as did, for example, doctors in the DGBG – that it was unrealistic to expect
them to remain celibate. As Max Flesch had argued in the fourth pamphlet
published by the BfM, it was an irreducible fact of life that “by far the majority
of men participate in extramarital sexual intercourse at least for a part of their
lives,” and that “furthermore very many women – aside from prostitution –
also practice extramarital sexual intercourse.”94
The sex-reform position was not merely that extramarital sexual relationships were unavoidable, however; many sex reformers also argued that they
were, in some senses, desirable. At the very least, some believed that greater
acceptance of nonmarital sexual relationships would form a more moral
(and healthy) alternative to prostitution. Helene Stöcker, for example, held
in 1905 that informal sexual relationships “would be a lesser evil than the
commercial sex that today poisons our entire sexual life.”95 Bré concurred:
“Free marriage according to matriarchal law,” she believed, would “drive
the prostitute from the field.”96 And in any case, as Stöcker remarked in
1905, a sexual relationship that grew out of friendship and was based on
“mutual respect,” “reverence,” and “equality” was superior to “the current
91

Stöcker, “Reform der sexuellen Ethik,” p. 10; Helene Stöcker, “Die Männer-Bewegung” (1897),
in Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (1906), p. 78; Bloch, Das Sexualleben, pp. 236, 224.
92 “Forderungen,” pp. 15, 17, 18.
93 Ibid., pp. 15, 18.
94 Max Flesch, “Entwurf zu einem Programm des Bundes fur Mutterschutz,” Flugblätter des
deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz, no. 4 (Berlin: n.p., n.d.), p. 3.
95 Helene Stöcker, “Die Ziele der Mutterschutzbewegung” (1905), in Stöcker, Die Liebe und die
Frauen (1906), p. 181.
96 Bré, Das Recht, p. 60.

Sex Reform

209

exploitative condition” in marriage; indeed “anything else would be better
than the current brutal power relations.”97
More positively, then, the sex reformers’ position was that the older, formalistic conception of sexual morality must give way to the “moral judgment
of sexual life according to its spiritual content,” as Heinrich Meyer-Benfey put
it.98 The BfM guidelines of 1910 declared that the organizations’ efforts were
“directed toward internalization of the concept of morality, to make it dependent not on a mere formality, but on the consciousness of responsibility and
on actual fulfillment of one’s duties.”99
In fact, the sex reformers universally assumed that real sexual morality
would only blossom on the basis of sexual freedom. Thus, Ernst Baars suggested that sex reformers “want freedom, because greater freedom raises the
consciousness of duty and the sense of responsibility.”100 Adele Schreiber hoped
that “the end of compulsory marriage will be the beginning of a new, higher,
more moral communion between man and woman.”101 Iwan Bloch, too,
believed that a new, less restrictive structure of sexual relations would result
in a lower rate of divorce, because “freedom is the source of constancy.”102 In
Ellen Key’s formulation, “the energies liberated by freedom themselves work
against the dangerous consequences of freedom!”103
The sex reformers differed regarding the precise nature of the legal and institutional reforms that might create the new sexual order. In some few cases, in
fact, they delivered what more conservative contemporaries would have considered outright paeans to sexual disorder. Henriette Fürth is a particularly
striking instance. In 1903 she had already gone so far as to celebrate the “small
community of strong, self-confident individuals,” the “path-breakers of a new
moral law” who, rejecting the moral authority of priests and bureaucrats,
embraced “responsible affirmation of life with all of its consequences.” Sexual
life, she argued, was “holy ground, on which every one has to come to terms
with himself,” and “neither society nor the law can intervene with their clumsy
hand.” By 1908 she argued that sex was every individual’s “private affair” and
neither state nor society could stand in judgment over it – even if that meant tolerating serial monogamy or polygamy.104 Her assumption was simple: because
sexuality was inseparable from selfhood, any expression of authentic desire
97

Stöcker, “Reform der sexuellen Ethik,” p. 8.
Quoted in “Zeitungsschau. Zur Kritik der sexuellen Reformbewegung,” NG 4 (1908): 68;
Heinrich Meyer-Benfey, “Die sittlichen Grundlagen der Ehe,” NG 7 (1909): 258, 259.
99 Max Rosenthal, “Was heisst: ‘Neue Ethik’? Was will der Bund für Mutterschutz?” NG 6
(1910): 224, 223.
100 Baars, Sexuelle Ethik, p. 24.
101 Schreiber, “Die Ansätze,” pp. 168, 167.
102 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, p. 245.
103 Key, Liebe und Ethik, p. 18.
104 Henriette Fürth, “Freie Liebe und Ehe,” Magazin für Literatur 13 (1903): 248, 247, 249;
Henriette Fürth, “Mutterschaft und Ehe,” NG 1 (1905): 489; Fürth, Das Geschlechtsproblem,
pp. 21–22; Henriette Fürth, Staat und Sittlichkeit (Leipzig: Wehner, 1912), p. 11.
98

210

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

was morally legitimate. Others clearly shared this perspective. Ruth Bré, for
example, suggested that “monogamous free marriage” might not necessarily
last a lifetime; in fact, it might survive only “a couple of years, perhaps a couple
months – or weeks. For some women perhaps only one night.”105 Iwan Bloch,
writing in 1907, argued that the “immensely varied mental differentiation of
modern civilized man” justified not only serial monogamy but in fact “simultaneous double love,” because one person might have erotic needs and desires
that could only be satisfied by two other people.106 Adele Schreiber held, in
1912, that given the “heterogeneity of human beings,” it was obvious that
“no degree of latitude can be big enough, with respect to love and marriage,
to do justice to the individual’s peculiarities”; the “straight-jacket of ‘one true
morality’” of any kind was therefore unacceptable.107 Helene Stöcker summed
it up in 1904: the ideal society needed moral “room for a thousand different
kinds of love.”108
About one form of sexual desire – homosexuality – the sex reformers were
strikingly reticent. The issue barely registered at all in the internal discussions
within the BfM at any time; and the organization’s journal did not publish
any substantial discussion of homosexuality until the summer of 1908, when
Stöcker finally presented her perspective on the scandal trials rocking the homosexual rights movement. Thereafter, the journal once again fell more or less
silent on the issue, until the discussion of the attempt to extend §175 to women
in 1911. And there was a certain ambivalence even to what was said within
the BfM regarding the moral status of homosexuality. The rhetorical core of
Stöcker’s first essay on the topic in 1908, for example, was that homosexual
“seduction” did far less damage to individual and society than did men’s heterosexual predations; thus the “moral outrage’” of homophobes was simply
hypocritical.109 In the same year, Die Neue Generation carried a strikingly
homophobic article by Bruno Meyer, who asserted that homosexuality was the
product of either celibacy or sexual excess.110 Even as late as 1914, Stöcker
remarked somewhat ambiguously that “aesthetic aversion” should never “go
so far as to make us treat those who think and feel differently with cruelty and
injustice.” But she also hoped that Freudian theory would yield therapies that
would enable doctors to “lead them back in many cases to a normal mode of
feeling.”111
105

Bré, Das Recht, p. 63.
Bloch, Das Sexualleben, p. 229.
107 Schreiber, “Die Ansätze,” p. 173.
108 Stöcker, “Die Selbstbestimmung des Weibes,” p. 59.
109 Helene Stöcker, “Der Prozess Eulenburg und die Sexualwissenschaft,” NG 4 (1908): 287.
110 Bruno Meyer, “Das Alb der Sittlichkeitsgesetze im Strafgesetzbuch (§175),” NG 4 (1908):
300–301.
111 Stöcker, “Die beabsichtigte Ausdehnung,” p. 111; “Abarten der Liebe,” NG 10 (1914): 377;
Helene Stöcker, “Homosexualität und Geschlechtsbewertung,” Geschlecht und Gesellschaft
(hereinafter GG) 9 (1914): 275.
106

Sex Reform

211

Still, Stöcker at least was quite vehement in her rejection of §175, which
she called an example of “the darkest Middle Ages” in sexual ethics and
an “artifact from the times of darkest absolutism, the most foolish police
power . . . crudeness and barbarism” comparable to “cannibalism and witchburning.”112 In 1911 she even looked forward to the day when such interference
in people’s private lives would be regarded as “‘perverse.’”113 And although the
sex reformers were almost completely silent regarding female homosexuality,
there was at least one member of the BfM, Johanna Elberskirchen, who was
one of the only openly homosexual women in German public life. In 1904 she
had responded to accusations that leading members of the women’s movement
were lesbians by remarking that “we have good reason to be.”114 Elberskirchen
kept a low profile in the BfM and beyond this one essay does not appear to
have made an issue of her sexual orientation; and the BfM generally acted,
effectively, as if lesbianism were a nonissue. But in some cases the sex reformers offered explicit justifications of lesbian relationships. Stöcker herself, for
example, held that “tender friendship with women” was often a surrogate for
a relationship with a man, particularly among female civil servants who had
to remain both unmarried and childless to keep their jobs.115 Käthe Schirmacher too argued that sexual relationships between women had to be judged
tolerantly, given that women’s opportunities for sexual gratification were so
constrained.116 Cautiously, perhaps even reluctantly, but nevertheless clearly,
the sex reformers applied their radical moral individualism even to this most
taboo of sexual topics.
What precisely this radically nominalist and individualist position implied
in legal terms was not entirely clear; but it was universally agreed that, as Grete
Meisel-Hess put it in 1909, existing marriage law “assumes the miraculous as
a universal human destiny” and was therefore nonviable.117 Some suggested
instead the introduction of some form of temporary marriage particularly for
young people. Others advocated replacing existing marriage law with a regime
of individual contracts. The official position of the BfM was less clear. The
first general assembly of the BfM passed a resolution that merely demanded
“completely equal rights for man and woman” within marriage; the “legal
recognition of free marriage”; legal equality for illegitimate children; and the

112

Helene Stöcker, “Der Prozess Eulenburg und die Sexualwissenschaft,” NG 4 (1908): 285, 286,
288.
113 Stöcker, “Die beabsichtigte Ausdehnung,” p. 116.
114 Johanna Elberskirchen, Die Liebe des dritten Geschlechts: Homosexualitat, eine bisexuelle
Varietät keine Entartung – keine Schuld (Leipzig: Spohr, 1904), pp. 24, 23, 25; Was hat
der Mann aus Weib, Kind und sich gemacht? Revolution und Erlösung des Weibes (Leipzig:
Magazin, 1904), p. 9.
115 Stöcker, “Die beabsichtigte Ausdehnung,” pp. 113, 116.
116 Käthe Schirmacher, “§175 des deutschen Strafgesetzbuches,” Abolitionist 10 (1911): 4, 3.
117 Meisel-Hess, Die sexuelle Krise, pp. 45, 56, 29.

212

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

expansion of child welfare services.118 In 1909, the organization’s second conference laid out the basic principles of equality, financial independence, mutual
exclusivity, and shared responsibility that would characterize a truly moral
marriage law.119 Max Rosenthal’s guidelines for the organization, accepted by
its governing board in 1910, called for the “moral and legal recognition of any
relationship characterized by consciousness of responsibility for the duties arising from it and the will to fulfill them as in truth ‘marital’ – even in cases where
the legal formalities are not observed.”120 Beyond that, the sex reformers seldom made specific practical demands; for of course the logic of their position
regarding the benefits of individual freedom was, as Heinrich Meyer-Benfey
put it in 1908, that “a morally healthy humanity, developing in freedom, will
always create for itself the forms it needs.”121
The sex reformers did not reject all order, nor even all legal order in sexual
matters. They did reject any binding, universal morality based on revelation,
on Christian tradition. But they were fully committed to natural science as
the source of authority in moral matters, and as their guide in constructing
a new set of social and personal relationships between men and women; and
they sometimes drew quite sweeping conclusions from that commitment. As
Ellen Key held in 1905, what was above all necessary was to “bring legal
concepts into harmony with well-researched nature”; or, as Lischnewska put
it in 1907, “only that which is in accordance with the laws of nature can be
moral.”122 But the sex reformers did not conceive of the bonds of natural law
as onerous, because their view was that anything natural was healthy – as
Bré put it, “natural” sexual desire must necessarily be “good,” because “in
nature everything is moral. Her intentions are always pure.”123 And again,
most sex reformers assumed that only the individual could know what was
natural for him or her. What was more, the program of creating a scientific or
natural morality necessarily implied creating a morality that was in constant
flux, one that could probably never be codified. For as good Darwinists, the sex
reformers believed that nature itself was always evolving, and science always
advancing. Accordingly, insistence on the idea of the historicity of all morality
was universal among the sex reformers.
The problem of Christian morality was precisely that it was outdated –
the product of “an age of civilization,” as Stöcker put it, “that has otherwise
been overcome,” a living cultural fossil.124 Walther Borgius, similarly, argued
that “the inherited clerical-ascetic moral teaching” was incompatible with the
118

Helene Stöcker, “Unsere erste General-Versammlung,” NG 3 (1907): 78–79.
“Forderungen,” p. 15.
120 Max Rosenthal, “Was heisst: ‘Neue Ethik’?” pp. 224–225, 222–223.
121 Heinrich Meyer Benfey, “Die neue Ethik und ihgre Gegner,” NG 4 (1908): 167.
122 Key, Liebe und Ethik, p. 37; Lischnewska in “Diskussion,” ZBG 7 (1907): 265 and “Die
geschlechtliche Belehrung der Kinder,” NG 1 (1905): 148, 147.
123 Bré, Das Recht, p. 26.
124 Stöcker, “Reform der sexuellen Ethik,” p. 3.
119

Sex Reform

213

“modern conception of life resting on scientific-sociological foundations” and
must be discarded.125 But the deeper point was that any moral code was necessarily historical and would in the fullness of time become outdated. Henriette
Fürth made this implication explicit in an essay of 1905, arguing that any
moral concepts were “only pertinent and justified under particular conditions
and for a particular age.”126 There was, then, as Hedwig Dohm put it, “always
only a moral du jour.”127 This perspective was enshrined in the BfM’s guidelines of 1910, which asserted that “morality too is subject to the condition of
progressive evolution.”128
The extraordinary optimism at the root of this evolutionary view of moral
development is self-evident. Whereas Christians regarded the apparent wave of
immorality of their times as part of a more general falling away from Christianity, many sex reformers viewed the whole discussion of sexuality and morality
as an inspiring development – evidence of the moral evolution of mankind in
their own times. Maria Lischnewska, for example, argued in 1905 that, until
the present, society had merely “forcibly and carefully covered up” its dark
side; but “our whole modern life is characterized – and this is one of its best
aspects – by openness.” The “swamp” of immorality had now been uncovered and could now be drained; and so “a new age has begun.”129 Helene
Stöcker, writing in the same year, held that “we live in an age of hope” comparable to the age of the Reformation, an age of liberation in which the dead
weight of the past was being replaced by “warm authentic life.”130 Iwan Bloch
even held that “there has never been an age that thought more purely and more
healthily than ours with respect to moral impulses,” and that the growth of
scientific knowledge of sexuality would allow the creation of “more natural,
free, noble conditions.”131
Many of the sex reformers, particularly socialists, believed that there was
very specific, concrete evidence in favor of this optimism. For they believed that
the proletariat was already on its way to creating a more rational, flexible, and
natural sexual ethic, in which premarital sexual relationships were common,
single mothers were not stigmatized, there was an implicit understanding that
unmarried fathers must help to provide for their illegitimate children, and
women were moving toward economic independence. As Bloch put it (citing
Alfred Blaschko), “in the proletariat the ideal of free love has long since been
125

Walther Borgius, “Mutterschutz und Neue Ethik,” Flugblätter des Bundes für Mutterschutz,
no. 3.
126 Henriette Fürth, “Ehe und Mutterschaft,” NG 1 (1905): 390.
127 Hedwig Dohm, “Aphorismen,” in Dohm et al., eds., Ehe, p. 15; Helene Stöcker, “Die Kultur
der Liebe,” NG 9 (1913): 516.
128 Max Rosenthal, Was heisst “neue Ethik”? Was will der Bund für Mutterschutz? (Breslau:
Bund für Mutterschutz, 1911), p. 8.
129 Maria Lischnewska, “Die geschlechtliche Belehrung der Kinder,” NG 1 (1905): 140.
130 “Hilligenlei,” NG 1 (1905): 341.
131 Bloch, Die Perversen, pp. 9, 10.

214

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

realized,” particularly among people aged eighteen to twenty-five.132 Grete
Meisel-Hess, too, believed that the working class “has long since accepted
concubinage (which in nine out of ten cases leads to marriage) as a fully
adequate substitute for marriage, and makes use of prostitution in far lesser
degree.” This pattern was, she held, a “transitional arrangement” on the way
to a “new sexual order.”133
And yet, class was obviously not the central term in the sex-reform discourse;
and the optimism at the heart of sex-reform thought was not optimism about
the evolution of the mode of production. Instead, at the heart of the sex-reform
program there was a celebration and veneration of biology that verged on
the religious – and that in fact was conceived of by many sex reformers, with
increasing frequency after about 1908, literally as a new religion. And although
they were convinced that time was on their side, they were also becoming less
willing simply to wait for evolution to take its course; it was time, they argued,
for humanity to take its own biological development into its own hands. As
Max Rosenthal put it in 1911, “humanity wants to be not only an object, but
also a subject of natural evolution.”134 In the last years before World War I,
in short, sex reform was increasingly understood to be a eugenic program, and
indeed a eugenic religion.
Chapter 10 turns to this development.

132

Bloch, Das Sexualleben unserer Zeit, p. 265.
Meisel-Hess, Die sexuelle Krise, p. 65.
134 Max Rosenthal, “Der Entwicklungsgedanke und das menschliche Geschlechtsleben,” BfM, in
BfM, Mutterschutz und Sexualreform: Referate und Leisätze des I. Internationalen Kongresses
für Muttershutz und Sexualreform in Dresden 28./30. Setptember 1911 (Breslau: Preuss &
Jünger, 1912), p. 18.
133

10
Religion of Love

I. Prophet: Ellen Key
The single most influential intellectual figure in German sex reform was Ellen
Key, a Swedish philosopher and feminist who, in a series of major publications
after 1900, elaborated a quasi-religious sexual-ethical creed, which she variously called “evolutionism,” the “religion of life,” or the “happiness-teaching”
(Glückslehre). Key had close intellectual ties to Germany; she appeared there
often in her capacity as a public speaker (for example, at the first public meeting
of the BfM); her works were translated almost immediately into German; and
they were of fundamental importance in shaping the basic terms and assumptions of the German sex reformers’ view of the world.
All life, Key held, was subject to a ceaseless process of change and upward
development, driven by the will to live, by Nietzsche’s “will to power.”1 This
evolutionary process was in fact the aim of life, the deeper purpose of life:
“Life itself,” as she put it, was “the meaning of life.”2 Key meant this in literal,
biological terms: the purpose of life was the evolution of life. This should
therefore be the aim of human society as well – “to improve and ennoble the
material of humanity.”3 What made people thrive, what made them vital and
strong, was morally good. And because happiness was simply the experience of
optimal conditions for life, it was both the measure and the product of morality;
in Spinoza’s formulation, “joy is perfection.”4 The individual’s desire to thrive
and be happy in this sense, which conservative Christians condemned as animal
egotism and as the sign and substance of man’s sinful will, was for Key the
1

Ellen Key, Der Lebensglaube: Betrachtungen über Gott, Welt, und Seele (Berlin: Fischer, 1906),
pp. 98, 26.
2 Ellen Key, Über Liebe und Ehe (Berlin: S. Fischer, 1911), p. 181.
3 Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, pp. 54, 55.
4 Spinoza, quoted in ibid., p. 59.

215

216

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

primary source of the increasing perfection of the species, hence the essence
of mankind’s capacity for goodness, as she defined it. “Self-preservation,” she
held, was “an expression of the divine power at work in everything,” which
was driving all life toward greater perfection, toward divinity. “Growth” was
“only another word for self-preservation, which is itself only a deeper word
for freedom.” Thus, there was in truth “no other freedom than the necessity of
following our own nature.”5
What the body desired, then, was morally right, because it was biologically
beneficial. Obviously, this new creed “sees in the sensual and the spiritual the
two forms of the Divine,” and in it body and spirit would be reconciled.6
So too would the individual and society; for the “conditions for our own
self-preservation” included the well-being of others and the preservation of
harmonious relations with them. As she put it, “nothing is more useful to
man than man”; those ideas and actions that fostered the health, freedom, and
vitality of all people were also most in the self-interest of the individual.7
Thus, for Key, “morality arises . . . from the conditions of life imposed by
our nature.”8 The marvelous logic of humanity’s situation was that morally
good intentions are effortlessly achieved. In fact, Key explicitly argued that
happiness – achieved through “intensification of life” – is “the only duty for
those who see life as the purpose of life.”9 In Key’s eyes, Christianity was a
source of suffering and immorality precisely because it regarded the achievement of moral goodness as the product of a bitter struggle to control one’s egotistical urges – a struggle of duty against desire. This was, of course, hopelessly
unrealistic: human beings, as living things, would naturally seek the pleasure
that derives from the enhancement of life. As Key put it, “only when moral law
has become natural is its dominion ensured.”10 Only then would people truly
be forced – through “congruity [Übereinstimmung] with themselves” – to be
free, to be moral.11
For Key, sexuality, as the origin of life, was therefore also the source of the
sacred. It was the motor of evolution; its purpose was the purpose of life itself –
to create more life; it was the fundamental life force, the generative, creative
force, “the nourishing and fruitful soil” from which everything else grew. Every
form of “endeavor for the common good” and creativity “draws upon and uses
the erotic energies in transposed form”; and therefore “everything is connected
to sexual love, the deepest foundation of life. . . . It stands in deep reciprocal
relationship with art . . . , with literature, with the law, work, religion” and
was “the instinct by which humanity is ever increasingly bound together and
5

Key, Lebensglaube, pp. 290–291, 302, 299.
Ellen Key, Liebe und Ethik (Berlin: Pan, 1905), p. 41.
7 Key, Lebensglaube p. 295.
8 Ibid., pp. 292, 296.
9 Ibid., pp. 304, 306; Key, Liebe und Ethik, p. 34.
10 Key, Lebensglaube, pp. 310, 298.
11 Ibid., pp. 302, 319.
6

Religion of Love

217

ennobled.”12 Key’s goal, therefore, was to make love “what it once was, when
the peoples still stood reverently before life: a religion.”13 “Fertility, the power
of conception in all its forms,” she remarked, was “the divine in man. . . . The
altars that were erected in the past to the gods of fertility must be built up
again.”14
Concretely, Key argued that the emotion of love served a direct biological
purpose, because love between parents was the best guarantee of adequate care
for children.15 But the emotion of authentic love was also an expression of the
will of nature for the reproductive pairing of two people, for the purpose of
breeding better humans – it was a product of that same “mysterious longing for
perfection itself, which in the course of evolution has raised instinct to passion,
and passion to love.”16 It was for this reason, for example, that opposites
attract – to create more balanced, more harmonious, more highly evolved
offspring. Love was “that form of selection that most improves the species.”17
Hence, “the more perfect humanity will be, in the fullest sense of the word,
loved forth.”18
The crucial moral imperative with respect to sexuality, therefore, was that
marriage and reproduction be made contingent on love, on mutual desire. The
“unity of love” must be the “guiding moral principle” in sexual matters – the
principle that all, and only, “those who love each other are man and wife.”19
The central practical task of the hour, then, was clear: “Society must make
it possible for the erotic happiness of the individual to serve the improvement
of the species.”20 But there was really no difficulty here at all, because love –
“the erotic happiness of the individual” – was a tool of evolution.21 Society
merely had to step out of the way of the achievement of happiness through
love. The problem of sexual morality was essentially a nonproblem.22 And this
nonproblem, in Key’s view, was the key to human existence – it was “the vital
question, the question of the happiness of society, in comparison with which
all others appear insignificant,” because it was the key to the “elevation of the
human species.”23
Before this simple, transcendental calculus of happiness could operate unimpeded, humanity had to be liberated from the bonds of the “old morality,”
12

Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, pp. 4, 31, 33; Liebe und Ethik, pp. 18, 19.
Key, Liebe und Ethik, p. 18.
14 Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, pp. 199, 162, 455.
15 Key, Liebe und Ethik, p. 33.
16 Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, p. 48.
17 Key, Liebe und Ethik, p. 12.
18 Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, p. 59.
19 Ibid., pp. 459, 24, 25; Key, Liebe und Ethik, p. 21.
20 Key, Liebe und Ethik, p. 7.
21 Ibid., p. 33.
22 Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, pp. 58–59.
23 Key, Liebe und Ethik, p. 12.
13

218

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

of Christianity and the institutional forms it had created. In locating the
“foundation of sexual morality in a transcendent reality,” Christianity denied
the true purpose of sexuality – life, here on earth. As a consequence, as a
purely practical matter it was a failure from day one; it had merely created the
hypocrisy, misery, and illness that characterized sexual life.24
The task of the moment, therefore, was to invent, in concrete institutional
and social terms, a practical “erotic monism” – a morality that coupled desire
with love. This would be achieved not by establishing a new set of moral or
legal rules and commandments but by creating greater freedom and flexibility.
Freedom would allow experimentation, so that new standards could grow
out of real needs – as Key put it, “evolutionism can regard only continual
experience as revelation.”25 But more fundamentally, no single moral standard
could ever be appropriate for all people, because part of the richness, vitality,
and creative potential of life was precisely that people were so very different
in their needs. Those who understood this knew “that humanity cannot be
homogenized by a single faith, a single morality, a single ideal, because they see
in the variety of life a great part of its value.”26 Because people were different,
“the concepts of good and evil must also be different for each individual.”27
Laws and norms appropriate for those who were naturally monogamous, for
example, must not be imposed on those who were by nature “many-loving.”28
The new morality demanded “the individual right to serve the commonweal
with his love according to his own choice, and to exercise the freedom of his
love under his own responsibility.”29
And yet, for Key, freedom was not an end in itself but merely a means to
the end of the improvement of the species. There was therefore an odd tension
running through her works between boundlessly optimistic erotic anarchism
on the one hand and a stern code of eugenic responsibility and discipline on
the other. Mankind had a moral duty to enter into a conscious “struggle to
consolidate its position as humanity and its elevation to super-humanity.”30
Where freedom served this purpose, it should be secured; but where it did
not, it must be constrained. The new religion of life must invent “forms that,
whether they increase or decrease freedom of action, encourage a use of erotic
energies that intensify life for the individual and for humanity.”31 Science
would discover natural “laws regarding the conditions for the improvement of
the race”; and those discoveries would yield both new moral imperatives and
“new legal norms.”32
24

Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, pp. 20–21, 28, 10, 7, 82.
Ibid., p. 55.
26 Ibid., pp. 6–7.
27 Key, Lebensglaube, p. 299.
28 Key, Liebe und Ethik, p. 9.
29 Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, p. 53.
30 Key, Liebe und Ethik, pp. 13–14; Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, p. 56.
31 Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, p. 4.
32 Key, Liebe und Ethik, pp. 13, 8.
25

Religion of Love

219

What precisely these new norms might be was unclear; but hints were scattered throughout Key’s writings. In a collection of essays titled Über Liebe und
Ehe (On Love and Marriage, 1905), for example, she suggested on the one
hand a whole range of social reforms – public housing, equal property rights
for wives, liberalized divorce law, remuneration for women’s domestic work,
an eight-hour day and minimum wage laws, equal pay, and so on.33 On the
other hand, she also proposed a prohibition on marriage before the age of
twenty-one; mandatory classes for girls in hygiene, care for the ill, and child
development; and legal “limitation, not of the freedom to love, but certainly of
the freedom to beget children.” Key even suggested that parents had a moral
duty not only to have no more children than they could provide for and raise
well but also to have no fewer children than they could provide for, because
that would be “anti-social.”34 Similarly, in Der Lebensglaube (The Religion
of Life), published in German in 1906, she observed that vast sums of money,
immense productive energies, and even the “highest ideals of the nation” were
routinely sacrificed for the maintenance of great-power status and “economicterritorial expansion in the interest of a group of power-holders” and suggested
that “the state . . . itself could live with doubled intensity” if “the intensification
of the lives of its own society’s members were the aim of the reason of state.”
But she also remarked that it was probable that in the future “parenthood
will be legally forbidden to the degenerate,” and even that “it is possible that
in future society will in greater degree than at present extinguish lives that
can never be intensified – the lives of moral, intellectual and physical freaks
[Missgeburten].” Christianity, she admitted, had achieved something fine and
useful by expanding humanity’s capacity for empathy; but “not every life is
sacred. What is sacred is the upward evolution of life.”35 Even the religion of
life, it seems, might require human sacrifice.
Fundamentally, then, Key’s religion of love and life was a religion of reproduction and eugenic health. She stated the overall goal of this program in
astonishingly crass terms: “Ever more valuable human material, capable of
evolution – that’s what we must create above all.”36
In this religion, women had a special place, because they were – Key
thought – more important in and more concerned with the reproductive process than men. Because woman’s “whole being is eroticism,” women were by
nature closer to the God of Key’s religion. Their love was “purer,” “higher,”
“deeper,” and more “unshakeable” than that of men. In women, she felt,
“‘the milk of human kindness’ flows more richly than in most men.” They
were “less hindered by religious and social dogmas, but filled with greater
piety and deeper public spirit than are men.”37 In particular, “in motherhood,
33

Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, pp. 149, 302–303, 406–407, 41, 416, 420, 422, 425, 436–450.
Ibid., pp. 152, 162, 168–169, 407, 451, 219–220, 246–247.
35 Key, Lebensglaube, pp. 329, 340, 341.
36 Ibid., p. 458.
37 Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, pp. 138, 198, 283, 288–289.
34

220

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

humanity has attained its most perfect form of life.”38 Motherhood was that
transcendental value that would replace, in the new age, the Christian concept
of salvation as the center of Western religious life. As she argued already in
Misused Woman-Power (Missbrauchte Frauenkraft), published in German in
1898, “when the power of motherhood appears on earth in its full glory, then
it . . . will give birth to the salvation of the world.”39
Key adopted a very ambivalent position with respect to the feminist movement of her own time, however. She supported virtually the entire range of
feminist demands for equal rights for women, because she believed that full
equality would better enable them to perform their essential function of motherhood, and because she believed that women’s motherliness was a necessary
corrective to the dominance of male values and characteristics in social and
political life.40 And yet fundamentally Key believed that woman’s proper function was to be an object of sexual desire for men, a bearer and educator of
children, the cultivator of feeling rather than reason, and a homemaker. She
stated this position vehemently in Misused Woman-Power, arguing that the
women’s movements’ focus (as she saw it) on developing masculine virtues in
women was a great mistake. It was silly for women to try to excel in “masculine fields of work” like science, industry, or politics, because the “true,
inmost nature of woman” made it impossible for her to match men in those
spheres. For the “true woman,” the “highest goal in life” was “motherhood
though love” and all the essentially emotional tasks she thought it entailed –
making a comfortable home, attention to domestic detail, and raising children to be decent, happy people and good, peace-loving patriots.41 Radical
feminism, then, was “hubris”; in it “the female sex sins against humanity.”42
Against this “old” feminism the champions of the religion of life now had to
struggle. Women must abandon the “man-hating” of early feminism and contribute to building “a society in which the well-being of the next generation is
the focal point”– and in which the members of each sex made that particular
contribution to it to which their nature suited them.43
II. Eugenics, Race, and Power
Few German sex reformers shared this contempt for the “old” feminism. In
some cases, in fact, they echoed rather precisely the views of moderates in
the women’s movement, even regarding sexuality, suggesting that the more
38

Ibid., p. 222, and Ellen Key, The Renaissance of Motherhood, trans. Anna E. B. Fried (New
York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1914), p. 105.
39 Ellen Key, Missbrauchte Frauenkraft (Leipzig: Langen, 1898), p. 42.
40 Key, Die Frauenbewegung (Frankfurt: Rütten & Loening, 1909), pp. 31, 32, 43, 44–45, 139,
167, 140, 61, 65, 118.
41 Key, Missbrauchte Frauenkraft, pp. 2–3, 6, 10, 46.
42 Key, Die Frauenbewegung, pp. 189–190, 179–180, 175, 177, 172.
43 Key, Die Frauenbewegung, pp. 67, 68, 47; Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, p. 267.

Religion of Love

221

important priority was not sexual liberation but the sexual civilization specifically of men. Thus Grete Meisel-Hess wrote in 1909 that “the unwillingness
and incapacity for love of today’s men is the tragedy of today’s women.”44
Gabriele Reuter summed up the same position in the title of an article in the
BfM’s journal in 1910: “The Education of Man by Woman.”45 Others clearly
implied – as did the moderates – that men were not quite as sacred as women,
because their desires were by nature animalistic and brutal. A quite striking case
is that of Johanna Loewenherz, who in 1895 had asserted that the “principle of
preservation” was “embodied by woman,” whereas the “principle of destruction” was “embodied by man. Woman is affirmation, man denial of life.”46
Even Helene Stöcker, who believed that “the problem of love, of marriage, of
parenthood can only be solved by both sexes together,” sometimes fell into
these cadences. “The future must come from woman,” she wrote in 1897, a
future characterized by “harmony between the spiritual and the sensual nature
of mankind.”47 And in 1903 she even asked whether “that which constitutes
the inmost essence of woman – love, goodness, culture – will triumph, or at
least hold its own alongside that which characterizes man: violence.”48 These
women clearly agreed that motherhood was sacred – that, as Henriette Fürth
put it, motherhood was “the principle of eternity underlying all that is,” and
that “women have always been not only the element that preserves the species
but also the element that drives its development forward.”49 But the struggle for
gender equality was for them necessary to achieve that forward development,
to achieve the victory of love over violence. Stöcker, for example, explicitly
regarded Key’s “hatred” for women’s rights advocates as an “error.”50
And yet, most of the sex reformers were clearly adherents of something
very much like Key’s religion of love; and in consequence they also sometimes
distanced themselves from the “old” feminism. Stöcker is a striking case. She
too had written in the late 1890s of the “oddly one-sided . . . views” of feminists,
of their lack of “warm pulsing youthful blood,” and of their rush to embrace
“only that which has been denied them up to now: reason, knowledge” and to
abandon “communion with a man.”51 She consistently stressed that her goal
44

Grete Meisel-Hess, “Die Umgehung der Ehe,” NG 5 (1909): 97.
Gabriele Reuter, “Die Erziehung des Mannes durch die Frau,” NG 6 (1910): 19.
46 Johanna Loewenherz, Prostitution oder Production: Eigentum oder Ehe (Neuwied: Vanity,
1895), p. 95.
47 Helene Stöcker, “Unsere Umwertung der Werte” (1897), in Helene Stöcker, Die Liebe und die
Frauen (Minden: J. C. C. Bruns, 1906), p. 27.
48 Helene Stöcker, “Von Mann und Weib” (1903), in Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (1906),
p. 111; “Lebensabriss,” Feministische Studien 3 (1984): 153.
49 Henriette Fürth, “Ehe und Mutterschaft,” NG 1 (1905): 269; Henriette Fürth, Das Geschlechtsproblem und die moderne Moral (Leipzig: Dietrich, 1908), p. 12.
50 Helene Stöcker, “Die Liebe der Zukunft” (1904), in Helene Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen,
second edition (Minden: J. C. C. Bruns, 1908), pp. 153, 155.
51 Helene Stöcker, “Unsere Umwertung der Werte” (1897) and “Die Männer-Bewegung” (1897),
in Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (1906), pp. 26–27, 78, 83.
45

222

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

was to end the “separation and alienation between the sexes,” to “liberate
woman from her bitterness toward man, man from his disdain for woman,”
because “only man and woman together can make real the higher love of the
future that we long for.”52 Stöcker did warn that “we must not make a dogma
of the ‘profession of motherhood’ that would hinder the free development
of the personality of the individual woman”; but she also argued that the
emancipation of women was desirable in large part precisely because it would
allow her to “become a mother in an ever higher, ever more comprehensive
sense.”53 A “richer development of female individuality,” she believed, would
create a “deeper motherliness.”54 Women’s emancipation, in other words, was
for her primarily a means to the end of making women better at what they had
always done: motherhood.
Although Stöcker was primarily an activist rather than a philosopher, in
fact, in her numerous speeches and essays she did clearly advocate a coherent
creed that, while more heavily inflected by Nietzschean and Romantic vocabularies, was strikingly similar to Key’s – one she too explicitly referred to as the
“religion of life” and of joy. Sexual love, as “logically the highest expression
of the love of life,” was the central symbol and sacrament of this faith. The
notion of original sin was “a crime against life, the real sin against the Holy
Spirit of life.”55 Christianity, she conceded, “had its good side,” because it
had led to a necessary “spiritualization” of man; but in stigmatizing and denigrating corporeality and sexuality, it had sabotaged people’s capacity to be
“good,” or more precisely full of life – to be joyful and creative.56 This mistake
she proposed to correct. Stöcker explicitly rejected “commonplace materialist
eudaimonism . . . , primitive pleasure, mere joy in the senses.”57 Instead, love
for Stöcker meant not only sexual union but also spiritual and emotional communion – “Eros,” not “Sexus.” For this reason, Stöcker argued “that in our
view there is no such thing as ‘free love,’” because “love is an inner bond
with other people, it means feeling responsible for their happiness.” The first
commandment of her new religion, she held in 1911, was precisely “individual responsibility.”58 But by this she meant above all responsibility to children, to the products of sexual union – and through them to the “race,” to
humanity in general. For her as for Key, the religion of joy, love, and life was
52

Helene Stöcker, “Vorwort” (1905), “Die Liebe der Zukunft” (1904), and “Die neue Mutter”
(1902), in Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (1908), pp. X, 154, 84.
53 Helene Stöcker, “Die neue Mutter” (1902) and “Frauenbewegung und Mütterlichkeit” (1903),
in Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen (1908), pp. 87–88, 104, 102.
54 Stöcker, “Die neue Mutter,” pp. 84–85, 88.
55 Stöcker, “Von neuer Ethik,” p. 6.
56 Helene Stöcker, “Reform der sexuellen Ethik,” NG 1 (1905): 4, 3.
57 Helene Stöcker, “Die Kultur der Liebe,” NG 9 (1913): 532.
58 Helene Stöcker, “Das Werden der sexuellen Reform seit hundert Jahren,” in Ehe? Zur Reform
der sexuellen Moral, ed. Hedwig Dohm et al. (Berlin: Internationale Verlagsanstalt, 1911),
pp. 56, 55.

Religion of Love

223

therefore necessarily a eugenic religion, a religion of human physical improvement. The worship of “eternal life, the eternal return of life . . . the triumphant
‘Yes’ to life . . . true life as the collective continuation of life through conception, through the mysteries of sexuality,” was for her the “best foundation
for religion and ethics.”59 And her new religion was therefore in some senses
“stricter and more exclusive” than Christianity, because it demanded “renunciation of parenthood” for persons who could not contribute to the creation of
a better generation of children.60 Already at the public meeting announcing the
formation of the BfM in 1905, she held that “we will have to find a means of
preventing the hopelessly ill or degenerate from reproducing.”61 She continued
to advocate this position for the next decade – remarking in 1914, for example,
that “inferior people” were “a threat and a hindrance for the state,” and that
preventing their birth, “by all means known to science, is not only our right
but our duty.”62
The great majority of the sex reformers clearly shared this commitment to
the transcendent value of life, sex, evolution, and eugenic health. Thus Ruth
Bré held that reproduction was “holy.”63 Gabriele Reuter imagined a society
of the future “in which reverence prevails not for the laws that human beings
made and human beings can change and destroy, but more, much more for
the eternal powers of divine Mother Nature.”64 Ernst Baars held in 1908 that
“our responsibility to the commonweal and to the next generation” was a
“more valuable substitute” for “heaven and hell”; the “desire for salvation
finds gratification in the doctrine of evolution,” and the “belief in the capacity
for evolution in all life” was “our religion.”65 And Adele Schreiber called
parenthood “the one form of immortality that an age of scientific knowledge
makes the focus of new religious feelings.”66
Even short of such explicitly religious conceptions of sexuality and evolution, however, a large number of the sex reformers clearly identified sex as
fundamental to the very meaning of life. Ernst Kromayer stated with striking
nonchalance that “sexual matters are the most important in life”; Walther
Borgius wrote of the “sanctity and beauty of sexual life”; Leopold von Wiese
remarked in Die Neue Generation in early 1914 that it was obvious that
59

Helene Stöcker, “Von neuer Ethik,” NG 2 (1907): 5.
Ibid., p. 57; Helene Stöcker, “Vom IV. Neumalthusianerkongress in Dresden,” NG 7 (1911):
470.
61 Helene Stöcker, Bund für Mutterschutz (Berlin: Pan, 1905), p. 18.
62 Helene Stöcker, “Kongresse,” NG 9 (1913): 597; Helene Stöcker, “Staatlicher Gebärzwang
oder Rassenhygiene?” NG 10 (1914): 144.
63 Ruth Bré, Das Recht auf Mutterschaft (Frazig: Frauen-Rundschau, 1903), p. 68.
64 Gabriele Reuter, “Rükblicke und Ausblicke,” NG 1 (1905): 57.
65 Ernst Baars, Sexuelle Ethik (Berlin: Akademischer Bund Ethos, 1908), p. 7.
66 Adele Schreiber, “Missbrauchte und unvollkommene Mutterschaft,” in Mutterschaft: Ein Sammelwerk für die Probleme des Weibes als Mutter, ed. Adele Schrieber (Munich: Albert Langen,
1912), p. 215.
60

224

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

“the existence of the individual and of us all stands under the dominion of
the sex drive.” Stöcker spoke for most of the sex-reform community when she
pronounced love to be “the core of our personal life as well as of the life of our
species.” So did Grete Meisel-Hess, in remarking that sex and sexual love was
the “most central zone” of life, “happiness pure and simple,” and the “focal
point of existence . . . the heart of any human life.” Henriette Fürth spoke in
1903 of sexuality as “the central power of life” and of sexuality as “the best
and highest in man.”67
There was consensus, too, on the sanctity specifically of the evolution of the
human species. Thus Max Rosenthal argued in 1903 that “the upward evolution of humanity” must be recognized “as a higher standard for our moral
action.”68 At the VFF conference of that year, Anita Augspurg characterized
women’s “innate calling” as “the improvement of the race.”69 In the same year
Ruth Bré also argued that the sexual order must provide not only “opportunities for individual happiness for every person” but also opportunities for the
creation of “higher forms of humanity through selective breeding.”70 Adele
Schreiber, speaking to the meeting at which the formation of the BfM was publicly announced in 1905, complained that too few in the women’s movement
understood “the high meaning of love-life . . . as the foundation of improvement of the race.”71 Similar passages dot the writings of the sex reformers
with increasing frequency in the years following the formation of the BfM. By
1911 the opening lines of the public invitation to the first international conference on sex reform in Dresden summed this credo up neatly: “To live means to
develop,” and “making the sexual life of man serve the well-being of the living
and the ascent of the species is the highest task of advancing civilization.”72
By that year the biological and eugenic obsessions of the sex reformers had
become quite vivid. An essay by Anita Augspurg, published in a collection
of essays by leading sex reformers in 1911, is a striking example. Augspurg
argued that in nature males competed with one another for every female they
67

“Zur Kritik der sexuellen Reformbewegung,” NG 1 (1905): 291; Walther Borgius, “Zur Frage
der strafrechtlichen Behandlung von Sittlichkeitsvergehen an Kindern,” NG 1 (1905): 383;
“Die gesetzliche Stillpflicht der Mutter,” NG 3 (1907): 361; “Zur Kritik der sexuellen Reformbewegung,” NG 3 (1907): 408; L. von Wiese, “Erotik und Kultur,” NG 10 (1914): 8; Helene
Stöcker, “Die sexuelle Abstinenz und die Stützen der Gesellschaft,” NG 5 (1909): 11; Grete
Meisel-Hess, Die sexuelle Krise (Jena: Diederichs, 1909), pp. VIII, 117, 121, 122, 127; Henriette
Fürth, “Freie Liebe und Ehe,” Magazin für Literatur 13 (1903): 248, 249.
68 Max Thal [Rosenthal], Mutterrecht, Frauenfrage und Weltanschauung (Breslau: Schottlaender,
1903), pp. 111, 99, 134.
69 “Die Tagung des Verbandes Fortschrittlicher Frauenvereine vom 27. September bis 1. Oktober
1903 in Hamburg-Altona,” Frauenbewegung 9 (1903): 155.
70 Bré, Das Recht, pp. 51, 52, 81, 82.
71 Cited in Stöcker, Bund für Mutterschutz, p. 26.
72 “Aufruf an Männer und Frauen aller Kulturländer,” in BfM, Mutterschutz und Sexualreform:
Referate und Leisätze des I. Internationalen Kongresses für Muttershutz und Sexualreform in
Dresden 28./30. September 1911 (Breslau: Preuss & Jünger, 1912), p. 134.

Religion of Love

225

encountered, whereas females chose the strongest and most successful competitors as their mates. The existing sexual order stood this natural order on its
head. The “institutions of the masculine state” were virtually all designed, she
believed, “to sabotage . . . precisely this selective instinct of woman.” The result
was the double standard, “massive sexual debauchery,” prostitution, mercenary marriages, and degeneration, a “visible increase in the loathsomeness of
humanity. . . . A stroll through lively streets, a ride on a Sunday afternoon excursion train shows us as a rule dull, ordinary, stupid physiognomies. . . . Ugliness
is the norm, beauty, sympathetic features are the striking exception.” The only
solution was to open up educational and professional opportunities for girls
and to pay mothers to raise their children, so that women did not face the alternative of hunger or marriage – perhaps to an ugly, selfish, greedy, antisocial
but therefore rich man.73
Augspurg may have derived her analysis from that of Grete Meisel-Hess,
whose massive tome, The Sexual Crisis, published in 1909, made a very similar argument at imposing length. Looking around one, Meisel-Hess observed,
one was gripped with “despair at this profusion of ugliness and dullness,”
by “what shines, or rather doesn’t shine,” from the eyes of one’s fellow citizens. The average punter, she believed, barely reached the level of “the normal
human being,” much less the “superman.” The simple reason was that the
existing sexual order was unnatural and ensured a “de-selective breeding” of
humanity, because it sabotaged women’s “freedom of choice” in reproduction.
The biological salvation of humanity depended on the “liberation of the female
womb” from capitalism and patriarchy. And a spiritual revolution was a necessary part of that revolution; for “reverence for procreation is the religion of
the future.”74
Women were not alone in presenting such ideas. The Social Democratic
member of parliament and BfM member Eduard David, for example, offered
a blunt statement of the eugenic vision of sex reform in two essays in the BfM
journal in 1910. Denouncing Christianity for having pursued a “degradation of
the body to a mere transitory vessel of sin,” he championed instead the “ideal of
the organic fitness and higher breeding of the generations.” Arguing that modern welfare programs created the very real danger of “degeneration through
the artificial preservation of organically inferior progeny,” he suggested that
society had “a solemn duty” to make sure that “physically or mentally inferior
human seed” did not “come to life at all.”75 The answer would be provided by
women’s liberation and modern contraception. The “economic independence
of woman” would enable a “more rational selection of spouses” in place of
the current “capitalistically corrupted business of spousal selection,” in which
73

Anita Augspurg, “Reformgedanken zur sexuellen Moral,” in Dohm et al., eds., Ehe? pp. 22,
23, 25, 28, 29, 33, 34.
74 Meisel-Hess, Die sexuelle Krise, pp. 20, 287, 7, 6, 324–325, 290.
75 Eduard David, “Säuglingsfürsorge und Rassenhygiene,” NG 6 (1910): 3, 5, 6, 8.

226

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

marriage was “in 90 out of 100 cases a question of money, of class, of career”
rather than of “organic hereditary qualities of the highest social value, such
as strong altruistic inclination.” Birth control would enable a “more rational
selection of seed” instead of the natural “selection of individuals” in the struggle for the survival of the fittest; it would permit “the exclusion of the bad
seed-corn from the garden of humanity” in humane and rational fashion.76
Particularly after 1910, organizational ties between the BfM and the broader
eugenics movement grew increasingly dense, and the organization’s journal
published extreme eugenic ideas with growing frequency. In 1910, for example, it carried without critical comment the leading eugenic theorist Wilhelm
Schallmeyer’s anxious reflections on the “steady self-extermination of the
gifted” through lower fertility.77 In 1911 it printed the prominent sexologist Hermann Rohleder’s argument that those who received poor-relief
“have . . . forfeited the right to reproduction (nota bene not the right to sexual pleasure).”78 In the same year, it reported, again without critical comment,
on the growing number of eugenic laws passed by various states in the United
States.79 Two years later it reprinted a pamphlet put out by the Berlin chapter
of the DMB that held that “only physically and mentally healthy people have
the right to reproduce.”80
Many sex reformers clearly hoped that genetically “inferior” people could
be persuaded, as Eduard David put it, “voluntarily to forgo having children”;
and the sex reformers were vehement in their advocacy of free access to contraceptives not only as a means to defend women’s economic independence and
the culture of erotic love free of reproductive risk but also for their potential
eugenic benefit. But most also agreed with David that “society must have the
right to exclude individuals burdened with serious heritable illnesses and disabilities, if not from marriage, then at least from reproduction.” Whatever the
implications for individual rights might be, ultimately “everything that serves
the higher evolution of the species is morally good.”81 Again, Helene Stöcker
was particularly insistent on this point. Henriette Fürth, too, advocated not only
“strengthening of the moral sense of responsibility” in eugenic matters but also
“as ultima ratio compulsory castration or sterilization.”82 Adele Schreiber was
more explicit still, suggesting that “reproduction by alcoholics, the mentally
76

Eduard David, “Bessere Sexualauslese,” NG 6 (1910): 303–304, 299.
Wilhelm Schallmeyer, “Über die Grundbedeutung der Ethik und ihr Verhältnis zu den Forderungen des Rassedienstes,” NG 6 (1910): 433–438, 483–496. On Schallmeyer, see Sheila Faith
Weiss, Race Hygiene and National Efficiency (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987).
78 Hermann Rohleder, “Neumalthusianismus (Schwangerschaftsverhütung) und Ärztestand,” NG
7 (1911): 536.
79 “Vererbbare Krankheiten als Heiratshindernis,” “Ehe und Rassenverbesserung,” and “Rassenhygiene,” NG 7 (1911): 498, 248.
80 “Die monistisch-soziale Gruppe Berlin,” NG 9 (1913): 169.
81 David, “Bessere Sexualauslese,” pp. 300, 301, 307.
82 Henriette Fürth, Staat und Sittlichkeit (Leipzig: Wehner, 1912), pp. 45, 50.
77

Religion of Love

227

disabled, and abnormal people, who can never be given the energy of will necessary for contraception, should be prevented by means of legal sterilization,
as it has been implemented in parts of the United States.”83
Almost no one in the sex-reform movement went as far as Ellen Key, who
advocated murdering “inferior” children. But some came close. Schreiber, for
example, advocated eugenic abortion at the discretion of a “panel of race
hygienists” – although she admitted that such “suggestions” at first sounded
“monstrous” or “very off-putting.”84 Grete Meisel-Hess supported the same
idea.85 Others followed the logic of “evolutionism” to less frightening, but still
quite odd conclusions – as when the sociologist Matilda Vaerting argued, in the
BfM journal in 1914, that women should reproduce much later in their life cycle
than men, because experience with house pets showed that this produced better
offspring.86 This, at last, was too much for Bruno Meyer, who denounced the
crude “stud-farm perspective” adopted by some of his colleagues.87 But a high
proportion of the organization’s intellectual leadership clearly agreed with the
Frankfurt doctor who, in an article in Die Neue Generation in 1912, remarked
that “we live in the age of racial hygiene.”88
The BfM as a whole was relatively circumspect. But it did formally adopt
vague resolutions in favor of restrictive eugenic legislation, including “legal
prohibition of marriage for the sick and inferior” at its first conference in
1907 and “race-hygienic measures to limit the procreation of inferior elements”
at its second conference in 1909.89
There was, then, a startling self-contradiction at the heart of sex-reform
thought. It was a prime article of faith among the sex reformers that freedom would generate its own order, and that the state had no business interfering in the sexual lives of its citizens. Most appear to have assumed that
the state could regulate reproduction without regulating sex; as Key put it,
“love will . . . become more and more a private concern,” but “children on the
other hand ever more a vital question for society.”90 Some sex reformers were
troubled by the fact – as Albert Eulenburg pointed out at the BfM’s 1911
conference – that some proposed eugenic measures might “contradict or be

83

Adele Schreiber, “Missbrauchte und unvollkommene Mutterschaft,” in Schreiber, ed., Mutterschaft, p. 215.
84 Adele Schreiber, in “Protokoll der 8. Generalversammlung des BDF,” LAB, B Rep 235-01,
pp. 286, 288.
85 Meisel-Hess, Die sexuelle Krise, p. 292.
86 M. Vaerting, “Das Altersverhältnis der Eheleute,” NG 10 (1914): 499–500, 502.
87 Bruno Meyer, “Das Altersverhältnis der Eheleute,” NG 10 (1914): 555.
88 W. Hanauer, “Die Wertigkeit der Unehelichen,” NG 8 (1912): 535.
89 “Forderungen der ersten Generalversammlung des Bundes 1907” and “Forderungen der zweiten
ordentlichen Generalversammlung in Hamburg vom 13. bis zum 16. April 1909,” in Resolutionen des Deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz, 1905–1916, ed. Helene Stöcker (Berlin: BfM,
n.d.), pp. 5–6, 19.
90 Key, Über Liebe und Ehe, p. 25.

228

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

disquieting to modern individualism.”91 But the terms in which the sex reformers conceived of sexuality and sexual morality simply militated against the
recognition that there could be a conflict between their libertarian sexual
agenda and their calls for restrictive eugenic legislation. A resolution passed by
the Berlin chapter of the BfM in protest against pending legislation restricting
access to contraceptives in 1911 is a telling example. Such a law, the resolution
pronounced, would be
an ineffective and immoral measure that would compromise the free, morally
responsible decision to become a parent and introduce compulsory child-bearing
by means of police power. The consequences of indiscriminate population growth
would be not ascent but decline of the race, an increase in venereal disease and
prostitution – whereas in contrast the sick and mentally, morally and physically
inferior people should be excluded from reproduction in the interests of society!92

The group simply did not see any contradiction between objecting to “compulsory child-bearing” and advocating compulsory sterility.
It is of course precisely the biologistic postulates underlying the sex-reform
program that explain this self-contradiction. The sex reformers demanded freedom of sexual expression because it would serve the upward evolution of
the race. Sexuality was sacred, and individual sexual autonomy inviolable,
for that reason. Where sexuality did not serve evolution, it was not sacred and
inviolable and should not be free. For them, evolution was the sole measure
of moral good; those who did not serve it were morally irrelevant, morally
invisible.93
From this perspective, there was a certain logic to the sex reformers’ position on reproductive freedom – a logic diametrically opposed to that of the
male morality campaigners who were increasingly concerned with the decline
in the birthrate. In some cases, it is true, the sex reformers did not scruple to
play on the appeal of nationalist pronatalism as a means of advocating for
change, particularly with respect to the welfare of single mothers and their
children. The first pamphlet put out by the BfM in 1905, for example, referred
to the high mortality rate among illegitimate infants as a waste of a “powerful source of our national strength” and deplored the fact that many of
those who survived became “criminals, whores, and vagrants,” and few were
91

Albert Eulenburg, “Die sexuelle Abstinenz und die moderne Kultur,” in Stöcker, ed., Resolutionen, pp. 61–62.
92 “Gegen den staatlichen Gebärzwang,” in Stöcker, ed., Resolutionen, p. 82.
93 For discussions, see Brunhilde Sauer-Burghard, “Frauenbefreiung und ‘Rassenveredelung,’”
Beiträge zur feministischen Theorie und Praxis 38 (1994): 131–144; Marielouise JanssenJurreit, “Sexualreform und Geburtenrückgang,” in Frauen in der Geschichte, vol. 1, ed. Annette
Kuhn and Gerhard Schneider (Düsseldorf: Schwann, 1979), pp. 56–82; Ann Taylor Allen,
“German Radical Feminism and Eugenics, 1900–1908,” German Studies Review 11 (1988):
31–55; Heide Schlüpmann, “Radikalisierung der Philosophie,” Feministische Studien 3 (1984):
11–33.

Religion of Love

229

“fit for military duty.”94 Maria Lischnewska suggested that maternity insurance would “secure healthy and strong recruits” to maintain “Germany’s world
power.”95 In 1906 the BfM’s journal reprinted, without critical comment, an
excerpt from the work of Friedrich Naumann in which he argued that “men
forge weapons, but soldiers rest in the arms of mothers. . . . Only nations with
capable mothers impose their will. Mothers are the conquering element.”96
And yet, in fact it was much more common for the sex reformers to reject
the pronatalist position; and as conservative concern about the issue grew more
vocal, they became ever more insistent on the right of women to control their
own reproductivity, and this issue became more and more central to their conception of the necessary connection between sexual and political liberty. Most
probably agreed fundamentally with the political perspective of the socialist
philosopher and political commentator Theodor Lessing, who asked in Die
Neue Generation in 1909 whether “anyone still really believes that the people
of a particular territory are the property of the state or even of their ruler,
pecus inane, cannon fodder, which must be ‘delivered’ in the greatest possible
quantities for the good of the political map?”97 Women, the sex reformers
insisted, could not be reduced (as Stöcker put it in 1911) to mere “things, to
baby-factories” for the militarist and authoritarian state.98 Stöcker reacted with
horrified disdain to Bornträger’s yearning for a leader with “sufficient conviction and force” to impose the kinds of intervention he considered necessary to
halt the fall in the birthrate; she regarded him as a “high-priest of ignorance and
darkness.” Such “police-clerical chicanery, denunciation, spying, prohibitions
of intellectual freedom” as he proposed, she believed, could never be effective
as long as people like him “cannot construct a national community in which
every man and every woman is, every minute of every day and night, under a
police supervision which watches over every impulse, every movement in his
life and love” – a notion she clearly found abhorrent.99
Even when they admitted to concern about the birthrate, moreover, the
sex reformers often insisted that conservatives were going about addressing
it from the wrong direction. The BfM proposed instead of police measures
a palette of positive measures to encourage fertility – motherhood insurance
or payment of a child allowance, welfare measures for illegitimate children,
94

“Was will der deutsche Bund für Mutterschutz?” Flugblätter des Bundes für Mutterschutz,
no. 1, BAK, NL 173 (Adele Schreiber), no. 29, fol. 129–130; also in NG 1 (1905): 254, 255.
95 Helene Stöcker, “Unser erster internationaler Kongress,” NG 7 (1911): 424.
96 Friedrich Naumann, “Die Frauen im neuen Wirtschaftsvolk,” NG 2 (1906): 133–134.
97 Theodor Lessing, “Kulturfortschritt und Bevölkerungszahl,” NG 5 (1909): 477, 479–480. On
Lessing, see Lawrence Baron, “Theodor Lessing: Between Jewish Self-Hatred and Zionism,”
Leo Baeck Institute Yearbook 26 (1981): 323–340.
98 Margarete Lissauer, “Untreue bei Mann und Frau,” NG 5 (1909): 483; Helene Stöcker, “Der
Internationale Neumalthusianer-Kongress im Haag,” NG 6 (1910): 416; “Politische Reaktion
und Geschlechtsleben,” NG 7 (1911): 95.
99 Helene Stöcker, “Der Kampf gegen den Geburtenrückgang,” NG 8 (1912): 595, 598, 600, 601.

230

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

better training for midwives, free obstetric care, public housing programs,
lower taxes on consumption, and an end to the requirement that female civil
servants give up their jobs on marriage.100 Pointing to the causal connection
between high fertility on the one hand and impoverishment, exhaustion, and
high infant mortality on the other, they suggested that a lower fertility rate,
combined with a lower mortality rate, made both human and economic sense.
Stöcker, for example, welcomed the falling birthrate as evidence of an ongoing
“rationalization of the process of reproduction,” such that fewer children were
born, but more of them grew to healthy adulthood (a position common, as we
have seen, also among the abolitionists).101 And the guidelines adopted by the
BfM’s steering committee in 1910 argued for rational population management
“in the race-hygienic and economic interests of the nation.”102
Interestingly, however, this prioritization of biological quality over quantity
did not translate into an affinity for ethnic racism. Again, in some instances a
strikingly racist note did creep into sex-reform discussions. Ellen Key warned,
for example, that “a race cannot sustain itself without healthy and moral
mothers” and that continued low fertility among Europeans would “in the end
amount to the problem of the future of the Euro-American peoples.”103 Ruth
Bré was concerned that the Germans might be overrun by the fast-breeding
Slavs, and then by the Chinese, in a century or two.104 Grete Meisel-Hess
suggested in 1911 that “it is unquestionably important that the biological race
that is the bearer of the highest civilization, that is the white race, spread
over the earth as far as possible and not let itself be displaced by the colored
races.”105 Maria Lischnewska in particular was a rabid ethnic and cultural
chauvinist.106
And yet in most of those scattered instances in which ethnic racism was
mentioned at all in sex-reform writings, it was actually explicitly rejected –
and in fact this was increasingly common in the years just before World War I,
even as the sex reformers turned more decidedly toward eugenics. Thus in 1912
Die Neue Generation reported with approval Eduard David’s suggestion, in
parliamentary debate, that some whites “could perhaps not degrade but rather
improve their progeny” through intermarriage with the indigenous Samoan
100

See, e.g., “Petition um Erweiterung der Mutterschaftsversicherung,” NG 9 (1913): 166.
Helene Stöcker, “Der Kampf gegen den Geburtenrückgang,” NG 8 (1912): 594; “Ortsgruppe
Berlin,” NG 9 (1913): 111; and “Staatlicher Gebärzwang oder Rassenhygiene?” NG 10
(1914): 139, 143, 137.
102 Max Rosenthal, “Was heisst ‘Neue Ethik’? Was will der Bund für Mutterschutz?” NG 6
(1910): 225.
103 Key, Die Frauenbewegung, p. 176.
104 Cited in Bernd Nowacki, Der Bund für Mutterschutz (1905–1933) (Husum: Matthiesen,
1983), p. 22.
105 Grete Meisel-Hess, “Mutterschutz als soziale Weltanschauung,” NG 7 (1911): 157.
106 Maria Lischnewska, “Weitere Ausgestaltung des praktischen Mutterschutzes,” NG 4 (1908):
178.
101

Religion of Love

231

population. In 1914 it carried an article arguing that, given the historical mixing
of populations, the idea of a “pure” race was a fantasy, and that “there are no
races that are . . . more primitive or more advanced than others. Every race is in
certain characteristics superior to others, in other characteristics inferior.”107
And in the same year, before the DMB’s annual conference, Stöcker observed
that “the ‘Yellow Peril’ belongs in the realm of fable,” derided the “fanaticism
for large birth numbers,” and insisted that what was important was that people
have “children who raise the level of the species.”108
It is worth noting, furthermore, that a relatively high proportion of participants in the sex-reform movement were secular Jews or the children of Jewish
converts to Christianity – including, for example, Schreiber, Bloch, Fürth,
Meisel-Hess, Rosenthal, Dohm, Kurt Hiller, Benedict Friedländer, Magnus
Hirschfeld, and the DGBG’s Albert Neisser, who was also a longtime member of the BfM.109 The phenomenon of the self-hating Jew was of course well
known at the time; but with very few exceptions anti-Semitism played no role at
all in the collective thinking of the sex-reform movement. This was arguably a
more important test issue than the so-called yellow peril or anti-African racism,
both of which were almost entirely abstract for most Germans.
This is an odd combination of convictions – enthusiasm for eugenic categories of human “quality,” but rejection of ethnic-racial ones, and enthusiasm for coercive measures aimed at securing high-quality people, but rejection
of coercive measures aimed at securing quantities of people. One explanation for it is that sex reform was quite close to Social Democracy, which
was at once the most powerful prodemocratic and antiracist political force
in Germany at the time and highly attracted both to economistic reasoning (such as Ellen Key’s question, “What could be more immoral than to
ask the strong and healthy members of society to burden themselves with
increasingly heavy taxes in order to support the vicious human offscum?”) and
to natural scientific perspectives.110 Again, eugenic thinking was particularly
attractive to revisionist Social Democrats, some of whom played important
roles in sex reform. But the deeper point here is that the sex reformers were
democrats not in spite of their biological obsessions but because of them –
because they believed that democracy and individualism were biologically beneficial. The same is true of their commitment specifically to feminism. Women’s
107

Iros, “Koloniale Sexualpolitik,” Neue Generation 8 (1912): 318; Ferdinand Freiherr von
Rietzenstein, “Rassenmischung und Mischehenfrage,” NG 10 (1914): 322, 241.
108 Helene Stöcker, “Geburtenrückgang und Monismus,” in Der Düsseldorfer Monistentag,
ed. Willy Blossfeldt (Leipzig: Unesma, 1914), pp. 46, 47.
109 See Christina von Braun, “Ist die Sexualwissenschaft eine ‘jüdische Wissenschaft?’” Zeitschrift
für Sexualforschung 14 (2001): 1–17; David Biale, “1906: The Discipline of Sexualwissenschaft emerges in Germany,” in Yale Companion to Jewish Writing and Thought in German Culture, 1096–1996, ed. Sander Gilman and Jack Zipes (New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 1996), pp. 273–279.
110 Key, The Renaissance of Motherhood, pp. 73–74, 77–78.

232

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

liberation did not actually come first for them; as Grete Meisel-Hess put it in
the BfM journal in 1911, the women’s movement was “only a means to an
end,” the improvement of the race.111 This should not call their sincerity into
question – the sex reformers were, in their great majority, vehement champions both of democratic political rights and of complete political, legal, social,
and sexual equality for women. But in most cases, biology was central to their
conception of democracy; indeed, for many it seems democracy and evolution
were one thing, that they were not complementary but identical. This connection implied rather frightening limitations on their commitment to individual
rights; but it also made their commitment to democracy literally, as they put it,
religious.
In this sense, too, their ideas were the mirror opposite of those of their
opponents. Most conservative Christians regarded contraception as immoral
and eugenics as at best a merely material concern; and most had a literally
religious commitment to the authoritarian state.
III. Fission: Gender, Politics, and Personality in Sex Reform
On these central elements of the sex-reform program, virtually all sex reformers were in agreement. Nevertheless, the sex-reform movement, and the BfM
in particular, erupted in 1908–1909 in an internal battle even more dramatic
and damaging than that suffered by the WHK in 1906–1907. This was a
complex split along multiple fault lines within the movement. One central
problem for the organization was that Stöcker had a tendency to regard
the BfM as her personal project and property. The organization’s journal,
Die Neue Generation, had actually been her initiative. It was formally adopted
as the BfM’s organ when the organization was created; but Stöcker continued to
edit it, and it was fundamentally her journal. A number of early conflicts within
the organization appear to have been generated by Stöcker’s high-handed (as
at least some seem to have felt) editorial practices.112 She was also apparently a
rather poor administrator – possibly precisely because she did regard the BfM
as in some sense her personal affair. Separate accounts were apparently not
kept for the BfM’s Berlin chapter and for the national organization, for example, and a new administrator brought in to help sort out the mess described the
organization’s office in December 1909 as being in chaos.113
111

Meisel-Hess, “Mutterschutz,” p. 154.
See “Protokoll der Ausschusssitzung des Bundes für Mutterschutz am 26. Februar 7 Uhr,”
BAK, NL 173 (Adele Schreiber), no. 25, fol. 490–495; unidentified document, “Stöcker Marcuse 1906,” ibid., fol. 508–513, p. 2.
113 “Protokoll der Vorstandssitzung des Bundes für Mutterschutz am 1. November 1908,”
BAK, NL 173 (Adele Schrieber), no. 25, fol. 376–384; “Protokoll der Vorstandssitzung des
Deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz am . . . 18. Mai 1908,” ibid., fol. 420–422, and unidentified document, 23 September 1909, ibid., fol. 272–277; “Protokoll der gemeinsamen Sitzung
des Bundesvorstands und des Vorstandes der Ortsgruppe Berlin am 5. April 1909,” ibid.,
112

Religion of Love

233

Adele Schreiber, aware of the organization’s financial problems, appears
to have decided in late 1908 that only hiring a competent, full-time administrator (by diverting to this new employee Stöcker’s salary of 1,500 marks
per year) would solve them – and curb Stöcker’s “autocratic, purely arbitrary
leadership.”114 Stöcker was uncomprehending; as she put it, “it is a little odd
that the leader of a spiritual movement should be judged in the first place on
whether she understands double-entry book-keeping.” Her solution, instead,
was to become the organization’s general secretary herself (with Lischnewska,
briefly in 1909–1910, as new chairman), double her salary, and move the
organization’s office to her private apartment.115
A deeper issue, however, was that it was actually very difficult even for the
sexual radicals in the BfM to escape the power of conventional views and taboos
specifically regarding female sexuality. As the debate over organizational issues
escalated, cracks began to appear in the sexual radicalism of the participants. At
a meeting of the Berlin chapter in January 1910, Stöcker’s opponents pointed
out that Bruno Springer, one of her strongest supporters on the BfM board, was
actually her lover. Springer in turn accused Schreiber of having a “past” herself,
and of having tried to seduce him – generating the first of, ultimately, no fewer
than five libel cases occasioned by the conflict.116 After some weeks of further
accusations and counteraccusations and a failed attempt to get to the bottom of
the matter by a special investigative committee within the Berlin chapter, other
members of the organization, and particularly many of the men involved, seem
to have been torn between despair, disgust, and amusement. One, for example,
drew laughter from the attendees at the BfM’s general meeting at the end of
February 1910 by proposing “to investigate, right here and now, the sexual
relationships of all those present.”117
The problem, however, was a serious one. In principle, within the BfM
the sexual behavior of the women involved should have been nobody’s business; but in practice, for women specifically, accusations of sexual laxity
were apparently still the moral equivalent of (as Stöcker put it) a “war of
fol. 336; Clara Linzen-Ernst to Vorstand of Ortsgruppe Berlin, 6 December 1909, ibid., fol.
190–199.
114 Unidentified and undated report, BAK, NL 173 (Adele Schreiber), no. 15, fol. 80–82.
115 BAK, NL (Schreiber), Vorstandssitzung of 24 January 1907, fol. 499–500; “Protokoll der
Vorstandssitzung des Bundes für Mutterschutz am 1. November 1908,” BAK, NL 173 (Adele
Schreiber), no. 25, fol. 376–384. “Ausserordentliche Generalversammlung der Ortsgruppe
Berlin des Bundes für Mutterschutz am 7. Mai 1910,” ibid., fol. 15–57 (quotation fol. 43);
“Protokoll der Gesamtvorstandssitzung vom 2.10.09,” ibid., fol. 237–238.
116 Helene Stöcker, “Zur Sitzung der OG Berlin vom 10. Januar 1910,” ibid., fol. 169–173,
and “Protokoll der Vorgänge am Schluss der Vorstandssitzung der Berliner Ortsgruppe . . . am
10. Januar 1910,” ibid., fol. 162; “Zwei Gerichstbeschlüsse zu den Konflikten im ‘Bund
für Mutterschutz,’” n.d., ADF, DEF, no. V28; newspaper clippings in BAK, NL 173 (Adele
Schreiber), no. 25; “Zeitungsschau,” NG 6 (1910): 170–171.
117 “Aus den Verhandlungen der Generalversammlung des Deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz
am 26. and 27. Februar 1910 in Halle,” BAK, NL 173 (Adele Schreiber), no. 25, fol. 124–130.

234

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

annihilation.”118 At least some men in the organization apparently found the
whole episode incomprehensible, however, and defaulted to gendered stereotypes to explain it all. As the Berlin chapter’s investigator put it, the problem was that both Schreiber and Stöcker had “allowed themselves . . . to be
carried away by their temperament” and were “overly gifted at writing and
talking” – a comment that naturally drew “vigorous cries of protest” from
women members.119
This element of gender tension also played a role in a second important split
within the sex-reform movement. For, simultaneously with the break between
Stöcker and Schreiber (and their respective supporters), a whole phalanx of
male doctors – led by Max Marcuse, one of the founding members – left the
organization in 1907–1908, establishing their own journal and the organizational nucleus for the new medical discipline of sexology. This development
is treated in the next chapter; for now it is important to note that the sense
that the radical women who dominated the BfM were typically irrational and
unstable females played a role in motivating Marcuse and his colleagues to
leave the organization, and it was clearly apparent in the rhetorical terms they
used to distance themselves from it.
The role of sexual accusations and gender stereotypes was not the only form
of tension between theory and practice at play in the BfM, however. For an
important faction within the organization, particularly in its local chapters, was
in fact more committed to social work with single mothers and their children
than to the ethical revolution espoused by many in the Berlin leadership. The
members of this group feared that propaganda for the New Ethic would merely
alienate many people who would otherwise be inclined to support their efforts.
Sex-reform organizations formed in Munich and in Hanover confined their
activities to practical social work and did not join the national organization;
local chapters in Stuttgart, Frankfurt, and Hamburg joined but resisted the
Berlin leadership’s agenda.120 And a number of important figures in the national
organization too – particularly men – continued to object to the whole idea of
adopting an explicit program of ethical reform, arguing that such a step would
only lead to endless disagreements and wrangling.121
The costs of these conflicts were considerable. Max Marcuse, Adele
Schreiber, Henriette Fürth, the venereal disease experts Max Flesch and Ernst
118

“Generalversammlung Halle 26./27.2.1910, Stenogramm Mayet,” ibid., fol. 63–106.
“Ausserordentliche Generalversammlung der Ortsgruppe Berlin des Bundes für Mutterschutz
am 7. Mai 1910,” ibid., fol. 15–57.
120 See “Mitteilungen des Bundes für Mutterschutz,” NG 1 (1905): 457; “Jahresbericht der Vorsitzenden,” NG 2 (1906): 48.
121 “Protokoll der Vorstandssitzung des Bundes für Mutterschutz am 17.12.08,” BAK, NL 173
(Adele Schreiber), no. 25, fol. 357–361; “Stöckers Entgegnung (mit Affaire Linzen-Ernst zugleich),” 17 December 1908, ibid., fol. 370–375; “Protokoll der Auserordentlichen MitgliederVersammlung . . . den 22. November 1909,” ibid., fol. 205–210; “Protokoll der Ausschusssitzung des Bundes für Mutterschutz am 6. Febr. 08,” ibid., fol. 449–450.
119

Religion of Love

235

Kromayer, the demographer Paul Mayet, and Lily Braun, all prominent in the
early history of the group, left it between 1907 and 1910. Three local chapters
in the far east of Germany, where the moral climate was more conservative,
also seceded, whereas a fourth declared that it would remain in the BfM but
engage in social work only. The BfM’s budget in 1910 was one-third what
it had been in 1909.122 Schreiber, Mayet, and Fürth continued to denounce
Stöcker’s “arbitrariness and injustice” and her “sexual-ethical radicalism” (in
the words of Fürth); Schreiber formed the competing Society for Mothers’ and
Children’s Rights, which was not very successful but did have at least one
local chapter by 1912.123 And the airing of the organization’s dirty laundry
cannot have done much for the sex reformers’ cause; indeed one conservative Protestant crowed in early 1910 over the “collapse” and “fundamental
bankruptcy” of the BfM; and a Social Democratic observer held in 1912 that
the BfM was “at present more ash than fire” as a result of these internal
conflicts.124
This concatenation of difficulties and conflicts ultimately led to a fundamental reorganization of the BfM. Already in 1908 the governing board of the
organization had been expanded to include one representative of each of the
group’s local chapters, as well as seven from the Berlin leadership.125 In 1910 it
was decided to rotate the chairmanship and headquarters among the provincial
chapters (by election), rather than fixing them in Berlin; the executive board of
the national organization was now to consist of the board of whatever local
chapter currently led the group, plus one member from each other chapter.126
The BfM’s general assembly voted in favor of Breslau as the new headquarters;
and the chairmanship was taken over by the head of Breslau’s local chapter,
Max Rosenthal. Stöcker remained editor of Die Neue Generation and chair of
the Berlin chapter; but the dominance of the Berlin leadership was, at least in
principle, broken.127
122

“Versammlungsbericht über die Generalversammlung des Bundes für Mutterschutz in Halle
am Sonnabend der 26. und Sonntag der 27. Februar 1910,” BAK, NL 173, no. 25, fol. 109;
“Bericht über die Finanzlage des Bundes für Mutterschutz vom 1. Januar 08 bis 1. Oktober
08,” BAK, NL 173, no. 25, fol. 461–462; “Mitteilungen des Bundes für Mutterschutz,” NG
7 (1911): 253–256.
123 Henriette Fürth, “Neue Ethik?” Sozialistische Monatshefte 3 (1908): 1612; Henriette Fürth,
“Die Lage der Mutter und die Entwicklung des Mutterschutzes in Deutschland,” in Schreiber,
ed., Mutterschaft, pp. 288, 289, 292, 296; Schreiber, “Ansätze,” p. 182.
124 Th. Wurm, “Der Zusammenbruch der ‘neuen Ethik,’” Innere Mission 5 (1910): 121; Thea
Berg, “Entwicklungsperspektiven des Geschlechtslebens,” SM 18 (1912): 1312.
125 “Mitteilungen des Deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz,” NG 4 (1908): 237–238.
126 “Versammlungsbericht über die Generalversammlung des Bundes für Mutterschutz in Halle
am Sonnabend der 26. und Sonntag der 27. Februar 1910,” BAK, NL 173, no. 25, fol. 122.
See Nowacki, Der Bund, pp. 59–62.
127 “Protokoll der Gesamtvorstandssitzung vom 2/3. Oktober 1909,” fol. 257–262; Regine
Deutsch and Francis(ka) Sklarek, Zur Krise im Bund für Mutterschutz (n.p.: n.p., 1910),
p. 20.

236

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

The assumption of the chairmanship of the national organization by Rosenthal had important implications for the ideological posture of the organization
as a whole. Rosenthal was extremely skeptical regarding the thinking of many
of his female colleagues in the movement, and particularly of Stöcker herself.
He openly regarded Nietzscheanism with deep distaste, as a symptom of what
he saw as the rampant egoism of the age; and he had argued that this same prevailing egoism made socialism more or less a dangerous pipe dream. Tensions
soon developed between him and the Berlin leadership; in late 1907, Stöcker
had even complained to the board of the BfM that Rosenthal was excluding
women from the leadership of the Breslau chapter, and that he “is in theory
a feminist, but in practice doesn’t think much of it.” And in fact in 1908 the
Breslau chapter was the only one in which male members outnumbered female
members.128 The subsequent development of Rosenthal’s thinking did nothing
to smooth relations. By 1912, in a study entitled “Love: Its Nature and Value,”
Rosenthal would offer a biting assessment of his fellow sex reformers, whom
he felt to be indulging in “an enormous over-estimation of love as a cultural
factor.” Women in particular, he found, were “over the top” in their estimation
of the importance of love. Actually, he held, love was not altruistic but almost
wholly egoistic, indeed antisocial, because it absorbed energies that might otherwise have been directed toward socially useful ends. It was often based on
self-delusion and generated endless dramas and upsets. All in all, “nowhere
else is so much energy uselessly squandered as in love.” The only thing that
made love useful, he reasoned, was that it encouraged monogamy, which was
conducive to what was, as he saw it, the real “goal” of human sexuality: “the
production and education of healthy progeny” and hence “human evolution.”
As for morality, what made sex moral was simply “duty” – the commitment
to front up to the responsibilities one took on by getting married and having
children.129
This realism may have recommended him to those in the BfM who sought
to create a counterbalance to Stöcker’s influence; and his more sober and pragmatic approach to eugenics and evolution, stripped of Nietzschean romanticism
and paeans to happiness, may have seemed an opportunity to shift emphasis to
what appeared to be more concrete and scientific ground that would be more
likely to build consensus. The organizational transformation of the BfM, in
other words, reflected the drift toward a more explicitly eugenic and “evolutionist” approach to sexual ethics.
This organizational and intellectual transition was highly successful. In particular, the BfM’s practical social work did in fact blossom. In 1909 the BfM
128

Stöcker to Vorstand of BfM, 1 December 1907, BAK, NL 173 (Adele Schreiber), no. 17,
fol. 111; Richard J. Evans, The Feminist Movement in Germany, 1894–1933 (London: Sage,
1976), p. 129.
129 Max Rosenthal, Die Liebe: Ihr Wesen und ihr Wert (Breslau: Preuss & Jünger, 1912), pp. 17,
19, 21, 29, 84, 89, 99, 26, 25, 106, 28.

Religion of Love

237

had had twelve local chapters but only three shelters for single mothers; in
1910 and 1911 it added five more shelters – despite losing local chapters.130
The group still had some 3,500 members and eight provincial chapters – down
from its peak of around 4,000 members and eleven chapters, but not drastically
so. In 1913 three new local chapters and a separate group for academics were
formed; and by that time the total membership of the organization had most
probably regained the level of 1909.131 In 1911 the BfM was able to initiate the
formation of an international sex-reform organization, the Internationale Bund
für Mutterschutz und Sexualreform (IBMS), and to convene its first conference
in Dresden. And the list of some 130 signatories on the public invitation to join
the IBMS was imposing, including major luminaries from sex reform, sexology, Social Democracy, the women’s movement, the homosexual emancipation
movement, eugenics, the arts, the DGBG, and psychoanalysis.132 Much smaller
national sister organizations had, by 1912, been formed in Holland, Sweden,
and Austria, and in 1913 they met concurrently with the regular biennial BfM
conference.133
Like the homosexual rights movement, then, by 1913 the BfM had little or
nothing concrete to show for its efforts to shape legislation or even administrative practice; yet the organization was clearly not demoralized or chastened, and
its leadership in fact appears to have had a clear sense that they were gaining
ground culturally, if not in practical politics.134 Obviously, the sex reformers’
analysis of the evolution of social and gender relations implied that time was
on their side. At least some in the movement felt that developments were confirming this prognosis. As Stöcker put it in 1913, “everywhere . . . new, deeper
expectations for people’s behavior in love and friendship are arising out of
the new knowledge of humankind. . . . Secretly, almost invisibly . . . everywhere
today new inner laws are developing.” Frida Stéenhof, writing in the previous
year, had regarded the spread in all classes of a new form of informal sexual
“relationship” between men and women as a crucial example.135 And the sex
reformers also believed that they were gaining purchase on opinion among the
political classes. Even Adele Schreiber concluded by 1912 that the BfM was
reaching a growing audience; as she put it, “what yesterday seemed so subversive and revolutionary has today been popularized in wide social circles.”136
Max Rosenthal argued – also in 1912 – that the “undeniable achievement of
130

Gudrun Hamelmann, Helene Stöcker, der “Bund für Mutterschutz” und “Die Neue Generation” (Frankfurt am Main: Haag + Gerchen, 1992), p. 56.
131 “Mitteilungen des Bundes für Mutterschutz,” NG 9 (1913): 223, 600, 681, and 10 (1914):
228.
132 “Aufruf an Frauen und Männer aller Kulturländer,” in Stöcker, ed., Resolutionen, pp. 66–69.
133 Nowacki, Der Bund, p. 79.
134 “Die Erfolge unserer Bestrebungen in den Parlamenten,” NG 5 (1909): 340–341.
135 Helene Stöcker, “Zur Kultur der Liebe,” NG 9 (1913): 516; Frida Stéenhof, “Die Klassenmoral,” NG 7 (1911): 453.
136 Schreiber, “Ansätze,” p. 184.

238

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

the League is that it has brought discussion of the sexual problem into motion
and directed universal attention to it.”137 In short, the sex-reform leadership
believed that although it had not – yet – been able to shape outcomes, it
was increasingly successful in setting the agenda of public debate. This was,
of course, precisely the conviction of the leadership of the homosexual rights
movement, the abolitionists, and the Christian morality campaigners in the
same period.
The BfM too was, moreover, forming an increasing number of important
organizational alliances within the expanding progressive monist milieu – what
Stöcker called the “cultural alliance of all emancipatory reform efforts.” In
1911 and 1912, representatives of the BfM joined or addressed conferences of
the WHK, the neo-Malthusian movement, the DMB, and the Weimar Cartel.
Stöcker had presented her ideas in the journal of the DMB in 1907; she
addressed the annual DMB conferences of 1911, 1912, and 1913, describing sex reform as “purely monistic”; and the DMB’s annual conference of
1912 essentially endorsed the BfM’s New Ethic as embodying monist views
on sexuality and reproduction.138 And the BfM intensified its international
engagements and raised its international profile by initiating the creation of the
IBMS.
Despite tension between Stöcker and Social Democratic women such as
Schreiber, Fürth, and Lily Braun, the BfM’s relationship with Social Democracy was also increasingly cordial. Individual Social Democrats – like Eduard
David – played an important role in the organization; and the Social Democratic
press reported on the BfM with increasing interest and approval after 1910.
In the late 1890s, orthodox socialists had been deeply skeptical of the ideas of
bourgeois sexual radicals; and the more orthodox in the party still sometimes
argued after the turn of the century in effect that sex reform should not have
an autonomous existence outside the Social Democratic movement, because
the economic and sexual emancipation of women could only happen under
socialism.139 But revisionists were more sympathetic. By 1911, Hope AdamsLehman was praising the BfM in the Sozialistische Monatshefte as one of those
“subsidiary streams” of the great army of liberation represented by Social
137

Max Rosenthal, Zur Geschichte des deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz (Breslau: BfM, 1912),
pp. 7–8.
138 Helene Stöcker, “Philosophie der Liebe,” Das Monistische Jahrhundert 1 (1912): 125–132;
“Bericht über die VI. Hauptversammlung des Deutschen Monistenbundes,” Das Monistische Jahrhundert 1 (1912): 420 (address by Grete Meisel-Hess); Helene Stöcker, “Von Kongressen und Gründungen,” NG 8 (1912): 546–555 (quotation p. 547); quotation in Andreas
Seeck, “Wilhelm Ostwald, Monistenbund, Energie und Sexualwissenschaft,” Mitteilungen
der Magnus-Hirschfeld-Gesellschaft 22/23 (1996): 88–89; Stöcker, “Geburtenrückgang und
Monismus,” pp. 40–51; Manfred Herzer, Magnus Hirschfeld (Hamburg: Männerschwarm,
2001), p. 114; Helene Stöcker, “Monismus und Mutterschutz,” NG 8 (1912): 546–49, and
“Kongresse,” NG 9 (1913): 599.
139 Wally Zepler, “Missbrauchte Frauenkraft,” SM 2 (1898): 419, 421; Therese Schlesinger,
“Sexuelle Ethik,” NZ 28 (1910): 281.

Religion of Love

239

Democracy, to be “greeted in cheerful and comradely” spirit and admired for
the “clarity and boldness of its demands” and for the practical work it did.140
The prominent Social Democrats Eduard David, Eduard Bernstein, Ludwig
Frank, and Oda Olberg all signed the public invitation to the IBMS conference
of that year.
The sex reformers were also able to build bridges to the psychoanalytic
movement. Helene Stöcker was associated with the Berlin Psychoanalytic Society from its foundation in 1908; and important figures in it joined the BfM
and/or published in its journal. Heinrich Koerber – a founding member of the
Psychoanalytic Society and chairman of the DMB in 1908 and 1909 – published an essay in the BfM journal in 1910, for example, that was sympathetic
to both the homosexual rights movement and sex reform.141 In a 1913 article in
Die Neue Generation, Wilhelm Stekel, a leading figure in the psychoanalytic
movement, was highly sympathetic, reiterating the sex reformers’ conviction
that sexual desire was ubiquitous in human affairs and that its repression
caused all sorts of moral, physical, and mental hardships, and even agreeing that
“our sexuality is our share of immortality.”142 In 1913, on Freud’s invitation,
Helene Stöcker attended a meeting of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society; and
Freud himself supported both the IBMS and the Austrian branch of the BfM.143
No less important, the sex reformers were also able to form alliances to the
burgeoning world of social welfare reform, and particularly to the movement
for the amelioration of infant mortality rates. The leadership of the infant
welfare movement appears to have been either indifferent or, in some cases,
hostile to the philosophical musings of the sex reformers; but they were acutely
concerned about the health of illegitimate children (who suffered markedly
higher mortality rates than children born to married couples). They therefore
contributed to the growth of a climate of opinion that regarded the plight of
single mothers and their children not as a moral but as a social issue. The
BfM journal reported from its inception on the key institutional innovation
in the fight against illegitimate infant mortality – professional public legal
guardianship – regarding it as a useful instrument in combating both social
hardship and social prejudices.144 Both sex reformers and welfare advocates
140

“Mutterschutzbund,” SM 16 (1910): 652–653; “Mutterschaft,” SM 19 (1913): 444–445;
Hope Bridges Adams-Lehmann, “Mutterschutz,” SM 17 (1911): 1243.
141 Heinrich Koerber, “Psychologie und Sexualität,” NG 6 (1910): 346–348; Evans, Feminist
Movement, p. 122.
142 Wilhelm Stekel, “Masken der Sexualität,” NG 9 (1913): 69, 72.
143 Ludger M. Hermanns, ed., “Helene Stöckers autobiographisches Fragment zur Psychoanalyse,” Luzifer-Amor 4 (1991): 177ff.
144 Siegfried Kraus, “Die Berufsvormundschaft als Schutzorgan für die unehelichen Kinder,” NG
2 (1906): 237ff; Othmar Spann, “Die Lage und das Schicksal der unehelichen Kinder,” NG
3 (1907): 345–358; Iwan Bloch, “Ist die Prostitution ein notwendiges Übel?” NG 5 (1909):
226; “Der Erfolg der Generalvormundschaft” and “Ein Jahr Generalvormundschaft,” NG 5
(1909): 444–446; “Uneheliche Väter,” NG 8 (1912): 156; “Mutterschutz,” NG 7 (1911): 45.

240

Sexual Radicalism, 1900–1914

faced animosity from moral conservatives who felt that the poverty of single
mothers was a good deterrent against sexual laxity. In some cases that common
interest was evident in surprisingly concrete developments – as when, in 1911,
the BfM’s journal reported on a municipal motherhood insurance scheme that
had been adopted in the face precisely of the argument that helping single
mothers would encourage nonmarital sexual unions.145
Despite conflicts between the BfM leadership and male sexologists, moreover, a number of the most influential German and international sexologists
continued actively to support and/or participate in the BfM after 1910. By
1913 a number of these male medical men formed a small but potentially
important organization, the Medical Society for Sexual Science and Eugenics
(Ärztliche Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft und Eugenik [ÄGSE]). Although
it adopted a more studiedly “scientific” posture than the BfM, this group was
clearly closely allied to the sex-reform movement. Its chairman was Albert
Eulenberg, a very early (1898) supporter of homosexual rights who was also
sympathetic to sex reform; its first meeting opened with the reading of a telegram from the godfather of monism, Ernst Haeckel, and then heard addresses
by founding members Iwan Bloch and Magnus Hirschfeld.146
As we have seen, finally, at least some doctors in the DGBG were drifting
toward common ground with the BfM on some issues – for example, on the
importance of free access to contraceptives or prophylactics, or on the potential harmfulness of sexual abstinence. Its leader, Albert Neisser, was a longtime
supporter of the BfM – an odd fact, given his views regarding prostitution,
but also a revealing instance of the importance of the shared monist/scientistic
underpinnings of medical and sex reform. An important example of the common ground between the two movements is their intensely critical reaction to
the attempt to legislate against contraceptives in 1914.
Ultimately, then, the development of the BfM was strikingly similar to that
of the WHK in the same years. It too had its origins in early intellectual
innovations in the 1890s; passed through a period of rapid expansion and
intense optimism immediately after its foundation; experienced severe internal
conflicts that appeared devastating at the time but turned out not substantially
to have compromised its growth or vitality; and, in the years before the war,
was able to build important organizational relationships with an emerging
network of like-minded activists across the spectrum of left-modernist reform
both within Germany and internationally.
Also like the WHK, however, the BfM proved unable to control the discussion of sexuality that it had done much to initiate in its early years. Particularly
in the five years before the outbreak of World War I, it found itself only the
most prominent of a growing number of organizations participating in a rapidly
widening debate concerning sexuality, eugenics, gender roles, and the nature
145
146

“Mutterschutz,” NG 7 (1911): 44–45
“Die Ärztliche Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft,” NG 9 (1913): 270–273.

Religion of Love

241

of an ethical perspective founded in natural science and specifically biology.
Some of these organizations supported much or even most of the sex-reform
program. But the most influential, the emergent scientific discipline of sexology or sexual science (Sexualwissenschaft), was in many cases directly opposed
to the central postulates and demands supported by most of the BfM leadership. In particular, the majority of its exponents were bitterly antifeminist and
homophobic – and became increasingly so as the women’s movements and the
WHK gained traction on public opinion.
Chapter 11 turns to the emergence of this competing movement.

part iii
CONFLICT, 1908–1914

11
Men, Sex, and Science

I. Diversity, Unity, and Polarization
Whereas sex reform had an institutional focus in the BfM, the discipline of
sexology as it took shape after 1900 remained diffuse and divided. Most of
its exponents were medical academics or doctors in private practice; they had
little institutional motivation to agree with one another. The discipline cast
its intellectual net widely and was pulled in multiple contradictory directions,
often by the interventions of relative outsiders who were able to grab headlines
with provocative claims and proposals. Until 1913 it did not generate its own
autonomous organizational focus. The two key journals for the development
of sexological ideas reflected the diversity of interests in the field. The more
important of the two was Max Marcuse’s Sexual-Probleme, founded when he
left the BfM in 1908. Marcuse deliberately defined sexology broadly to include
multiple disciplines (biology, race theory, sociology, anthropology, psychology,
etc.) and pursued a very open editorial policy, publishing contributions from
across the spectrum of the debate on sexual morality. The first two volumes,
for example, included articles not only by men who had left the BfM, like
Marcuse and Christian von Ehrenfels, but also by Anna Pappritz of the IAF;
Bruno Meyer and Hermann Rohleder, both of whom contributed also to Die
Neue Generation; Sigmund Freud; the birth control advocate Hans Ferdy; the
Swedish sex reformer and venereal disease expert Anton Nyström; Paul Näcke;
and Kurt Hiller. The other important journal was Geschlecht und Gesellschaft
(Sex and Society), published from 1906 by the Berlin artistic and publishing
entrepreneur Karl Vanselow. Vanselow was editor of the controversial lifereform journal Die Schönheit (Beauty), which advocated for nudism, vegetarianism, and associated ideas and was illustrated with – among other things –
conventional photographic nudes. The two journals were among Vanselow’s
many commercial ventures, which included publications related to nudism and
245

246

Conflict, 1908–1914

life reform, the sale of photographic nudes, nude and semi-nude dance performances, and even a nudist hotel on the Baltic island of Rügen.1 Geschlecht und
Gesellschaft offered a colorful mix of articles on the arts and literature, ethnology, venereology, sex reform, nudism, and reproduction, among many other
things. Contributors ranged from Helene Stöcker to the conservative theology
professor Reinhold Seeberg and included, for example, Max Rosenthal, Anton
Nyström, the psychoanalyst Otto Adler, and the right-wing völkisch radical
Friedrich Siebert, as well as academic medical sexologists.
Sexological ideas were also elaborated and debated in numerous other
venues. The leading eugenics and race-theory journals of the period – the
journal of the German Society for Race Hygiene, Archiv für Rassen- und
Gesellschaftsbiologie, and the Politisch-Anthropologische Revue, the leading
venue for theorists of Aryan or Nordic racial superiority – carried influential discussions of particular issues. The importance of forensic psychiatry in
the study of sexual “perversions” made criminological journals (particularly
the Archiv für Kriminal-Anthropologie und Kriminalistik) yet another relevant
venue. And the leading medical journals, too, carried numerous articles on
sexuality.2
Sexology nevertheless did have a certain degree of implicit coherence, for
several reasons. First, it was consistently focused on three loose thematic complexes: sexual pathology, normal sexuality and its management, and reproduction. Relatively defined and focused debates shaped the discussion of each.
Second, sexology defined itself – to an increasing degree – as masculine, rational,
and scientific, in contradistinction to sex reform, which it defined as feminine,
emotive, and speculative. The sexologists were virtually without exception men.
Both Geschlecht und Gesellschaft and Sexual-Probleme did publish essays and
reviews by women, including a handful of women doctors; but the perspective
of sexology was overwhelmingly and self-consciously male. Third, sexology
was decidedly self-referential – quite literally, in the sense that a large proportion of major publications in the field were compendia of quotations about sex,

1

“Vereinigung für Sexualreform,” Sexualreform 1 (1906): 114, 113; “Schönheits-Prozess,” Sexualreform 1 (1905): 403; Andreas Pretzel, “Des Kaisers neue Kleider . . . Karl Vanselows Beitrag
zur Schönheitsbewegung und Sittenreform im deutschen Kaiserreich,” in Das bewegte Buch:
Buchwesen und soziale, nationale und kulturelle Bewegungen um 1900, ed. Mark Lehmstedt
and Andreas Herzog (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1999), pp. 267–311.
2 On the history of sexology, see Volkmar Sigusch, Geschichte der Sexualwissenschaft (Frankfurt: Campus, 2009); Tilman Walter, “Begrenzung und Entgrenzung: Zur Genealogie wissenschaftlicher Debatten über Sexualität,” in Von Lust und Schmerz: Eine Historische
Anthropologie der Sexualität, ed. Claudia Bruns and Tilman Walter (Cologne: Böhlau, 2004),
pp. 128–174; Andreas Seeck, “Das Verhältnis von Wissenschaft und Politik im Selbstverständnis
der Sexualwissenschaft,” and Andreas Pretzel, “Sexualreform im Spannungsfeld weltanschaulicher Voraussetzungen und sozialpolitischer Auseinandersetzungen,” both in Verqueere
Wissenschaft? ed. Ursula Ferdinand, Andreas Pretzel, and Andreas Seeck (Münster: Lit, 1998),
pp. 199–212, 229–242.

Men, Sex, and Science

247

and often about women, drawn from a wide range of religious, literary, philosophical, medical, anthropological, and aesthetic works, overwhelmingly by
men. And the sexologists constantly recycled key passages from one another’s
works. By 1909, in fact, this pattern had become so glaringly obvious that
Albert Moll observed with obvious annoyance that the actual advance of sexological knowledge “stands . . . in gross disproportion” to the massive outpouring of books on sexual problems, for the simple reason that “most authors
repeat what others have said in similar or the same words, or publish synthetic
books on sexual life” that merely summarized what was already known.3
In fact, one of the most striking characteristics of sexology was the extent
to which it was unscientific, in the specific sense that it had little basis in experimentation or measurement. It was not an exact science but a Wissenschaft in
the sense defined, for example, by the economist and demographer Julius Wolf
in 1913: “Wissenschaft in the strict sense is sifted, systematized knowledge.”4
In practice the sexologists relied almost exclusively on two sources of knowledge: case studies from their own practice and the authority of other authors.
Of these, in most cases, the latter predominated. Even when cases from medical
practice were cited, there was almost never any attempt to render them in any
other than anecdotal form. Cases were, for example, almost never subjected
to statistical analysis; and studies of control groups were never used.5 As Paul
Näcke had remarked already in 1899, sexology as a field was “unsystematic,
more or less anecdotal” – and for the most part it remained so.6
Many sexologists were therefore extremely excited by the work of Eugen
Steinach, who shortly before World War I experimented with transgendering
small mammals by transplanting testes and ovaries. This seemed to be the start
of an actual experimental and medically useful science of sex. But Steinach’s
work appeared quite late, with the key text published in 1912; and by World
War I he had not actually isolated the hormones in question. For the time
being, therefore, Steinach’s work simply made embarrassingly clear just how
vanishingly little was actually known about the physiology of sexuality.7
The anecdotal quality of sexology made Sigmund Freud’s theorization of
sex appealing to some sexologists as well. In Three Essays on the Theory of
Sexuality, published in 1905, Freud pointed out that the key terms in prevailing models of perversion had no actual content. The idea that perversions
were acquired effectively meant that people fell into the habit of behaving
one way and not another. There was no mechanism – no disease vector, no
3

Albert Moll, Das Sexualleben des Kindes (Leipzig: Vogel, 1909), p. III.
“Aus Vereinen, Versammlungen, Vorträgen,” SP 9 (1913): 873.
5 See Hans Freimark, “Die Beweiskraft der ‘Fälle,’” SP 2 (1909): 363–368.
6 P. Näcke, “Kritisches zum Kapitel der normalen und pathologischen Sexualität,” Archiv für
Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten 32 (1899): 356.
7 The locus classicus is Eugen Steinach, “Willkürliche Umwandlung von Säugetier-Männchen
in Tiere mit ausgeprägt weiblichen Geschlechtscharakteren und weiblicher Psyche,” Pflüger’s
Archiv für Physiologie 144 (1912): 71–110.
4

248

Conflict, 1908–1914

trauma, nothing actually identifiable as the process by which a perversion was
acquired. Similarly, the notion that sexual orientation was inborn was simply a
metaphor, and no one had any idea what organic mechanism it described.8 In
fact, what was most radical in Freud’s theory was that he essentially denied the
existence both of an authentic sexual self and of sexual normalcy. Like almost
all sexologists, he was sure that sexuality was rooted deep in the organism, in
“inner-somatic stimuli.”9 But his understanding of the enormous flexibility of
sexuality sabotaged the idea of an irreducible, stable, “normal” sexual selfhood.
What sexual objects the individual fixed on as the source of sexual gratification was a product of multiple environmental variables, and individual choices
were accordingly diverse. In light of that fact, Freud regarded the prevalence
of heterosexuality as a problem that needed explaining; and he concluded that
everyone was in one degree or another “perverse.” The perversions were rooted
in “something inborn . . . but something that is inborn in all people”; and the
differences between “so-called normal sexual life” and perversion were differences of quantity, not quality. There were no clear boundaries between normal
(“physiological”) sexuality and pathological sexuality.10
Rather than normalizing perversion, in short, Freud abnormalized sexual
normalcy; and in doing so he stressed over and over that most of what sexologists thought they knew about sexuality was simply unfounded speculation. No
one really knew what sexuality was – it was “something,” but precisely what
something was a matter of guesswork. The final line of the book concluded
“that we know far too little about the biological processes that constitute the
essence of sexuality to be able to develop, from our isolated insights, a theory
adequate for comprehension of either the normal or the pathological” in sexual
life.11
And yet, Freud himself had nothing better to offer. His theory was founded
on anecdotal case studies – “a large number of psychoanalyses that has been
growing for twenty years,” which he had conducted. In short he claimed authority based on his personal experience – just like every other sexologist.12 Older
sexologists were not swept off their feet. Albert Eulenburg found “a lot in
Freud . . . hardly to be taken seriously” and deplored the “excess doctrinal and
theoretical ballast” that, in his view, kept psychoanalysts from simply observing
psychological facts. Paul Näcke wrote similarly of the “colossal exaggeration,
the subjective and fantastical in the whole of psychoanalysis.”13 Wilhelm Stern
8

See, e.g., Hermann Rohleder, Vorlesungen über Geschlechtstrieb und gesamtes Geschlechtsleben des Menschen, vol. II (Berlin: Fischer, 1907), p. 168.
9 Sigmund Freud, Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie (Leipzig: Deuticke, 1915), pp. 26, 15,
94–95.
10 Ibid., pp. 13, 36, 26.
11 Freud, Drei Abhandlungen, p. 101; see also pp. 11, 12, 13, 15, 27, 36, 74, 77, 92.
12 Ibid., p. 28.
13 “Ärztliche Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft und Eugenik in Berlin,” ZSW 1 (1914): 34; Paul
Näcke, “Die moderne Übertreibung der Sexualität,” AKAK 39 (1910): 132.

Men, Sex, and Science

249

found that Freud’s theories regarding infantile sexuality fell “entirely in the
realm of the absurd.”14 Before World War I the influence of psychoanalysis
in sexology as a whole was quite limited; psychoanalysts played an important
role on the sexological left, and a very minor role in sex-reform thought; but
that was all.
In the absence of any experimental or statistical mode of falsification, disagreements among the sexologists could almost never be resolved. As Magnus
Hirschfeld put it in a discussion of abstinence in 1908, a simple fact explained
what made the diametrically opposed positions of various sexologists plausible: “that this like so many other sexual problems has . . . simply not yet been
systematically studied on the basis of exact observation.”15 The discipline was
characterized, then, by unresolved and often wildly speculative arguments right
down to 1914. It was also, however, highly vulnerable to purely political forces.
In fact sexology became increasingly polarized along political lines. On the one
hand, socialist and left-liberal sex reformers or reform-oriented doctors continued to champion the ideas dominant in the BfM and the WHK. On the other
hand, an opposing trend among a loose grouping of more conservative men
steadily gathered momentum. Some of these men were drawn to the radical
Right; many of them were at least skeptical of democratic politics; and almost
all of them were vehemently antifeminist.
By 1913, this development was institutionalized in the formation of not
one but two competing sexological organizations. In February of that year, a
small circle of male medical men in or sympathetic to the BfM and WHK
established the ÄGSE, which was essentially a medical wing of the sexreform movement. Members of its governing board included Iwan Bloch and
Magnus Hirschfeld; the socialist medical expert Alfred Grotjahn; Hermann
Rohleder and Albert Eulenburg (as chairman), both influential sexologists
sympathetic to sex reform; and a number influential figures in the psychoanalytic movement.16 Although only medical doctors could become regular
members, others could be co-opted as “extraordinary members”; the first of
these, co-opted at its first meeting, was Helene Stöcker. By the beginning of
1914, the ÄGSE’s membership had climbed to 102, and it was able to revive the
Zeitschrift für Sexualwissenschaft (ZSW), which had appeared for one year in
1908.17
14

Quoted in Heike Brodthage and Sven Olaf Hoffmann, “Die Rezeption der Psychoanalyse in der
Psychologie,” in Die Rezeption der Psychoanalyse in der Soziologie, Psychologie und Theologie
im deutschsprachigen Raum bis 1940, ed. Johannes Cremerius (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1981),
pp. 158, 160.
15 Magnus Hirschfeld, “Einteilung der Sexualwissenschaft,” ZSW 1 (1908): 577.
16 See “Ärztliche Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft und Eugenik,” Medizinische Klinik 9 (1913):
392, and “Ärztliche Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft und Eugenik,” ZSW 1 (1914): 33.
17 “Ärztliche Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft und Eugenik,” ZSW 1 (1914): 33; Andreas
Pretzel, “Zur Geschichte der ‘Ärztlichen Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft’ (1913–1933),”
Mitteilungen der Magnus-Hirschfeld-Gesellschaft 24/25 (1997): 45–47.

250

Conflict, 1908–1914

Sexologists hostile to the sex-reform movements responded almost contemptuously. Max Marcuse, commenting on the “extraordinarily extensive overlap
between the founders . . . and the leadership and influential members” of the
BfM and WHK, warned that the new organization would have “a dilettantish
stamp from day one.” He himself had been invited to its constitutive meeting
but refused to join.18
Instead, in November 1913, Marcuse and other more intellectually conservative sexologists (the term is used here and later in the chapter in its purely
comparative intellectual sense; politically most of the men in question were
liberals) formed their own, competing organization, the International Society
for Sex Research (Internationale Gesellschaft für Sexualforschung [IGS]). In
addition to Marcuse himself, its governing board included, among others, the
economist and demographer Julius Wolf; Albert Moll; Albert Freiherr von
Schrenck-Notzing, a psychiatric opponent of the theory that sexual orientation
was inborn; Hugo Sellheim, author of works attempting to define feminine
beauty in scientific terms; Eugen Steinach; and, significantly, the Berlin theology professor Reinhold Seeberg, an influential figure in the Protestant morality
movement. At its constitutive meeting, Moll announced the group’s intention to
pursue “purely scientific” work, not agitation for reform; and Julius Wolf criticized the “metaphysical tendency” of competing organizations, which presumably was a swipe at sex reform’s focus on sexual ethics.19 Later in 1914, Wolf
would reinforce the message, underlining at the organization’s first membership meeting that “what we seek is simply knowledge . . . what we don’t want
is in any way to pursue politics in this realm. . . . We are interested only in the
facts.”20
The division between these two organizations is well illustrated by their
divergent response to early research into the physiology of sex. Iwan Bloch
admitted in the introduction to the first volume of the (revived) ZSW in
1914 that “we have not yet gone beyond the earliest beginnings,” but he was
certain that the discoveries of Steinach and other medical researchers would
generate an “extraordinary broadening” of the “concepts ‘sexuality’ and ‘sexual.’” The discoveries of “sex-chemistry,” the fact that the entire human body
was suffused with “inner secretions” or “so-called hormones,” proved that
there was an “intimate connection between sexuality and the nervous system
and mental life” and confirmed the “enormous importance of the sexual for the
individual” and “as a powerful cultural principle.” In other words, the existence of the authentic sexual self and the centrality of sexuality to all human life
had now been established as concrete, physical facts. Yet Steinach himself was
a member of the IGS, and conservative sexologists were not at all troubled by
18

M. M., “Aus Vereinen, Versammlungen, Vorträgen,” SP 9 (1913): 354–355.
“Aus Vereinen, Versammlungen, Vorträgen,” SP 9 (1913): 871–874; “Aus Vereinen, Versammlungen, Vorträgen,” SP 10 (1914): 83–88 (text of Wolf’s address).
20 “Internationale Gesellschaft für Sexualforschung,” SP 10 (1914): 292.
19

Men, Sex, and Science

251

his findings. Instead, they took his work as proof that sexual perversions were
in fact physiological pathologies and hence could and must be cured. Bloch’s
hope that the nascent science of hormones would carry sexology beyond the
“conflicts of the political or religious parties” was, in short, immediately proven
illusory.21
II. Sexology and Sex Reform, 1900–1908
Curiously enough, before the critical years between 1905 and 1908, it had not
been at all clear that this would be the case. As good monists and progressive
men of science, many sexologists were quite sympathetic to or even actively
involved in sex reform; and some would remain so throughout the prewar
years. The line between the two groups was in fact quite indistinct.
A particularly striking case was that of the Swiss psychiatrist, entomologist,
and temperance, morality, and Esperanto activist August Forel, whose The Sexual Question of 1904 was widely read and influential in Germany. In that and
lesser works published in the ensuing few years, Forel laid out a perspective that
was in most respects identical to that of the BfM. Like the sex reformers, Forel
argued that sex was the “root of life,” and the health of individual and race
was the “most sacred thing in humanity.”22 After concluding that “morality
is . . . relative” because all morality is historically, socially, and even situationally determined, he rejected the “old heritage of mysticism, dogma, fashion
and tradition,” the futility of which was proven by “our disgustingly hypocritical morality” and the “total bankruptcy of orthodox religious ethics.”23
In its place, he put a new and, he believed, scientific foundation: “Everything
sexual . . . that is qualitatively beneficial to the individual, society, and above all
the race (our offspring) is ethically positive; everything that harms it is ethically
negative; everything that neither serves nor harms it is ethically neutral.”24
Therefore, “the satisfaction of man’s sexual drive belongs among his natural
rights. Science forces us to establish this principle.”25 Forel’s views on eugenics
were as radical as those of the most extreme of the sex reformers. He favored
compulsory sterilization of the eugenically inferior and in fact even suggested
that it was “terrible that the law forces us to keep alive . . . embryos that will be
born as cretins, idiots, hydrocephalics, microcephalics and suchlike”; in future
at least parents should be allowed to direct a doctor to kill such infants “with
a gentle narcosis.”26
21

Iwan Bloch, “Aufgaben und Ziele der Sexualwissenschaft,” ZSW 1 (1914): 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
August Forel, Die sexuelle Frage (Munich: Reinhardt, 1907), p. 3; August Forel, Sexuelle Ethik
(Munich: Reinhardt, 1906), p. 25.
23 Forel, Sexuelle Ethik, p. 17; August Forel, Kulturbestrebungen der Gegenwart (Munich: Reinhardt, 1910), p. 21.
24 Forel, Sexuelle Ethik, p. 17.
25 Forel, Sexuelle Frage, p. 398.
26 Ibid., pp. 441–442.
22

252

Conflict, 1908–1914

In more practical terms, Forel advocated effectively the elimination of marriage law, because “outward coercion here produces only hypocrisy, conflict
and fraud”; women must be made financially independent through the separation of assets and payment for women’s domestic labor; there should be no legal
distinction between children born in and out of wedlock; and the “social and
legal equality of women” was a “first demand” to be made on the way to creating a healthy society. Needless to say, Forel also favored votes for women.27
And he saw birth control as a way to “separate love and the satisfaction of
the sex drive from reproduction” – which would serve both eugenic and social
purposes.28 Forel thought prostitutes were mostly “pathological creatures,”
but he was an abolitionist on the grounds that “the state cannot prohibit an
adult and mentally competent person from making use of his own body” as he
saw fit.29 Homosexuality Forel found “absurd,” and he thought most homosexuals were “severe psychopaths”; but homosexuality had nothing to do with
“depravity or wickedness” and was “pretty harmless” – certainly less so than
prostitution.30
Finally, Forel’s political principles also matched those of his counterparts
in Germany. He was, he wrote in 1908 in the Sozialistische Monatshefte,
“a whole-hearted socialist,” detested German “feudalism and the militarism
and megalomania” and the dysgenic effects of war, and believed that “all
the peoples of Europe and even of the earth” should be “united in one great
nation.”31
Iwan Bloch is, in some ways, an even more telling example of the overlap
between sex reform and sexology. We have discussed the sudden shift in his
views on homosexuality in Chapter 7. Bloch made an equally radical change of
direction with respect to the women’s movement. In his two-volume study of
the sexual perversions, published in 1902–1903, Bloch had written dismissively
of “the so-called ‘women’s emancipation’” movement, which he believed made
“impossible” demands; and he had held that “the functions of the sexual apparatus attendant upon childbirth and motherhood . . . compromise any intensive
mental activity severely, indeed make it impossible” for women.32 Abolition he
considered “nichtig,” or a nullity, and merely a product of English “hypocrisy”
27

Forel Sexuelle Ethik, pp. 21, 22; Forel, Kulturbestrebungen, p. 36; Forel, Sexuelle Frage,
pp. 398, 550–551; August Forel, Out of My Life and Work (New York: Norton, 1937),
p. 193.
28 August Forel, Malthusianismus oder Eugenik? (Munich: Reinhardt, 1911), p. 27.
29 Forel, Sexuelle Frage, pp. 323, 329, 327, 335, 321.
30 Ibid., pp. 257, 258, 263, 260, 262; Forel, Sexuelle Ethik, p. 27.
31 August Forel, “Über die Stellung der Sozialisten zu den Entartungsproblemen,” SM 12 (1908):
1275; Forel, Sexuelle Frage, p. 502; Forel, Out of My Life, p. 305; Forel, Kulturbestrebungen
p. 33.
32 Iwan Bloch, Beiträge zur Aetiologie der Psychopathia sexualis, vol. II (Dresden: Dohrn, 1903),
pp. 1, 15, 17, 19.

Men, Sex, and Science

253

and the denial of the realities of sexual life; he himself advocated a state-run
system of Kasernierung.33
In The Sexual Life of Our Times (1907), in contrast, Bloch devoted sixteen
pages to an uncritical summary of Ellen Key’s ideas, which he now called
“the gospel for all those who are determined to bring love into harmony with
all the changes and advances of cultural life” in the past century. Rejecting
the “Jeremiads of the blind apostles of morality,” he believed instead that a
“radical perfection of love” was imminent; everywhere the “beginnings of a
new, more noble, more perfect configuration of sexual life” could be seen.
The “whole mendacity and infamy” of Christian morality still created much
“sexual misery.”34 But all that would be corrected by the “introduction of
free love and the new sexual morality associated with it, which sees man and
woman as two free, equal, but also mutually responsible personalities.”35 Not
surprisingly, he also embraced virtually all of the concrete proposals of the sex
reformers, with respect to family law, divorce, abolition, and so on.
Other sexologists had actually long been quite open to the ideas and aims of
the women’s and homosexual rights movements. Albert Eulenburg, for example, observed of resistance to the demands of the women’s movement that
“barbarism . . . is deeply rooted.”36 Hermann Rohleder, too, shared the sex
reformers’ belief that sexuality was the “origin of every form of progress in
all realms”; that every sexually mature person had a “right . . . to satisfaction
of his sex drive, to the exercise of his sexual individuality”; and that sex was
“an action that is of interest only to the two participants, an internal, private
matter, a priori no concern of the law.” He supported the abolition of §175,
holding that homosexuality was inborn, ineradicable, and neither pathological
nor degenerate but merely “a variety, a caprice of nature.”37 Both he and Bloch
were actively involved in the WHK.38 And the role of Richard von Krafft-Ebing
and Albert Moll in laying the conceptual foundations for the homosexual rights
movement has been examined in Chapter 7.
In fact, even some of those who would emerge later as conservative critics,
opponents, and competitors of sex reform had actually, in the years before
about 1908, been quite positive toward it. Max Marcuse was one of the
founders of the BfM; at its first meeting he had deplored the “incomprehension
Eugen Dühren [Iwan Bloch], Das Geschlechtsleben in England (Charlottenburg: Barsdorf,
1901), pp. 428, 429, 438.
34 Iwan Bloch, Das Sexualleben unserer Zeit (Berlin: Marcus, 1907), pp. 297, 1–2, 200, 827,
263–264.
35 Ibid., pp. 265–266.
36 Albert Eulenburg, Sadismus und Masochismus (Wiesbaden: Bergmann, 1911), pp. 25, 26, 18.
37 Hermann Rohleder, Die Masturbation: Eine Monographie für Ärzte und Pädagogen (Berlin:
Fischer’s Medizinische Buchhandlung, 1899), p. 346; Hermann Rohleder, Vorlesungen, vol. I
(Berlin: Fischer, 1907), pp. 54–55, 10–11; Rohleder, Vorlesungen, vol. II, pp. 429, 428.
38 MWHK 6:3 (March 1907): 41–42; MWHK 6:11 (November 1907): 212.
33

254

Conflict, 1908–1914

and indifference with which men still today look upon the sacred struggle of
woman for her just rights.”39 Even after becoming a bitter critic of the BfM,
he continued to champion some of its central ideas – for example, that sexual
morality evolved and changed with changing times and contexts.40 Albert Moll
signed the WHK’s petition and argued already in 1897 that women should be
granted equal access to higher education and the professions as a matter of
“justice for women and with regard to the commonweal.”41 He continued to
praise the BfM and the protection of single mothers as late as 1912.42
The tone and content of the early volumes of the two leading sexological
journals reflected this sympathy. The first pages of the journal Geschlecht und
Gesellschaft in 1906 amounted virtually to a sex-reform manifesto. The editors
argued that “every social instinct and every form of sociability is built on the
biology of sex,” denounced Christian prudery and hypocrisy, and held that
the “development of the sense of individual freedom and the consciousness
of personal responsibility” in modern society meant that “tutelage in intimate
matters that concern only the individual” was no longer viable. A later article
deplored the “hatred and frenzy of persecution of some ‘apostles of decency’”
when faced with “pure, chaste nudity” (such as that of the dancer Isadora
Duncan). A third repeated Hirschfeld’s arguments regarding the fundamental
bisexuality of all people. A fourth supported coeducation as a path to “a much
more serious morality in relations between the sexes.” A fifth recommended
contraception as a way to enable early marriage, and hence avoid prostitution
and venereal disease. A sixth held that the informal premarital “relationship”
common in working-class communities both derived from “ancient Germanic
custom” and was a model for the future. A seventh argued that equal education for boys and girls would help to improve marriage, reduce immorality,
elevate the arts, and advance science, religion, international understanding,
and the global economy, asking “how much useful energy must be denied” to
social progress “because female humanity is artificially held at a low level of
knowledge?” An eighth offered a paean to sex reform as a “sacred longing for
renewal and purification.” A ninth repeated the argument that the “mysterious magnetic force that draws lovers to each other” in a true “love-match”
expressed “unconsciously the reproductive aim for the creation of ever better
crossings” and hence was superior in a eugenic or evolutionary sense.43
39

Helene Stöcker, Bund für Mutterschutz (Berlin: Pan, 1905), p. 25.
Max Marcuse, “‘Der Zweck heiligt die Mittel’ – das ethische, insbesondere das sexualethische
Recht der ‘Jesuiten-Moral,’” SP 6 (1910): 283.
41 Quoted in Sigusch, Geschichte, p. 205.
42 Moll, Das Sexualleben des Kindes, pp. 293–294; Albert Moll, Handbuch der Sexualwissenschaften (Leipzig: Vogel, 1912), p. 402.
43 “Einführungsworte”; “Sinnlichkeit und Sittlichkeit”; “Lebt die Liebe!”; Erna Walling, “Nacktheit und Scham”; E. Lehien, “Bisexualität”; Georg Hoppmann, “Über den gemeinsamen Unterricht von Mädchen und Knaben”; Anton Nyström, “Frühzeitige Ehen”; Rudolf Sommer,
“Mädchenerziehung oder Mädchenbildung?”; Hans Adner, “Von der neuen Ehe”; Wilhelm
40

Men, Sex, and Science

255

The sex-reform perspective continued to be well represented in later issues
as well. The third volume, in 1908, carried another manifesto for sex reform,
repeating all the usual postulates and calling for a “crusade . . . for the liberation
of love.”44 Even as late as 1914, the journal carried articles by Helene Stöcker
arguing against §175, by Rosa Mayreder observing that the existing legal
form of marriage seemed by all the evidence to be no longer “adequate to the
conditions of modern life,” and by Isaak Spier-Irving arguing that “it can no
longer be denied that the natural rights of woman in sexual life are equal to
those of the man.”45
Sexual-Probleme too was initially quite sympathetic to sex reform. Marcuse’s introductory essay in the first volume in 1908 sought to seize the
intellectual high ground by arguing that only science could solve the sexual
problem and by promising to avoid “abstract theoretical speculations” – a
thinly veiled swipe at his erstwhile colleagues in the BfM. But he went on to
offer the classic activist sex-reform agenda for the journal: to
pave the way for liberation from sexual misery and danger; refine relations
between the sexes both in and outside of marriage – help to make them happier, healthier and more honest; contribute to the reform of economic and social
defects in consequence of which asceticism, prostitution, venereal disease, perversions and other signs of degeneration must arise; help to . . . protect state and society from a further increase in the mass of anti-social and unfit individuals. . . . We
want to pursue sexual Realpolitik.46

The first substantive article in that volume announced “that any legal stipulation that hinders or constrains natural instincts . . . must be despised as a hopeless effort” and argued for the decriminalization of prostitution and unmarried
cohabitation, liberalized divorce law, and improved wages for women.47 In the
next article, reform-friendly gynecologist Max Hirsch deplored the “martyrdom with which human society in our time burdens the unmarried mother”;
advocated the “liberation of woman from physical and economic dependence,”
the use of contraception to rationalize reproduction, the legalization of abortion, and separation of property within marriage; and held that alcoholics and
the mentally ill were “unfit for reproduction.”48
Again, such arguments did not entirely disappear from the journal’s pages
in later years. In 1911, for example, Marcuse himself published a very long
Brönner, “Ehe und Entwicklungslehre,” all in GG 1 (1906): 3–4, 6, 18, 27, 74, 88–90, 100,
106, 115, 117, 149, 150–151.
44 Hermann Fernau, “Präventivmittel und Liebesethik,” GG 3 (1908): 356, 357–358, 358, 364.
45 Helene Stöcker, “Homosexualität und Geschlechtsbewertung”; Rosa Mayreder, “Die Frauenbewegung und das sexuelle Problem”; Isaak Spier-Irving, “Das sexuelle Zentralproblem,” all
in GG 9 (1914): 273–284, 375, 315, 318.
46 “‘Sexual-Probleme’: Ein Wort zur Einführung,” SP 4 (1908): 1, 3.
47 [Johannes] Werthauer, “Sexualverkehr in strafrechtlicher Beleuchtung,” SP 4 (1908): 8, 9, 14.
48 Max Hirsch, “Das geschlechtliche Elend der Frau,” GG 4 (1908): 20, 21, 22, 24, 26.

256

Conflict, 1908–1914

article in the journal opposing legislation that would further inhibit the sale
of contraceptives, on the grounds that Germany’s population was growing by
800,000–900,000 per year and that in any case the welfare of the nation was
dependent “not on the quantity but on the quality of [its] progeny.” Instead,
the state should work to reduce infant mortality among the working class,
fund better prenatal care, and introduce a system of motherhood insurance.49
Even in 1914, the journal carried an extended article that, while poking fun
at the “dilettantism” and “disputable theoretical constructions” of the BfM
leadership, nevertheless exactly replicated much of sex-reform thought and
welcomed the fact that “inherited traditions and authorities have largely lost
their guiding and persuasive power in broad social classes,” who were drifting
toward a “new faith, a new religion.”50
III. The Science of Difference: Biological Foundations of Gender Roles
Such fundamental sympathies did not, however, rule out quite bitter rhetorical
attacks. The introduction to the first volume of Sexual-Probleme, for example, implicitly labeled the BfM leadership “immature and unqualified” and
“do-gooders and naive ideologues” and announced that it would adopt “a
policy in which not feelings but experience and knowledge are decisive.”51
In the second issue, Marcuse complained that the BfM had developed into a
“special sect of the women’s movement . . . , in which the ladies talk only to
each other.”52 By 1909, he was waxing rabid, declaring that both the BfM
and the “orthodox indecency-sniffers” suffered from “thoughtless dogmatism
and arrogant narrow-mindedness,” and that Stöcker’s position was a “sexualpolitical menace to society.”53 Hirschfeld came in for a drubbing as well; he
suffered from “strong emotional affect” and was incapable of “calm objective
research and reporting.”54 The sex reformers (male and female), in short, were
irrational, emotional, unrealistic, illogical, and essentially silly. This was a view
that some others were willing to express more bluntly. Christian von Ehrenfels, for example, held the female sex reformers to be “womanish and weak,
illogical . . . mired . . . up to their ears in the moonshine romanticism of anemic
49

Max Marcuse, “Die antineomalthusianistischen Bestimmungen in dem ‘Entwurf eines Gesetzes
gegen Missstände im Heilgewerbe,’” SP 7 (1911): 48, 87, 88, 102, 119–120, 121, 123.
50 H. v. Müller, “Sexualreform und Sexualethik,” SP 10 (1914): 237, 241, 416, 418.
51 “Sexual-Probleme,” pp. 3–4.
52 M[ax] M[arcuse], “Der Bund für Mutterschutz,” SP 4 (1908): 35, 36, 37.
53 “Die Ehereform der ‘Mutterschützler,’” SP 5 (1908): 694, 695; Max Marcuse, “‘Der Zweck
heiligt die Mittel’ – das ethische, insbesondere das sexualethische Recht der ‘Jesuiten-Moral,’”
SP 6 (1910): 272; review of Reinhold Seeberg, Sinnlichkeit oder Sittlichkeit (1909), SP 5 (1909):
305.
54 Max Marcuse, review of Die Homosexualität des Mannes und des Weibes (1914), SP 10 (1914):
823–824.

Men, Sex, and Science

257

girls.”55 Of Ruth Bré in particular he found “something’s not quite right in her
upper story”; she produced merely a “jumble of errors, nonsense and manic
emotional outbursts” in a “nagging woman’s voice.”56 Alfred Klaar explained
that Ellen Key’s ideas were a “childish bit of fantasy.”57 Others writing in
Sexual-Probleme denounced female sex reformers as “spiritual prostitutes of
the lowest sort,” or as “truly womanish, that is, without any sense for logic.”58
Such comments may have reflected personal animosities generated by the
split within the BfM; and in fact there were almost no denunciations of sex
reform in Geschlecht und Gesellschaft similar to those in Sexual-Probleme.
Nevertheless, it too was not immune to the temptation to denigrate female
sex reformers’ ability to reason. In the introductory article in the first issue,
for example, the editors were careful to distance themselves from “delirium
of modern exuberance in the realm of sexuality” and from the “Amazons”
who led the sex-reform movement.59 And in 1912 the journal offered an essay
in which Bruno Meyer, a professor of art history, author of richly illustrated
coffee-table books on the female nude, and early activist in the sex-reform
movement, suggested that women really had nothing worthwhile to say about
sex; for although “men make science, and naturally know what they experience in sexual intercourse . . . [o]n the female side there is an almost complete
absence of comparable . . . experiences and observation. Women lack the practice in exercising their understanding necessary to give . . . an account of their
experience . . . in the form of a sober, truthful and exhaustive description.”60
And even men close to sex reform sometimes used a similar tone – as when Max
Rosenthal, for example, remarked on Ellen Key’s “flights of fancy” concerning
the social usefulness of love.61
Obviously, gender stereotypes played an important role in shaping such
views. The term “stereotype,” however, is not quite adequate; for such ideas
rested atop a massive edifice of theorization of the profound, pervasive, and
essential sexual differences between men and women. Fundamental to sexology
as a body of knowledge was the postulate that men’s and women’s sexuality
were radically different, and radically at odds.
55

Christian von Ehrenfels, quoted in “Rassenveredlung durch Polygamie?” NG 1 (1905/1906):
387; Christian von Ehrenfels, “Sexuale Reformvorschläge,” Politisch-Anthropologische Revue
(hereinafter PAR) 4 (1905/1906): 442.
56 Von Ehrenfels, “Sexuale Reformvorschläge,” pp. 426, 427, 428, 441, 442.
57 Quoted in “Ein Spiel mit dem Feuer,” SP 4 (1908): 376–377.
58 Erich Lilienthal, “Die skandalösen alten Jungfern,” SP 7 (1911): 389–390; Bruno Meyer,
“‘Wenn zwei eine Fensterscheibe zerschlagen haben . . . ,’” SP 6 (1910): 542.
59 “Einführungsworte,” p. 4; Wilhelm Brönner, “Der Kampf um die neue Liebe,” GG 1 (1906):
13.
60 Bruno Meyer, “Immer noch einmal die ‘Doppelte Moral’!” GG 7 (1912): 47. See, e.g., Bruno
Meyer, Weibliche Schönheit, 2 vols. (Stuttgart: Klemm & Beckmann, 1905).
61 Max Rosenthal, Die Liebe: Ihr Wesen und ihr Wert (Breslau: Preuss & Jünger, 1912),
pp. 29, 99.

258

Conflict, 1908–1914

The locus classicus for this view was Richard von Krafft-Ebing’s Psychopathia sexualis of 1886. “Without doubt,” Krafft-Ebing asserted, “the
man has a more lively sexual need than the woman. . . . Following the powerful urgings of nature, he is more aggressive and tempestuous in his wooing. . . . It’s otherwise with the woman. If she is mentally normally developed
and well-raised, her sensual desire is minimal. . . . She behaves passively.” Furthermore, the “emotional tendency of woman is monogamous, while the man
leans toward polygamy.” For men, finally, sex was an episodic interest, because
“if his desire is fulfilled, his love recedes temporarily behind other vital and
social interests.” In contrast, “the realm of sexuality has greater influence on
the consciousness of woman than on that of man. The need for love is stronger
in the former than in the latter, continuous, not episodic; but her love is more
spiritual than sensual.”62
Sexologists would repeat these four central themes – that men’s sexual drive
was stronger than women’s; that men were aggressive and women passive;
that men were polygamous and women monogamous; and that sex was a
brief episode for men but filled women’s whole lives – over and over again
for the next thirty years. Thus the prominent gynecologist Alfred Hegar, in
his 1894 study, “The Sex Drive” (“Der Geschlechtstrieb”), would argue that
the sexual instinct had two components: the drive to have intercourse (Begattungstrieb) and the drive to reproduce (Fortpflanzungstrieb), with the former
more important to male and the latter more important to female sexuality.63
Albert Moll, in 1898, divided the sexual drive into the specifically genital
drive for Detumeszenz or release (predominant in men) and the more generalized drive for Kontrektation or touch (women).64 Hugo Sellheim argued
in 1908 that men’s desire “soon takes on a particular form. He sets his eyes
on the goal, has at it directly, and takes the obstacles by storm.” Women, in
contrast, had no “primary understanding” of “male charms,” but rather only
“adaptability” – the ability to accommodate men’s sexual desires for the sake of
emotional closeness. Although once they did, “love occupies all their thoughts
and aspirations” – whereas “the man’s love recedes into the background as
soon as his thoughts are engaged with his profession.”65 Max Marcuse denied
that this difference was natural, insisting that women had, only under pressure from men, “very gradually learned to feel monogamously”; but because
he believed “men have never been forced in the same degree to emancipate
themselves from their polygamous instincts,” the outcome was the same.66

62

Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Psyhopathia sexualis mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Conträren
Sexualempfindung (Stuttgart: Enke, 1892), pp. 13–14.
63 Alfred Hegar, Der Geschlechtstrieb (Stuttgart: Emke, 1894), p. 5.
64 Albert Moll, Untersuchungen über die Libido sexualis (Berlin: Fischer, 1898), pp. 8–11, 201.
65 Hugo Sellheim, Die Reize der Frau und ihre Bedeutung für den Kulturfortschritt (Stuttgart:
Enke, 1909), p. 9.
66 Max Marcuse, “Geschlechtstrieb und Liebe des Urmenschen,” SP 5 (1909): 738.

Men, Sex, and Science

259

Even men quite close to the BfM shared most of these views. August Forel
believed that men’s sex drive was “more imperative, more tempestuous and
more irresistible than that of normal women.” In contrast, “among a very
large number of women the Libido sexualis is completely absent,” although
normal women did have a “need to give themselves passively, to play the role
of the defeated, the coerced, the dominated.” And “on average woman is much
more monogamously inclined than man,” who had a “polygamous instinct.”67
Iwan Bloch contrasted the “impetuous, aggressive character of the masculine
sex drive” to woman’s “greater outward passivity” and believed nevertheless
that “woman is much more sexual than man”; indeed he wrote of her “saturation . . . with sexuality.”68 Max Rosenthal too held that the “extraordinary
difference in the . . . purely physical character of the genital systems” of men
and women “points to a difference in kind between male and female sexual feelings.”69 Even Sigmund Freud wrote in Sexual-Probleme in 1908 that
women were the “true bearers of the sexual interests of humanity.”70
Some men who occupied the gray zone between sexology and sex reform
did make one concession to their female colleagues: they conceded, as Forel
put it, that once a woman’s sexuality was awakened by a man, “it is not at all
rare that in the course of many years of marriage the relationship is reversed,
and the woman becomes more desirous than the man.”71 Bloch too believed
that women’s sexuality “develops in its full strength only after the onset of
regular sexual intercourse.” Marcuse argued that the “greater self-mastery
that women . . . are obliged . . . to exercise” was not evidence “that they have
nothing to master.” This view seems to have been growing more influential in
the years before World War I; but it was still a minority position.72
Many sexologists believed, moreover, that the sexual drives or natures of
men and women were not only different but incompatible. In fact, the image of
the struggle or even war between the sexes was ubiquitous in sexological discourse. Thus, for example, one author observed in the opening line of an essay
published in Geschlecht und Gesellschaft in 1907 that “since the beginning of
the world man and woman have been at war. . . . The sexes are incomprehensible to each other.” Hans Adner held that this conflict was only an apparent one,
because actually it only built up the “drive to combine and resolve the antithesis in love.”73 Others were not so optimistic. Christian von Ehrenfels believed
that the instincts of men and women “necessarily clash with one another.
67

Forel, Sexuelle Frage, pp. 75, 242, 91, 92, 93, 94, 81, 89.
Bloch, Das Sexualleben, pp. 12, 62, 63, 64, 90, 91, 591.
69 Max Thal [Rosenthal], Sexuelle Moral: Ein Versuch zur Lösung des Problems der geschlechtlichen, insbes. der sogenannten “Doppelten Moral” (Breslau: Koebner, 1904), pp. 10, 5.
70 Sigmund Freud, “Die ‘kulturelle’ Sexualmoral und die moderne Nervösität,” SP 1 (1908): 121.
71 Forel, Sexuelle Frage, pp. 95, 97.
72 Ibid., p. 95; Bloch, Das Sexualleben, p. 90; Max Marcuse, “Sexualphysiologie und Sexualpsychologie des Weibes,” SP 10 (1914): 770.
73 Hans Adner, “Der Kampf der Geschlechter,” GG 2 (1907): 145, 146.
68

260

Conflict, 1908–1914

Reconciliation is unthinkable.”74 The Munich bohemian and dandy, antiSemite, misogynist, and popular novelist Oscar A. H. Schmitz remarked in
1910 that “I know that I speak here as a man, with all the one-sidedness of a
man . . . but womb and brain” – by which he meant woman and man – “are
enemies . . . peace and compromise are impossible. . . . There can only be domination of the one by the other.”75 Iwan Bloch too remarked on the “basic,
deeply rooted antipathy between the sexes that grows out of their deep heterogeneity, out of the impossibility of really understanding each other.”76 Max
Rosenthal was more straightforward: “Love is . . . war . . . , stubborn, dogged,
bitter and embittering.”77
The male sexologists and sex reformers therefore tended to see sexual intercourse as a fundamentally hostile act, an act of violence committed by men
against women. In its most benign form, this was expressed in an almost playful
use of metaphors – as when, for example, one author compared sperm entering
the womb to “bold conquerors,” “brazen conquerors,” or even a “conquering
people.” Others asserted that both men and women found the game of sexual domination and surrender exciting.78 Other views were more ambivalent.
Max Rosenthal observed in 1904 that “love and its preliminaries often take
on, in jest or in earnest, the forms of warfare.”79 One article in Geschlecht und
Gesellschaft in 1908 argued that sexual intercourse was a “combat between
man and woman, even if only play-acted combat.”80 Robert Michels reported
in 1911 that it was often difficult for a man to tell “whether the resistance
that the girl opposes to his desire is genuine or fake”; the “boundary between
the legitimate exploitation of a situation and a criminal action” was hazy.81
And one south German police doctor argued in 1908 that most women’s lack
of interest in sex was merely feigned, and that husbands should not “take the
resistance and whimpering of newly married women too seriously” but rather
proceed to “enjoy the right of domination, which the apparently recalcitrant
woman [actually] gladly grants him.”82
Still more negative views were quite common. Albert Eulenburg, for example, stated bluntly that “sexual satisfaction through intercourse is bound up

74

Christian von Ehrenfels, “‘Doppelte’ – und differenzierte Moral,” SP 4 (1908): 77.
Oscar A. H. Schmitz, “Die Abhängigkeit der Frau,” Frauen-Zukunft 1 (1910): 290. On Schmitz,
see Oscar Schmitz, Das wilde Leben der Münchener Boheme. Tagebücher, 3 vols, ed. Wolfgang
Martynkewicz (Berlin: Aufbau, 2006).
76 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, p. 85.
77 Rosenthal, Die Liebe, p. 121.
78 Adner, “Der Kampf,” p. 150; Bruno Meyer, “Homosexualität und Strafrecht,” AKAK 44
(1911): 306–307.
79 Thal [Rosenthal], Sexuelle Moral, p. 11.
80 Georg Lomer, “Zur Ästhetik des Geschlechtstriebes,” GG 3 (1908): 153.
81 Robert Michels, Die Grenzen der Geschlechtsmoral (Munich: Frauenverlag, 1911), p. 80.
82 Wilhelm Hammer, “Geschlechts-‘Kälte’ bei sogennant ehrbaren Frauen und Geschlechtskälte
bei Freudenmädchen,” GG 3 (1908): 383.
75

Men, Sex, and Science

261

with cruelty.”83 And many sexologists were particularly fascinated with what
they imagined as the violence of “the wedding night,” as they commonly called
it – women’s first experience of sexual intercourse. Thus the gynecologist Enoch
Kisch, author of the massive tome The Sexual Life of Woman (1904), held that
“brutality” was “more or less inherent” in the act of “defloration” and that the
ignorance of men regarding women’s sexuality was so great that in many cases
“one can speak of the rape” on the wedding night. Essays in Geschlecht und
Gesellschaft in 1907 and 1908 argued that defloration was often a “violent
act” that destroyed the sexual foundation of marriage at its outset, or that
most cases of female “frigidity” could be traced back to the “brutal violence
of the man” on that night.84
In all three of these latter cases, the authors were arguing for greater sensitivity among men to the different sexual rhythms and needs of women; one in
fact argued that between 10 and 40 percent of women never reached orgasm
and that they had “a right to a change in this situation,” which would require
only adequate sex education and a little bit of “adaptability in the man.”85
More frequently, however, the sexologists argued that their discovery of the
nature of the sexual differences between men and women provided a scientific foundation for the double standard of sexual morality. Thus Richard von
Krafft-Ebing argued that “natural drive and social position bring the man easily to fall, while the woman is granted much protection,” and that adultery
by women was therefore “endlessly more morally serious.”86 And Hermann
Rohleder argued in 1907 that women had a duty to be more disciplined in
sexual matters because “the fetus is entrusted to the woman alone” – or, as
Rohleder put it, “nature itself” (and not “men’s brutality”) had given her
greater sexual responsibility.87
Such views were not universal among the sexologists. Paul Näcke in fact
explicitly and vehemently rejected the double standard, arguing that girls
should be forgiven their “missteps” just as easily as were boys.88 Albert Moll
rejected the double standard equally clearly, as a product of “men’s lust for
domination.”89
Yet defenses of the double standard and of prostitution in the sexological
journals were sometimes strikingly explicit. The first volume of Geschlecht und
83

Eulenburg, Sadismus, p. 13.
Enoch Heinrich Kisch, Das Geschlechtsleben des Weibes in physiologischer, pathologischer und
hygienischer Beziehung (Berlin: Urban & Schwarzenberg, 1904), pp. 277, 278; Hans Menjago,
“Die Überschätzung der physischen Reinheit,” GG 2 (1907): 357; Otto Adler, “Weib und
Empfindung,” GG 3 (1908): 104, 106.
85 Adler, “Weib,” pp. 64, 113.
86 Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Psychopathia sexualis mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der
Conträren Sexualempfindung (Stuttgart: Enke, 1892), p. 15.
87 Rohleder, Vorlesungen, vol. I, pp. 90, 153.
88 Paul Näcke, “Gedanken über sexuelle Abstinenz,” SP 4 (1908): 328–329.
89 Moll, Handbuch, pp. 362, 368, 375–377, 332, 396, 297.
84

262

Conflict, 1908–1914

Gesellschaft in 1906, for example, carried an essay arguing that, given the facts
of sexual difference, prostitution was necessary “in order to occupy the young
men whose income is not yet sufficient” to support a family. As for the married
man, “why shouldn’t he . . . have a little bit of freedom to do what he will
with what his wife can’t use?”90 Bruno Meyer argued in the 1912 volume
of the same journal that it was right to judge prostitutes and their clients by
different standards, because men were primarily “professional beings,” whereas
in women “the sexual being stands very clearly at the forefront,” and that it was
“contrary to reason” to judge men and women who committed adultery by the
same standard, because only the wife could bring an “heir of foreign descent
into the marital union.”91 And numerous contributions to both Geschlecht und
Gesellschaft and Sexual-Probleme simply offered the theory that prostitutes
were morally or mentally defective and “born whores.”92
The debate over the dangers of abstinence played an important role in such
defenses of the double standard. Opinion among sexologists was divided. Moll,
Hegar, Eulenburg, Näcke, and others thought that abstinence was both possible and harmless. Marcuse was the most fervent advocate of the opposing
view, but he was supported by many others – including, for example, Hermann
Rohleder, who believed prolonged abstinence could cause sexual neurasthenia,
hysteria, or satyriasis, and Anton Nyström, who reported cases in which abstinence caused nervousness and lack of energy, impotence and atrophy of the
testes, hypochondria, and other disorders.93 One contributor to Geschlecht und
Gesellschaft in 1906 even reported (of course on the basis of unspecified “experience”) that abstinence led to “feminization” of men and “masculinization”
of women, and ultimately to homosexuality.94
The discussion of abstinence was closely bound up with that on the dangers of masturbation. Here again opinion was divided. August Forel was
unusually sanguine, arguing that the dangers of “moderate” masturbation
had been “unbelievably exaggerated”; and Eulenburg and Näcke more or
less concurred.95 But the foremost expert, Hermann Rohleder, believed that
masturbation could be terribly harmful. It demanded “colossal labor of the
imagination” and so delivered a “shock to the whole nervous system”; it could
90

Fr. Erhard, “Auch ein Wort zur Ehereform,” GG 1 (1906): 402–403, 409, 411.
Bruno Meyer, “Immer noch einmal,” pp. 41, 135, 134.
92 See, e.g., “Aus den Verhandlungen der 80. Versammlung Deutscher Naturforscher und Ärzte,”
SP 1 (1908): 855–858; Magdalene Thumm-Kintzel, “Prostitution und Verbrechen,” GG 2
(1907): 83–85; Wilhelm Hammer, “Ursachen des Dirnentums,” GG 1 (1906): 458–467; Isaak
Spier-Irving, “Das hemmungslose Weib,” GG 9 (1914): 49–58.
93 Moll, Untersuchungen, p. 848; L. Löwenfeld, Sexualleben und Nervenleiden (Wiesbaden:
Bergmann, 1903), 40–41; Paul Näcke, “Gedanken über sexuelle Abstinenz,” SP 1 (1908):
321; “Rundschau,” SP 1 (1908): 618–619.
94 H. Lehien, “Geschlechtsleben und Ehe,” GG 1 (1906): 250–251.
95 Forel, Sexuelle Frage, p. 242; Albert Eulenburg, “Zur Behandlung der sexuellen Neurasthenie,”
ZSW 1 (1914): 23; Paul Näcke, “Noch einige Bemerkungen zur sexuelle Abstinenz,” SP 5
(1909): 114.
91

Men, Sex, and Science

263

weaken the memory and undermine the ability to work and was conducive to
feelings of shame and remorse, depression, melancholy, cramps, convulsions,
hysteria, palpitations, diarrhea, twitching eyelids, sensitivity to light, hypochondria, panic attacks, dishonesty, hypocrisy, weakness of will, unemployment,
impulsivity, inhumanity, criminality, and where there was some predisposition
even epilepsy and mental illness. In short, masturbation was a threat to the
“foundations of the prosperity of society and the state.”96 Bloch too believed
that although moderate masturbation was harmless, excess could generate all
the ills Rohleder listed plus egoism, hard-heartedness, poor eyesight, frigidity
in women, and sexual perversions, including “pseudo-homosexuality.”97
Whatever the precise details of these debates and whatever the nuances of
the positions taken in them, the implicit message of a sizable grouping of the
medical sexologists was clear: that men needed to have sexual intercourse, and
therefore their access to women’s bodies had to be preserved.
The most striking instance of this project was the discussion in sexological
and sex-reform circles of the idea that Europeans needed to abandon their
(superficially) monogamous sexual order and embrace some institutionalized
form of polygamy – or rather polygyny – instead. The most influential advocate
of this idea was Christian von Ehrenfels, a professor of philosophy in Prague
who made the case for polygyny in a barrage of articles and books published
between 1902 and 1910. Von Ehrenfels was actually a rather sensitive soul
who was thoroughly disgusted with the prevailing sexual culture among men
and appreciative of the cultural benefits of monogamy. But he held that this
cultural advance had come at a high, and no longer sustainable, biological
cost. By ensuring that most men – hence also inferior ones – reproduced, it was
eroding the biological quality of the European population.98 It also lowered the
birthrate, and so put Europe at a numerical disadvantage in the coming global
geopolitical and economic conflict with the polygamous Chinese. Von Ehrenfels
feared particularly the prospect of a Japanese conquest of China, which would
create an unstoppable juggernaut – “400 million healthy, clever, wily coolies –
virtuosi of reproduction – under the leadership of a military power of the first
order.” But even short of that, the success of Chinese workers in the global
labor market would eventually bring about “the complete Mongolization of
the whole population.”99
96

Rohleder, Die Masturbation, pp. X, 44, 189, 190, 204, 244, 343; Rohleder, Vorlesungen, vol. I,
p. 250.
97 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, pp. 468, 469, 475, 477.
98 Christian von Ehrenfels, “Zuchtwahl und Monogamie,” PAR 1 (1902/1903): 694, 696, 697,
691, 700.
99 Christian von Ehrenfels, “Monogamische Entwicklungsaussichten,” PAR 2 (1903/1904): 718;
Christian von Ehrenfels, “Die gelbe Gefahr,” SP 1 (1908): 188; Christian von Ehrenfels,
“Weltpolitik und Sexualpolitik,” SP 4 (1908): 476; von Ehrenfels, “Die gelbe Gefahr,” pp. 189,
201. On von Ehrenfels, see Reinhard Fabian, ed., Christian von Ehrenfels: Leben und Werk
(Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1986).

264

Conflict, 1908–1914

In short, the “biological indispensability of a sexual morality differentiated
by sex” was clear. Women should continue to be monogamous; men should be
polygynous. This would guarantee “virile selection,” by making it possible to
limit reproductive rights to only the most courageous, smartest, and strongest
men; and it would also guarantee adequate numbers, by making use of the
reproductive capacities of a maximum number of women.100
Von Ehrenfels argued, however, that such a system would have innumerable
more immediate benefits as well. The “demand for a ‘unitary morality’ for both
sexes” was a “fateful misconception,” because the whole “‘raison d’être’ of the
masculine sex per se” was to serve evolution by competing to impregnate as
many women as possible.101 Monogamy was in fact “that variety of sexual life
that . . . takes the needs and capacities of woman one-sidedly into account, at
the expense of those of the man”; its institutionalization was an “abnormal
state,” unnatural and unsustainable in the long term.102 Concretely, it had
obliged European men to create the double standard, prostitution, and all the
attendant evils, because “the polygynous instincts of the man cannot be decreed
away by any moral commandment.”103 It explained, too, why “in marriage
the man demands the subordination of the woman under his will” – as a form
of compensation for the violence he was doing to his own sexual selfhood.
And all of these ills had given rise to the understandable but unreasonable
demands of feminists.104 The “property-fanaticism” of many men and the
predatory excesses of capitalism were also expressions of men’s “unsatisfied
sex drive.” And because men in the monogamous family naturally focused on
their own children and wanted to pass on their wealth to them, monogamy
underlay the distribution of wealth according to privilege rather than merit –
which, inevitably, gave rise to revolutionary socialism as a very foolish but
understandable reaction.105
Von Ehrenfels developed a concrete set of proposals on the basis of these
ideas. European society must first of all exclude a large proportion of men from
reproduction – those who were not financially successful and thus could not
afford to support children, and/or those who were not found fit for military service. Because these men could not simply be forced to endure lifelong celibacy,
however, it would also be necessary to create a recognized and respected caste
of “courtesans” to serve their sexual needs. These women would live in communal, all-female households.106 For those men who were deemed worthy of
100

Von Ehrenfels, “‘Doppelte’ – und differenzierte Moral,” pp. 75, 82.
Ibid., pp. 67, 71.
102 Christian von Ehrenfels, “Die Ehe nach Mutterrecht,” PAR 4 (1905/1906): 635; Christian von
Ehrenfels, “Sexuales Ober- und Unterbewusstsein,” PAR 2 (1903/1904): 456.
103 Von Ehrenfels, “‘Doppelte’ – und differenzierte Moral,” pp. 75, 79.
104 Ibid., pp. 635, 636.
105 Christian von Ehrenfels, “Monogame und polygyne Sozialpolitik,” PAR 7 (1908/1909): 540.
106 Christian von Ehrenfels, “Die konstitutive Verderblichkeit der Monogamie und die Unentbehrlichkeit einer Sexualreform,” ARGB 4 (1907): 823; Christian von Ehrenfels, “Die sexuale
Reform,” PAR 2 (1903/1904): 986.
101

Men, Sex, and Science

265

reproduction and the women who bore their children, von Ehrenfels proposed
the creation of a new form of sexual relationship, the “reproductive marriage”
or “matriarchal marriage.” The women in these marriages, too, would live in
all-female communal households with their children – because one did not want
to create an “intimate, individual bond of love” between fathers and their children that would tempt the former to limit the number of their progeny in order
that each should have a larger inheritance.107 By dividing domestic labor among
a large number of women, moreover, these communal households would also
achieve much greater efficiency than the monogamous nuclear family.108 This in
turn would permit perhaps half of all women, including mothers, to undertake
professional careers, creating a massive new economic and cultural potential
while at the same time providing enormous opportunities for personal development and satisfaction for women.109 Husbands would visit their wives from
time to time, make child support payments, and have a right to make collaborative decisions in and to “oversee” the raising of their children. Wives would be
bound to sexual fidelity to these husbands, whereas men would be free to form
as many such marriages as they could afford; but regardless of the duration of
the marriage, men would remain financially responsible for all their children
until they reached adulthood.110
Von Ehrenfels’s plan was not the loopiest on the intellectual market at the
time. It was at least rivaled by Willibald Hentschel’s project for the creation
of “breeding-grounds for a heroic humanity.” Hentschel believed that “lifelong monogamous marriage has proven to be an ineffective method of racial
higher breeding”; that the “Germanic-Aryan” race was degenerating; and that
“Christian marriage has to go if we still want to think seriously about saving
our nation.” His answer was to create rural colonies whose initial population
would consist of 100 men and 1,000 women each. Here the men would live in
collective households and the women in individual huts, and the two would be
joined only in temporary marriages, which would end “with the sure beginning
of pregnancy” so that the husband could get on with impregnating his next
wife.111

107

Von Ehrenfels, “Die sexuale Reform,” p. 987; von Ehrenfels, “‘Doppelte’ – und differenzierte Moral,” p. 81; von Ehrenfels, “Die gelbe Gefahr,” pp. 196–197; von Ehrenfels, “Die
konstitutive Verderblichkeit,” p. 824.
108 Von Ehrenfels, “Die sexuale Reform,” pp. 974, 975.
109 Christian von Ehrenfels, “Das Mutterheim,” PAR 5 (1906/1907).
110 Von Ehrenfels, “Die sexuale Reform,” p. 976; von Ehrenfels, “Die Ehe nach Mutterrecht,”
p. 642.
111 Willibald Hentschel, Mittgart: Ein Weg zur Erneuerung der germanischen Rasse (Leipzig:
Fritsch, 1906); Willibald Hentschel, “Zuschrift betreffend den Artikel von A. Ploetz, ‘Willibald
Hentschels Vorschlag zur Hebung unsrer Rasse,’” ARGB 2 (1905): 889; Hentschel, quoted in
Jean Bornträger, “Die Beduetung der öffentlichen Sittlichkeit für die Zukunft unseres Volkes,”
Volkswart 11 (1918): 67; Willibald Hentschel, Vom Aufsteigenden Leben (Leipzig: Matthes,
1922), p. 165. On Hentschel, see Peter Emil Becker, Zur Geschichte der Rassenhygiene: Wege
ins Dritte Reich (Stuttgart: Georg Thieme, 1988), pp. 219–276.

266

Conflict, 1908–1914

Both von Ehrenfels and Hentschel published first in journals devoted to race
hygiene and Nordic racial theory – the Archiv für Rassen- und Gesellschaftsbiologie (ARGB) and the Politisch-Anthropologische Revue (PAR). But the
proposition that men were actually by nature polygamous was virtually ubiquitous in sexological discourse. It should therefore not be surprising that Marcuse granted von Ehrenfels plenty of space in Sexual-Probleme – including five
essays in the first volume of the journal, almost one-eighth of its total length.
He also published a blistering response in which Bruno Meyer excoriated von
Ehrenfels as a “breeding-fanatic” and a “race-fear freak”; but clearly Marcuse
himself did not regard von Ehrenfels’s ideas as indiscussable.112 Nor was he
alone; in fact, von Ehrenfels was widely respected, and his ideas were widely
discussed. Sigmund Freud began his own essay in the 1908 volume of SexualProbleme with a reference to an “important train of thought” in von Ehrenfels’s
1907 book on “sexual ethics” and invited him to speak to the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society.113 One contributor to the journal in 1910 precisely replicated
von Ehrenfels’s argument in favor of recognizing the value of the “polygamous
instinct in men.”114 Another, in 1913, regarded monogamy as “the consequence of blackmail committed by women exploiting a temporary condition
of diminished responsibility in the man” in the early stages of heterosexual
love.115 In the first volume of Geschlecht und Gesellschaft, Friedrich Erhard
observed that “nature shows clearly enough that . . . the man requires more
than one woman,” because men were more sexually excitable and because
women “definitively cease at about the age of 45 years to be desirable and a
sexual creature . . . the man, in contrast, twenty years later.”116 Another essay
in the same year found that the tribes of ancient Germany and Scandinavia had
practiced polygamy and argued for a “return to ancestral virtues.”117 Isaak
Spier-Irving held up instead the ancient Hebrew practice of polygyny as the
model for modern Germans.118 And even some men close to the BfM were
sympathetic. Iwan Bloch conceded in 1907 that “racial biology, if it really
wants to achieve ‘breeding successes,’” would have to follow von Ehrenfels in
“declaring polygamy desirable in certain cases.”119 August Forel supported the
notion that men were “driven to have sex with as many women as possible and
to beget as many children as possible.”120
112

Bruno Meyer, “Etwas von positiver Sexualreform,” SP 4 (1908): 715, 720, 791, 807, 810–811.
Freud, “Die ‘kulturelle’ Sexualmoral,” p. 121; Herman Nunberg and Ernst Federn, eds., Minutes of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, Volume II: 1908 –1910 (New York: International
Universities Press, Inc., 1962), minutes for 23 December 1908.
114 G. Weiss, “Gattin – Geliebte,” SP 6 (1910): 137.
115 August Hallermeyer, review of Adam Ander, Mutterschaft oder Emanzipation? (1913), SP 10
(1914): 216.
116 Erhard, “Auch ein Wort zur Ehereform,” p. 507.
117 S. Conz, “Monogamie und Kindesrecht,” GG 1 (1906): 184.
118 Isaak Spier-Irving, “Das Verhältnis,” GG 5 (1910): 61.
119 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, p. 781.
120 Forel, Sexuelle Frage, pp. 113, 577.
113

Men, Sex, and Science

267

IV. Women, Sex, and Horror
Fantasies like those of von Ehrenfels and Hentschel, in which men got to reproduce without having to live with women, can be seen as part of a powerful
current of outright misogyny in sexological thought. In this of course they
merely echoed developments in Central European culture more broadly; for
the period around the turn of the century saw the publication of a number of virulently misogynistic – and quite widely read – works, most of
which purported to be based on modern biomedical science. The message
of all the misogynist texts of the period was fundamentally the same: that
woman’s sole purpose is reproduction, and that therefore she is contemptible.
The most emblematic of these texts was Paul Möbius’s rant, On the Physiological Feeble-Mindedness of Woman (1900), which argued that women
were “intermediate between a child and a man,” with smaller and less welldeveloped brains, driven by instincts that made them “animal-like, dependent,
confident and cheerful,” suggestible, impulsive, and gossipy. All these characteristics, Möbius believed, derived from women’s role in reproduction: bearing
and then caring for children was stultifying work, and therefore “female feeblemindedness is not only present, but necessary.”121 Sex reform was good evidence: Ellen Key was “without doubt a very competent woman in her way, and
look what ghastly things she’s scribbled about love and marriage.” As for her
colleagues, they indulged in “Darwinist enthusiasms” and waxed lyrical about
“communion of souls and other silliness.”122 Otto Weininger’s Sex and Character, published in 1903, recycled most of what Möbius had already said.123
Woman, Weininger believed, is not a subject but an object; women have no
self, no “I,” no Eigenwert (value in and of themselves), no soul. Accordingly,
they have no capacity for logic, morality, honor, genius, honesty, or action, no
free will, no love, and no shame.124 They exist only as sexual objects; women
are “nothing but sexuality” or, more simply still, “nothing.” Their only purpose and aim is “coitus” (or “procuring” coitus). They are given meaning,
identity, indeed existence only by sex, by a man, in fact by “the phallus.”125
“Only when the man becomes sexual does woman come into existence”; or,
in other words, “only when Something becomes Nothing can Nothing become
121

Paul Möbius, Ueber den physiologischen Schwachsinn des Weibes (Halle: Marhold, 1908),
pp. V, 8, 9, 10, 14.
122 Ibid., pp. 14, 17, VII, 11.
123 For Möbius’s quite contemptuous response, see Paul Möbius, Geschlecht und Unbescheidenheit (Halle: Marhold, 1904). See Susan C. Anderson, “Otto Weininger’s Masculine
Utopia,” German Studies Review 19 (1996) or Matthias Wolfes, “Otto Weininger: ‘Geschlecht
und Charakter’: Das Werk und seine Wirkung,” Historische Mitteilungen 13 (2000):
76–93.
124 Otto Weininger, Geschlecht und Charakter: Eine prinzipielle Untersuchung (Vienna: Wilhelm
Braumüller, 1925), pp. 234, 253, 248.
125 Ibid., pp. 108, 393, 340, 332, 396.

268

Conflict, 1908–1914

Something.” Thus, woman was “man’s guilt become flesh”; woman is “sin, as
a possibility in the man.”126
Mainstream sexologists were less extreme; but many of them shared the
assumption that women were by nature and of necessity intellectually inferior
to men. Again, even many female sex reformers – such as Ellen Key – thought
of women primarily as mothers and creatures of feeling rather than intellect.
But they thought motherhood to be of transcendent importance, and hence
sacred. Many of the sexologists were content merely to point out, as Albert
Moll did in 1912, that “great new achievements in the realms of science, art
and technology are almost all exclusively thanks to the masculine sex,” and
that where that was not the case, the women in question were generally so masculine that “one can say without further ado that she was not a woman.”127
Iwan Bloch believed that men and women were “different, but equally valuable”; but his discussion of what women were really like consisted almost
entirely of unfavorable comparisons with men. Women were suggestible, emotive, excitable, tired easily, and tended toward religion rather than rationality;
they were “more monotone and conservative” rather than “variable and progressive” and were “much more . . . sexual than the man.”128 The problem of
woman’s emancipation was this: “How can the development and perfection of
her higher nature be achieved without too much compromising and obscuring
her peculiar character as a sexual being?”129 For Bloch, in other words, what
was specific to women as sexual beings was not “high.” Implicitly, “high”
meant “male.” Max Rosenthal too believed that men “are able to think more
critically and deeply,” whereas women were “more ‘emotive’”; women were
“not only more stubbornly conservative, reactionary if you will; they are also
less imaginative.”130 Hermann Rohleder remarked in passing that only “people
who think more deeply” had a well-developed moral sense, “which explains
why the man, mentally superior to woman, has a higher morality.”131
The sexological journals sometimes printed rather crass versions of such
arguments. One review in Geschlecht und Gesellschaft in 1910, for example,
critiqued a work that argued that women were subhuman, concluding that
the fact “that the physical and mental capacities of the man in general exceed
those of the woman probably no one will dispute” but that this was no reason to deny women’s “membership in the human race.”132 And in 1913 the
journal carried an article that held that the influence of the “sexual glands” on
126

Ibid., pp. 458, 459, 458, 396, 395, 393. On Weininger’s aversion to sexual intercourse, see
particularly p. 342.
127 Moll, Handbuch, pp. 317, 341.
128 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, pp. 76, 85, 79, 82, 81, 70.
129 Ibid., pp. 74–75.
130 Max Thal [Rosenthal], Mutterrecht, Frauenfrage und Weltanschauung (Breslau: Schottlaender,
1903), pp. 5, 46–47, 49, 71.
131 Rohleder, Vorlesungen, vol. I, p. 20.
132 B., “Sind Weiber Menschen?” Sexualreform 5 (1910): 137.

Men, Sex, and Science

269

“mental processes” was stronger in women than in man, that women’s brains
were starved of blood by the demands of their reproductive apparatus, and that
as a result women had only mimetic intelligence and remained “their whole
lives long big children.”133
Obviously, then, contempt for women was quite widespread among male
sexologists. Fear of women’s sexuality, however, was certainly no less common. This fear was expressed in various forms. Among the most common was
that women would exploit sexual difference to gain power over men. Thus
Bruno Meyer believed “that women misuse their better capacity for life without sexual intercourse to keep men ‘dangling’ and to bring them into shameful
subjection.”134 Another author observed in Geschlecht und Gesellschaft in
1913 that woman’s “passivity” was “the best and most successful weapon
with which to make the man submissive to her wishes.”135 Both merely echoed
Krafft-Ebing, who had remarked that “the weakness of the man with respect
to the woman lies in the power of his sexual needs.”136
On the other hand, many men also feared that women were too sexual. Max
Marcuse, for example, believed that “so-called frigid women” could actually
achieve sexual satisfaction “in coitus arbitrarily drawn out by the man – to the
great ‘delight’ of his wife and with great injury to his own nervous system.”137
Max Rosenthal found that extramarital sex was the result of men’s “stronger
sexual nature” and their “brutality” regarding sex; but “if we ask who is to
blame for it,” the answer was “the obliging cooperation and the easy venality
of the female sex in general.”138 Bruno Meyer fantasized about the heartless
woman who “submits to the foreign conqueror” and “laughs with her subjugator” about her “cuckolded dummy” of a husband. Others ground their
teeth over the sexual curiosity of young German women about visitors to
Germany from Africa, the Middle East, or Asia. Max Marcuse believed that
it was a “fact of experience . . . that members of an alien, particularly often
precisely an . . . ‘inferior’ race exercise an extraordinarily strong influence on
women.”139
Such fears became increasingly intense in the last years before World War I.
A striking instance is Isaak Spier-Irving’s discussion in Sexual-Probleme in
1913 of the character of Lulu in Frank Wedekind’s play Erdgeist and a number
of similar female figures in drama and the daily press. These “Lulu-figures,”
he observed, illustrated the “sinister influence of the purely animal-feminine
133

A. Lorand, “Der Einfluss des Geschlechtstriebes sowie der Geschlechtsunterschiede auf die
Intelligez,” GG 9 (1913): 186, 188, 189.
134 Meyer, “Immer noch einmal,” p. 136.
135 Johannes Marr, “Die Jagd nach dem Manne,” GG 8 (1913): 211.
136 Krafft-Ebing, Psychopathia, pp. 14–15.
137 Marcuse, “Sexualphysiologie und Sexualpsychologie des Weibes,” p. 773.
138 Thal [Rosenthal], Mutterrecht, p. 90.
139 Meyer, “Immer noch einmal,” p. 134; W. Wiest, “Exotische Liebe,” GG 5 (1910): 89; Max
Marcuse, “Die sexologische Bedeutung des ‘Falles Elsie Siegel,’” SP 2 (1909): 565.

270

Conflict, 1908–1914

on the man.” A woman could subvert a man’s intelligence, humiliate him,
“wear him down, diminish him, make out of a spiritual hero a miserable,
whimpering weakling and knave. . . . She has been given by nature the power
to be desirable, and this weapon is stronger than all reason and all the mental
superiority of men.” Such characters could be found throughout literature and
history; there were “Lulu-characters everywhere the eye roves.” Education and
tradition, he believed, forced most women to hide their sexual desire; “‘Lulu’
may be pathological, but a bit of pathology lurks in the feminine soul.”140
Another author warned in Geschlecht und Gesellschaft in the same year that
“no woman . . . stands so high that she does not carry within her a faint, even
if imperceptible taint of the whore.”141 Max Marcuse believed that “woman
is by nature an exhibitionist.”142 Oscar A. H. Schmitz, in 1914, even found
that “if not contained, women’s sexual nature” was “a raging torrent, which,
without firm banks, floods everything.”143
A particularly odd instance of such fears was the discussion of children’s testimony in sexual abuse cases. For although they classified attraction to children
as a form of perversion, there was a very clear preference among the sexologists
for seeing the children involved in such cases not as victims but as perpetrators.
Albert Moll, for example, believed that men almost never escaped conviction
in such cases but were mostly innocent.144 Otto Adler believed one could only
understand the problem of child sexual abuse if one knew “what a gift for lying
sensually precocious children already have and how well they know how to
act.”145 And in addressing the arrest of a large ring of pederasts in Breslau in
1913, Sexual-Probleme quoted a newspaper report to the effect that “not the
girls but the men were the victims.”146 Such assertions were commonplace in
sexology.
And yet, it was not only women’s sexuality that seemed dangerous to the
sexologists; for they regarded sexuality per se as dangerous. Discussion of the
potential dangers of masturbation is one example. But one sexologist or another
found almost any sexual practice to be dangerous and disturbing. Alfred Hegar
warned that “frequent copulation” could “not be borne . . . in the long run without injury.”147 Albert Moll wrote of “how powerful the organic shock” of the
“process of detumescence” was; he reported that “particularly in men . . . death
has been . . . observed to be a direct consequence of intercourse” and that “not
140

Isaak Spier-Irving, “Lulucharaktere!” SP 9 (1913): 677, 678, 686, 687.
Lothar Eisen, “Psychologie des Warenhauses,” GG 8 (1913): 396.
142 Marcuse, “Sexualphysiologie und Sexualpsychologie des Weibes,” p. 778.
143 Oscar A. H. Schmitz, “Die Notwendigkeit der doppelten Moral,” SP 10 (1914): 486, 487,
488, 489.
144 Moll, Das Sexualleben des Kindes, p. 208. See Brigitte Kerchner, “‘Unbescholtene Bürger’ und
‘gefährliche Mädchen’ um die Jahrhundertwende,” Historische Anthropologie 6 (1998): 1–32.
145 Otto Adler, “Das Sexualleben des Kindes,” GG 4 (1909): 449.
146 “Mädchen als Verführer,” SP 9 (1913): 785.
147 Hegar, Geschlechtstrieb, p. 5.
141

Men, Sex, and Science

271

seldom the onset of epilepsy has been reported” (although he went on to admit
that such disasters were “exceptions”).148 Max von Gruber, a professor of
hygiene in Munich, reported that “the man’s nervous system suffers with particular frequency” due to “sexual intemperance.”149 Christian von Ehrenfels
believed that “quite a few” men planted “the seeds of their death” through
sexual excess during their honeymoons.150 Hermann Rohleder believed
that sexual excess caused pathologies such as masturbation, pederasty, obsessive sexual daydreaming, inability to concentrate, and job loss.151 Contraception – particularly coitus interruptus, but also the use of condoms – was made
responsible for all kinds of ills, too, including phrenocardia (imaginary chest
pains), neurasthenia, hysteria, phobias, panic attacks, erectile dysfunction, back
pain, moodiness, obsessional thinking, melancholy, paranoia, headaches, memory loss, asthmatic complaints, premature aging, and death.152
Occasionally it was clear in fact that many of the sexologists found their
own sexual drives puzzling and disturbing. Christian von Ehrenfels’s whole
elaborate vision of a sex-segregated reproductive order was a response to his
discovery of the crudity and animalism of men’s (and it appears his own) sexual
culture. Within even “relatively sensitive men,” he found, there lurked a “different, lower, animalistic personality.”153 Iwan Bloch believed that men hired
prostitutes because of a secret desire “to renounce and abase oneself through
submission to an inferior creature.”154 Rohleder was “ashamed” to confess
that most people had the urge only to have sex, not to make babies; and he
found it troubling that even “the greatest genius, the most important personality comes down from the heights in sexual pleasure and is in that moment like
an . . . animal.”155 Bruno Meyer believed that the “unparalleled sensations of
pleasure” of intercourse were there to help people overcome the “undeniable
nastiness of the sex act,” which was fundamentally an “uncomfortable, disgusting, shameless business.”156 And Albert Eulenburg felt that after sex it was
natural for a man to feel “disgust” and “revulsion” and a desire to be cruel to
his partner, because he “experiences it . . . as a form of shame and humiliation
that he has let himself be overwhelmed by sexual pressure in this way.”157
148

Moll, Handbuch, p. 181.
Max von Gruber, Hygiene des Geschlechtslebens (Stuttgart: Moritz, 1905), pp. 53, 55.
150 Von Ehrenfels, “Sexuales Ober- und Unterbewusstsein,” p. 465.
151 Rohleder, Vorlesungen, vol. I, pp. 351, 356, 360.
152 “Sexuelle Ursachen nervöser Herzleiden,” SP 8 (1912): 340; Ludwig Löwenfeld, “Über den
sexuellen Präventivverkehr und seine Bedeutung als Ursache von Nervenleiden,” SP 8 (1912):
757–774; “Ein typisches Krankheitsbild infolge von Coitus interruptus,” SP 9 (1913): 269;
Ernst Reh, “Über naturgemässe Empfängnisverhütung,” GG 1 (1906): 236.
153 Von Ehrenfels, “Sexuales Ober- und Unterbewusstsein,” pp. 462, 461, 463; von Ehrenfels,
“Die gelbe Gefahr,” p. 192.
154 Bloch, Das Sexualleben, pp. 361–362.
155 Rohleder, Vorlesungen, vol. I, pp. 37, 43.
156 Meyer, “Immer noch einmal,” p. 129.
157 Eulenburg, Sadismus, pp. 13, 16.
149

272

Conflict, 1908–1914

As the language of these passages often makes clear, however, even where
men subjected themselves to such self-examination, it was clear who was
ultimately to blame for their unease. This is not surprising, because, again,
almost all the sexologists to one degree or another defined women as sex,
and men as intellect. The sexologists’ distaste for and fear of sexuality in
general, then, cannot really be separated from their distaste for and fear of
women.
V. The Women’s Movement and Sexological Reaction, 1909–1914
The sexological discussion of all these issues was complex, fragmented, and
diverse; on each of them multiple divergent and often conflicting positions
can be found in the periodical and monographic literature. The sexologists’
discourse ranged from the relatively mild and nuanced (Iwan Bloch and
Hermann Rohleder) to the extraordinarily crass (Bruno Meyer and Christian
von Ehrenfels). And the foregoing pages will have made clear that the distinction between sexology and sex reform is to some extent artificial, because a
number of influential men were important participants in both discussions. In
aggregate, however, it is difficult not to see a simple message in the thinking of
most of these men: they didn’t like women much but wanted to have sex with
whatever females they could get their hands on, often in a manner just shy of
brutal; they didn’t want to have to deal with a lot of feelings and emotional
folderol about it; and they found the whole subject rather unpleasant. Nothing
could be further from Helene Stöcker’s dream of heterosexual love as “the
wonderfully harmonious union of all physical and mental energies” and “the
crown of life.”158
As the role of the women’s movements in public discussions of sexuality
grew in the decade before World War I, this contrast grew ever more radical.
Backed further and further into a political and intellectual corner, the sexologists collectively became increasingly crude in their denigration and fear of
women. The response of sexology to the women’s movement more broadly is
revealing in this respect and helps to put the discussion of sexual difference
in context. For as women made growing (if still very modest) gains, overall
the responses of sexologists grew increasingly sour. From about 1909 or 1910,
both major sexological journals began to carry a growing number of articles
skeptical of women’s emancipation.
Vanselow’s Geschlecht und Gesellschaft was relatively circumspect and
never devoted a great deal of space to explicit denunciations of women’s
emancipation. By 1910, however, a reactionary note began to creep into its
pages. In that year, for example, the journal’s supplement dismissed feminist
views on the question of whether women teachers who got married should
158

Helene Stöcker, “Ehe und Sexualreform,” in BfM, Mutterschutz und Sexualreform: Referate
und Leisätze des I. Internationalen Kongresses für Muttershutz und Sexualreform in Dresden
28./30. Setptember 1911 (Breslau: Preuss & Jünger, 1912), pp. 107, 108.

Men, Sex, and Science

273

be fired, because those who complained were “women who feel just as masculine as they outwardly appear.”159 In 1911 and 1912, the journal carried
multiple articles defending the double standard and implicitly critiquing, for
example, the IAF. In the 1913 volume Robert Hessen, author of numerous popular pamphlets championing a “natural” sexual order, characterized feminists
as suffering from “systematic mendacity”; their “ugliness and petty egotism”
were a “painful warning sign of national decline.”160 Another author in the
same volume found the “problematic woman” to be “torture on the nerves”;
and he defined as problematic “the modern woman as such, so far as she participates in . . . ‘women’s emancipation.’” Women “have at bottom no mental
life, rather they are merely a complex of passions and feelings”; feminists were
all suffering from “anomalies in the area of their sexual life . . . , repressed or
excessive sexuality.”161 Isaak Spier-Irving found that the English suffragettes
were “women without inhibitions” whose “tricks” had “to be explained as
diverted sexuality” that produced “fanatical hatred” for men; for “otherwise
the actions of the suffragettes simply cannot be understood.”162
Sexual-Probleme was even more vehement. In the early years, its critiques
of women’s emancipation were relatively moderate, often presented in “yes,
but” form – yes, there should be “economic, social and political equality for
women,” for example, but education for girls should not train “competitors
for men in all areas of endeavor” and “stunt the psychical-physical peculiarity of feminine nature.”163 By 1913 and 1914, in contrast, Sexual-Probleme
devoted a substantial proportion of its pages to openly vituperative attacks
on the women’s movement. Two themes dominated these attacks: that the
women’s movement sought to dominate men, not emancipate women, and
that it was un-German. Max Marcuse held, for example, that “it is everywhere evident that the goal of the feminist struggle, which has nothing against
discrimination against men, is not the achievement of equal rights but of privileges for women.”164 Hans Fehlinger found that the new forms of women’s
work attracted “a striking number of virile types” who were more typical of
British than German women.165 Another author urged German men not to
engage in “self-castration” by permitting “subversive elements” to introduce
English-style marital cruelty and divorce laws into their country. August Hallermeyer warned that the “weaknesses of the female psyche,” conditioned by
menstruation and pregnancy, “could become the ruin of the nation” and that
159

“Stellungnahme gegen das Zölibat der Lehrerinnen und Staatsbeamtinnen,” Sexual-Reform
5 (1910): 69.
160 Robert Hessen, “Anwendung der Kraftphilosophie auf die Sexualprobleme,” GG 8 (1913):
246, 247, 250.
161 Ernst Bernhard, “Die problematische Frau,” GG 8 (1912): 76, 80, 81.
162 Isaak Spier-Irving, “Das hemmungslose Weib,” GG 9 (1913): 57–58.
163 Ernst Baars, review of Max von Gruber, Mädchenerziehung und Rassenhygiene (1909), in
SP 6 (1910): 857.
164 M. M., review of Adele Schreiber, ed., Mutterschaft (1912), SP 9 (1913): 140, 141.
165 Hans Fehlinger, “Gedanken über sexuelle Anpassung,” SP 9 (1913): 713, 4.

274

Conflict, 1908–1914

the “tyranny of women in America demonstrates this danger with frightful
clarity. . . . The flip-side of the emancipation of woman is the enslavement of
man.”166
Shared fear of and contempt for feminism did not reconcile sexology with
the morality campaigners in these years. In fact, many sexologists regarded
Christians and their repressive sexual morality as the real authors of the sexual misery of their times. Max Marcuse believed in 1909, for example, that
there was an “intimate relationship between piety and sexual debauchery”;
and Isaak Spier-Irving warned in Geschlecht und Gesellschaft in 1910 that
“secretiveness” in sexual matters merely steered children “onto the path of the
forbidden and prohibited.”167 Nevertheless, in the last years before the war, a
broader sense of moral crisis similar to that prevalent among the morality campaigners did creep into sexological discourse. Thus in 1910, Sexual-Probleme
carried an article in which the race theorist Heinrich Driesmans claimed that
“the ‘crimes against morality’ of ancient times were childish games compared
to the cynically refined indulgences of our day.”168 In the same journal in
1912, the social reformer and cultural critic Victor Noack warned that “a
sadism packaged in sentimental excess . . . speaks ever more brutally” in popular film, and that “in most of the awful ‘blockbusters’ violence against women
is exploited for thrills.” In the following year, Bruno Meyer deplored the “cinema plague” as a “social danger.”169 In 1913, Geschlecht und Gesellschaft
carried an extraordinary rant explaining that capitalism’s commodification of
absolutely everything was at bottom sexual, and that the modern department
store was the “most poetic . . . revelation of modern eroticism” because most
salesgirls sold sex on the side and the masses of women who shopped there
were motivated by “sexual covetousness.”170
In fact, some sexologists began to suggest that public discussion of sexuality was itself fundamentally objectionable. Thus, for example, Otto Adler
found in 1909 that although the development of sexual science was imperative, “the sexual question is . . . discussed a little bit too much in the general
public.”171 In the same year Paul Näcke deplored the fact that Iwan Bloch’s
Sexual Life of Our Times had sold 15,000 copies in one year, a figure that he
believed showed that the book was serving not “real thirst for knowledge” but
“common salaciousness.”172 One skeptic even complained in Sexual-Probleme
166

C. Klamroth, “Vestigia terrent!” SP 10 (1914): 97, 95; August Hallermeyer, review of Adam
Ander, Mutterschaft oder Emanzipation? (1913) SP 10 (1914): 216.
167 Max Marcuse, “Die sexologische Bedeutung des ‘Falles Elsie Siegel,’” SP 2 (1909): 564; Isaak
Spier-Irving, “Sexualität in der Jugend,” GG 5 (1910): 43.
168 Heinrich Driesmans, “Sittlichkeitsverbrechen in alter und neuer Zeit,” SP 6 (1910): 182.
169 Victor Noack, “‘Schlafburschen’ und ‘Möblierte,’” SP 8 (1912): 391; Bruno Meyer, “Zum
‘I. Deutschen Kinokongress,’” SP 9 (1913): 118, 119.
170 Eisen, “Psychologie,” pp. 390, 391.
171 Adler, “Das Sexualleben des Kindes,” p. 442.
172 P. Näcke, “Die sittliche Gefährdung der Grossstadt-Jugend durch die Geschäftsauslagen,”
SP 5 (1909): 451; P. Näcke, “Die moderne Übertreibung der Sexualität,” AKAK 39 (1910):
132, 122.

Men, Sex, and Science

275

in 1910 that discussion of sexual problems was increasingly dominated by “the
sensation-seeking cultural rabble.”173
One important feature of this broader backlash, finally, was of course a
marked turn toward homophobia among some sexologists in the wake of the
scandal trials of 1907–1909. Albert Moll, for example, after being in the 1890s
one of the architects of the theory that homosexuality was inborn and should
not be punished, argued by 1908 that many heterosexual acts were legally suppressed too, and that there was no reason why “qualitatively abnormal” desires
should be treated differently.174 Isaak Spier-Irving, writing in Geschlecht und
Gesellschaft in 1912, reported that “a lesbian high tide has set in over Germany
and indeed all of civilized Europe” and was threatening to “sweep aside natural
activities with irresistible force.” In this crisis, all intimate female friendships
were “highly suspect.”175 Bruno Meyer argued in Geschlecht und Gesellschaft
in 1909 (while still advocating the repeal of §175) that homosexuality was
“always the result of a sexual life in which either abstinence or excess have
dulled or over-excited natural feelings and thereby led to un-natural lusts.”176
In 1911 he suggested that lesbians were responsible for the “sexual misery of
men,” the “growth of prostitution” and venereal disease, and the decline in the
birthrate.177
The connection between these two trends is obvious. Male sex scientists were
driven by the successes of the women’s movements more and more to emphasize
sexual difference rooted in physiology or anatomy, and hence to argue that it
was essential and unchangeable. There was, therefore, less and less room in their
conceptual world for people whose desires jumped the (to them) unbridgeable
gap between male and female. Men could not desire men because, if they did,
they would be like women. Homosexuality was impermissible because men
and women could not possibly understand each other.
VI. Race and Death in Sexology
Commitment to the unalterable importance of sexual difference was not the
only respect in which sexologists denied the unity of the human species, however. Racism too played an important and growing role in sexological discussions.
A kind of offhand racial prejudice was certainly present in some earlier sexology texts. Thus, for example, Alfred Hegar believed that Africans, Asians,

173

Erich Liliethal, “Das Sexualproblem beim Fünfuhrtee,” SP 6 (1910): 802, 804.
Albert Moll, “Sexuelle Perversionen, Geisteskrankheit und Zurechnungsfähigkeit,” GG
3 (1908): 65–66.
175 Isaak Spier-Irving, “Die Homosexualität der Frauen unserer Zeit,” GG 7 (1912): 227, 226,
233, 231.
176 Bruno Meyer, “Der Alb der ‘Sittlichkeitsverbrechen’ im Strafgesetzbuche,” GG 4 (1909): 174,
175, 176.
177 Bruno Meyer, “Homosexualität und Strafrecht,” AKAK 44 (1911): 307, 308, 309.
174

276

Conflict, 1908–1914

and workers had stronger libidos than did white people; Iwan Bloch, in his
earlier writings on sexual perversions, was convinced that the Middle East
was the “worst breeding-ground” of homosexuality.178 And August Forel was
comprehensively and vulgarly racist, asserting at various points in The Sexual Question that Jews were oversexed, commercial, and therefore deeply
involved in the sex trade; that Africans were characterized by “mental inferiority . . . unbridled sexual passion” and “cruel barbarism”; and that the aim
of future racial breeding programs must be to give contraceptive knowledge
to “the sick, the incompetent, the idiots, the bad, the inferior races” while
teaching superior people to breed generously.179
On this issue, too, however, sexology was quite divided. Albert Eulenburg,
for example, warned already in 1896 against “delusional and useless play”
at “prophecies of the end of the world” regarding the “Slavic or Mongolian
racial high tide” or “American Yankeedom.”180 Max Marcuse, although he
was very interested in Christian von Ehrenfels’s ideas about polygyny, distanced himself from the latter’s obsession with the “Yellow Peril.”181 In 1912,
Marcuse devoted almost sixty pages of his journal to rebutting anti-Semitic
beliefs regarding marriages between Jewish and non-Jewish Germans; along
the way he comprehensively demolished contemporary racial theory, concluding that it “has nothing in common with science.”182 And in the following
year, in the context of a heated public debate over sexual relations in Germany’s
colonies, Sexual-Probleme carried articles poking fun at the idea of racial purity
as a product of extraordinary historical ignorance; deploring the misogynistic
outpourings of one race theorist as “grotesque distortions”; and citing approvingly the view of a leading anthropologist that Africans, Asians, and Europeans constituted together “a complete and self-contained unity, the human
species.”183
Nevertheless, sexologists defined their discipline primarily as a biological
science; and sexology therefore did engage actively with racist theory, and vice
versa. The most obvious example, again, is Marcuse’s decision to publish the
views of Christian von Ehrenfels, whose earlier articles appeared in ARGB and
PAR. Although primarily focused on other issues, those journals did regularly
publish discussions of sexuality; and in that intellectual context von Ehrenfels’s
ideas were certainly not outlandish. In 1909, for example, the PAR carried an
article by the French race theorist Georges Vacher de Lapouge that rehearsed

178

Hegar, Geschlechtstrieb, p. 4; Bloch, Beiträge, p. 26.
Forel, Sexuelle Frage, pp. 203, 483, 504, 554–555, 577.
180 Quoted in Sigusch, Geschichte, p. 246.
181 Max Marcuse, “Das Liebesleben deutscher Studenten,” SP 4 (1908): 679; Meyer, “Etwas,”
pp. 808, 810.
182 Max Marcuse, “Die christlich-jüdische Mischehe,” SP 8 (1912): 691–749 (quotation p. 728).
183 Gustav Fritsch, “Über Rassenmischungen”; “Die Weiberwirtschaft unserer Zeit”; and “Über
die Mischlingsfrage,” all in SP 9 (1913): 675, 36, 38, 34.
179

Men, Sex, and Science

277

many of the same arguments von Ehrenfels had made.184 Willibald Hentschel’s
ideas, too, were made available to the broader public primarily in the PAR and
the ARGB.185
Nor were von Ehrenfels’s essays in Sexual-Probleme the only or last example of slippage in the other direction. In 1913, for example, Sexual-Probleme
carried an article in which August Hallermeyer, who was active on the radical right-wing anti-Semitic fringe in Munich, warned that Europeans were
degenerating due to “indiscriminate mixing with inferior races,” wars, the
welfare state, the humanitarian ideal of Christianity, democracy, “pleasureseeking,” the “over-valuing of personal comfort,” and capitalism. Hallermeyer
warned that soon the “coolies” would “be firmly established in all four quarters of the globe and given their limitless reproduction soon overrun all other
races,” including “the most highly developed, the Aryan race.” He recommended “selective-breeding measures on a large scale” that would make the
Aryans so superior that it would be “easy to dominate the earth and hold the
other races in check.” Hallermeyer also recommended the abolition of parliamentary government and the formation of a new eugenic religion.186 In a
follow-up article early in 1914, Hallermeyer pointed out the “indispensability
of war as the final decider in questions of race”; racial questions, he explained,
were “pure questions of power,” and “we demand that the earth belong to the
fittest.”187 In 1906, similarly, Geschlecht und Gesellschaft had carried an essay
on reproductive ethics that concluded that “the sexual crime of psychic and
physical abortion will degrade our master-race into slaves of Asiatic despots
or American parvenus” unless men and women ended their “unhappy struggle
for hegemony” and started producing more babies.188 In 1914 it published an
essay suggesting that the European peoples had to band together – and have
more babies – to face the “Slavic or the Yellow Peril.”189 Such radical visions of
global racial conflict were not predominant in sexological discourse; but they
are evidence of how porous the boundary between sexual and racial science
was.
184

George Vacher de Lapouge, “Die Krisis in der sexuellen Moral,” PAR 7 (1908/1909): 419,
420, 421, 416.
185 See Willibald Hentschel, “Zuschrift betreffend den Artikel von A. Ploetz, ‘Willibald Hentschels
Vorschlag zur Hebung unsrer Rasse,’” ARGB 2 (1905): 889; W. Hentschel, “Zur ‘Krisis in der
sexuellen Moral,’” PAR 7 (1908/1909): 550–553; W. Hentschel, “Zucht – eine Lebensfrage
für die weisse Rasse,” PAR 8 (1909–1910): 231–243; W. Hentschel, “Landwirtschaftliche
Betriebsgesellschaft Mittgart,” PAR 11 (1913/1913): 329–332.
186 August Hallernemyer, “Rassenveredelung und Sexualreform,” SP 9 (1913): 175, 176, 182,
231, 187, 229, 243, 248. On Hallermeyer, see Derek Hastings, Catholicism and the Roots of
Nazism (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), pp. 41–42.
187 August Hallermeyer, “Über die rassenbiologische Bedeutung der Kriege,” SP 10 (1914):
29, 28.
188 S. Conz, “Monogramie und Kindesrecht,” GG 1 (1906): 192.
189 Max Seber, “Der geburtenrückgang im Verhältnis zu Staat und Gesellschaft,” GG 9 (1914):
220, 221, 222, 224.

278

Conflict, 1908–1914

In contrast to the sex reformers involved in the BfM, however, sexologists
were rather skeptical of eugenics. Those closer to sex reform were exceptions.
August Forel is the most striking example; his enthusiasm for eugenics was
even more radical than that of most in the BfM. Iwan Bloch paid relatively
little attention to eugenics but agreed “that only healthy people, or at least
those burdened with only such abnormalities or diseases as are not physically
or mentally detrimental to their offspring, should mate.”190 Paul Näcke established an extensive catalog of people who should be sterilized (sexual offenders,
habitual criminals, epileptics, alcoholics, the mentally ill, and hysterics); and
Sexual-Probleme carried an article in 1910 that favored not only that proposal
but also castration for sex offenders.191
Most conservative sexologists, however, were either uninterested in eugenics
or explicitly skeptical. Thus Alfred Hegar, already in 1894, had warned against
passing eugenic laws, which would create “very substantial limitation of individual freedom,” particularly because “a great deal in heredity is still obscure,
unexplained and not clear enough to formulate legal precepts.”192 Eighteen
years later, Albert Moll would make the same argument, noting that “for the
most part we’re still feeling around in the dark” when it came to heredity.
Noting that some states in the United States had adopted such measures, Moll
hoped that “these proposals will not be converted into action in Germany, and
that our race-improvers don’t gain too much influence over legislation.”193
Max von Gruber conceded in 1905 that it was morally a “crime” to have
children if one knew they “will be stunted, crippled, sick, or burdened with a
serious predisposition to sickness”; but as for actual legislation, he wondered
where one would find “the wise authority that would be able to give the right
guidelines for selection and then proceed objectively and reliably” to enforce
them. As for ideas about selective breeding, he urged his colleagues “not to
indulge in fantasies.”194 In the context of rising interest in American eugenic
legislation, Sexual-Probleme carried an article in 1914 suggesting that “the
exclusively prejudicial nature of qualities that the eugenists want to extirpate
from the genetic material is not established with sufficient scientific certainty”
to justify “playing around” with them, and deploring the “trite utilitarianism”
of eugenics advocates.195 Max Marcuse summed up the views of many sexologists: “On the whole I take no real joy in all these radical race-hygienic
proposals; their justification is inadequate, their usefulness doubtful, not to
190

Bloch, Das Sexualleben, p. 776.
L. Loewenfeld, “Über medizinische Schutzmassnahmen (Kastration, Sterilisation) gegen Verbrechen und andere soziale Übel, mit besonderer berücksichtigung der amerikanischen
Gesetzgebung,” SP 6 (1910): esp. 308–312; Paul Näcke, reviews in AKAK 55 (1913):
188, 355.
192 Hegar, Geschlechtstrieb, p. 144.
193 Moll, Handbuch, pp. 915, 916, 918.
194 Gruber, Hygiene, p. 25.
195 Wilhelm Wirz, “Anwälte der Rasse,” SP 10 (1914): 589, 590–591.
191

Men, Sex, and Science

279

speak of the loss of human material that is perhaps constitutionally inferior,
but may be culturally very valuable.”196 And Christian von Ehrenfels dismissed
eugenics almost as laconically as he did the “farce” of anti-Semitism: it was
inhumane, authoritarian, and impracticable.197
Sexology, then, was relatively skeptical of eugenics, and relatively open
to racism; sex reform was relatively indifferent to racism, but obsessed with
eugenics. The reason for this divergence is simple: in the conceptual world of the
female sex reformers, evolution was the product of love, and more specifically of
women’s work of selecting mates and bearing and raising children. In the conceptual world of a large proportion of (but not all) sexologists, evolution was
driven primarily by men, struggle, and death – men competing for women, conquering women, and vanquishing racial aliens.198 Max von Gruber put it this
way in a monograph on the declining birthrate in 1914: “Aggression and appropriation are a necessary part of life. Life is struggle. . . . Life is necessarily full of
bitter tragedy.”199 In von Ehrenfels’s formulation, evolution was driven by the
“forces that lead to struggle, and through it to selection.”200 The vision of sex
reform was fundamentally ecstatic; that of sexology was fundamentally tragic.
This difference also extended to politics. A majority of the sex reformers were democratic socialists, and hence believers in cooperation. Sexologists
were more often sympathetic to left-liberalism (Moll, Marcuse, Eulenburg, and
Rohleder), and antisocialism and antidemocracy were not infrequent among
them. Alfred Hegar’s early (1894) work on the sex drive was conceived as a
rebuttal to August Bebel’s views on sex in Woman Under Socialism; twenty
years later, in 1914, Oskar A. H. Schmitz would argue in Sexual-Probleme that
the demands of the women’s movement – which he detested – “stem . . . from
the same source as socialism, indeed all of democracy: from the delusional pursuit of equality.”201 Friedrich Siebert, similarly, wrote in Sexual-Probleme in
1909 that “leveling and democratic individualism . . . the dogma of the equality
of all people . . . the empty phrases of the French Revolution . . . the proletarian tendencies of Christianity” were all contributing to the biological wreck
of humanity.202 Sex reform, then, accommodated a broad spectrum of political views relatively open to the radical socialist Left and relatively closed
196

Max Marcuse, “Fruchtabtreibung, Präventivverkehr, und Geburtenrückgang,” SP 10 (1914):
53.
197 Von Ehrenfels, “Zuchtwahl,” pp. 692, 693; von Ehrenfels, “Monogamische Entwicklungsaussichten,” pp. 706, 714; Christian von Ehrenfels, “Rassenproblem und Judenfrage,” in Metaphysik, ed. Reinhard Fabian (Munich: Philosophia, 1990), p. 339.
198 On this point, see Richard Weikart, From Darwin to Hitler: Evolutionary Ethics, Eugenics,
and Racism in Germany (New York: Palgrave, 2004), pp. 76–87.
199 Max von Gruber, Ursachen und Bekämpfung des Geburtenrückgangs im Deutschen Reich
(Munich: Lehmanns, 1914), p. 37.
200 Von Ehrenfels, “Monogamische Entwicklungsaussichten,” p. 706.
201 Hegar, Geschlechtstrieb, p. III; Oscar A. H. Schmitz, “Die Notwendigkeit der doppelten
Moral,” SP 10 (1914): 486.
202 Friedrich Siebert, “Weltanschauung und Geschlechtsleben,” SP 5 (1909): 273, 276.

280

Conflict, 1908–1914

to the conservative Right; sexology was relatively open to the radical racist,
antidemocratic Right and relatively closed to the socialist Left.
A final important distinction between the sexologists and the sex reformers
is that whereas a rising triumphalism can be distinguished among the latter in
the years before World War I, among the former a sense of crisis and catastrophe was clearly deepening. Some feared that the women’s movements would
enslave men or render their entire culture effeminate; some feared demographic
collapse; some saw racial Armageddon looming; and some feared a flood of
lesbianism. Whatever the issue, the sense of looming apocalypse appears to
have been virtually ubiquitous.
It is not completely clear why this should be. Most of the sexologists were
doctors, and hence members of a rapidly growing and increasingly influential
profession – and one apparently on the verge, with developments in endocrinology and psychoanalysis, of major scientific and therapeutic advances. One
would expect them to have a sense of growing momentum, of optimism. It
is of course tempting to see in the mounting fears of the sexologists precisely
what Freud diagnosed as “masculine hysteria” generated by the repression of
homosexual desire.203 Their distaste for and fear of women and sex might
fit that pattern. Yet a more straightforward explanation seems more plausible. Sexology began to take shape as a discipline in the years between about
1905 and 1910; but by that time the notion that sexology as a discourse of
scientific expertise would be able to dominate or guide public discussion of
sexuality and reproduction would have sounded laughable. Krafft-Ebing in
1886, Hegar in 1894, Moll in 1898, Rohleder in 1899, or even perhaps Iwan
Bloch in 1902 might have been able to believe that they would achieve that
role; by 1908 the public discussion had reached such dimensions, and such
diversity, that any such aspiration must have seemed clearly delusional. What
was happening, instead, was that the intensity and tone of the debate among
the multiple parties to the discussion was escalating rapidly and virulently.
Between 1908 and 1914, it resembled a brawl – intense, unpredictable, and
often bruising. To use another metaphor, the sexologists could see a new continent of authority, prestige, and professional opportunity opening up before
them; but they could also see that, in the developing free-for-all land grab, they
weren’t going to get much of it.
The final chapter of this study will briefly examine some of the hardest
punches thrown in that fight.

203

Freud, Drei Abhandlungen, p. 31.

12
Confrontations, 1908–1914

I. Fault Lines
The foregoing chapters have shown that there were two diametrically opposed
anthropologies of sex in play in the debate over sexuality in early twentiethcentury Germany. One understood sexuality as a demonic, antisocial, dangerous force that must be controlled, both within the individual and in society, by
authoritative moral forces – whether moral principles and the moral will, or
social authorities (the church, the state, or the law). In this Christian anthropology, the authentic self was the moral self; the true “I” was ethical will,
moral reason, and the higher principle embodied in man’s mind and spirit.
This was what made humankind human, defined the individual, and made
people happy, productive, social beings. Sexuality, in contrast, was rooted in
the body, in humanity’s animal, merely material self, and threatened constantly
to overwhelm the mind and the individual identity that it embodied, generating
pathology, disorder, and suffering in society. Conservative moralists saw the
evidence of this struggle all around them; what they understood as the sexual
pathology of their times was for them the product of the rising tide of naturalism and materialism, which was liberating the beast within and threatened to
drown the social order in a “flood” of sex.
The other prevailing view regarded sexuality as the engine of human creativity and of human social cohesion, the fundamental life energy that drove
everything good and noble in humanity and that must be liberated if the individual, society, and indeed the human species were to thrive. In this monist
anthropology, the authentic self was the sexual self; individual desire defined
humanity and made people productive, happy, social beings. Repressing this
creative life force in the service of some unnatural spiritualist/dualist fantasy or
superstition could only lead to psychological suffering, social pathology, and
biological degeneration. The monists saw evidence of this struggle all around
281

282

Conflict, 1908–1914

them; what they understood as the sexual pathology of their time was for them
the product of the long nightmare of Christianity. That unnatural, impoverishing, life-denying doctrine had tortured individuals and sabotaged the progress
of evolution for more than a millennium and must now, at long last, be demolished so that the life energy of sex could flow freely through society and through
the biological substance of humanity.
The other most intense division in the debate over sexuality was that between
men and women. For the women’s morality movements – confessional and nonconfessional alike – women were the real, natural, and best representatives of
the moral principle, the truly human principle, and men were representatives
of the destructive and animalistic and sexual principle in human life. On the
journey to the Kingdom of God on earth, women drove the bus. For women in
the sex-reform movement, women were the real, natural, and best representatives of the life principle and of honest and natural and uncorrupted sexuality;
as mothers, women were the representatives of the interests of life. Men were
the champions at perverting or sabotaging the life force and indeed at killing.
On the journey to evolutionary transcendence, women drove the bus. Men
in the morality movements fundamentally agreed with their female counterparts that men were the greatest problem, the champions in sexual disorder
and animalism; but they clearly did not think women should be driving anything – fundamentally they should be at home with the kids, cultivating moral
selfhood, while men did everything else. Heaven, for men in the morality movement, was a patriarchy. For the male monists in sexology, women were clearly
both biologically inferior and biologically passive; it was men who (in a natural
order) made the reproductive choices that drove evolution – women were too
stupid to do that.
This is a complex picture, and as we have seen, the lines between these groupings were not always clear cut. Nevertheless, the fundamental divisions were
obvious to everyone. The hostilities and the debates were intense, sustained,
and played out across multiple arenas – local politics, state and national legislatures, and the media. And these hostilities and debates were also clearly escalating. Particularly between 1907 or 1908 and the outbreak of World War I,
the heat and aggression of the rhetorical confrontations between and among
these groups ratcheted up to a new level.
The reasons for this development are obvious. The organizations and groupings involved were steadily expanding, maturing, articulating their ideas, and
increasing their profile in the public sphere – in the media, in policy making,
and in legislative initiatives. As a result, they were increasingly rubbing up
against one another. This was a process that can be observed in many areas
of German life in the period – the growing organization and media saturation
of German society made all kinds of cultural, political, and economic conflicts
more evident, more explicit, and more pervasive. At the same time, both the
gradual coalescence of the monist reform milieu (the growing ties and interconnections among the DMB, the BfM, the WHK, the SPD, the neo-Malthusians,

Confrontations, 1908–1914

283

and so forth) and the increasing cooperation among confessional groups –
Catholic, liberal and conservative Protestant, and Jewish – in the morality
movements gave the contending parties a deepening sense that they had to overcome an organized and malevolent opposition. Similarly, the growing success
of the women’s movements generated rising tension between men and women
across the ideological spectrum (although moral conservatives managed them
far more effectively). And limited legislative successes for most groupings raised
the stakes on all sides as well.
The rising urgency of these conflicts reshaped the ideas of the contending
parties in important ways. We have seen one example in Chapter 11: the
growing importance of the women’s movements (not least the BfM) generated
an intense intellectual backlash among sexologists, feeding their commitment to
the concept of gender difference and perhaps also of racial difference. A similar
process appears to have been at work in the DGBG, in which debate with
Christian conservatives and with the IAF in 1903–1905 helped to consolidate
commitment to an explicitly pragmatic and naturalist approach among doctors.
As this chapter shows, the same sort of process was under way among moral
conservatives and among the sex reformers. As each grouping mobilized to
face the challenge of its opponents, its ideas evolved in subtle but important
ways.
II. The Authentic Moral Self
The quantum step up in the intensity of debate after about 1908 was probably
least clear in the case of the hostility between conservative Christianity and sex
reform, for the simple reason that it was difficult for these groups to trump
their own early efforts in despising and denouncing each other. Conservative
Christians reviled the sex reformers from the foundation of the BfM, indeed
even before 1905. There were, it is true, sympathetic voices among Christians.
The BfM’s journal was even able to cite, for example, the opinion of one liberal Catholic priest, who wrote that its efforts were characterized by “truly
humane spirit, true Christian love.” One Protestant pastor, too, at least conceded that he respected the “great pure idea” of the BMS; and some liberal
Protestant clergy played important roles in the organization.1 Across most of
the spectrum of Christian opinion, however, the response was overwhelmingly
contemptuous and dismissive. Already in 1904, for example, Hermann Roeren
regarded the emergence of sex reform as “indicative of the low state of our
morality.”2 One Protestant pastor referred to the BfM in 1905 as the Mutterschmutz (mother-filth) movement; another thought the leaders were “apostles
1

Cited in “Zur Kritik der sexuellen Reformbewegung,” NG 2 (1906): 31, and in Helene Stöcker,
“Zehn Jahre Mutterschutz,” NG 11 (1915): 115.
2 Hermann Roeren, Die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit und ihre Bekämpfung (Cologne: J. P. Bachem,
1904), p. 17.

284

Conflict, 1908–1914

of Satan.”3 Friedrich Bohn, leader of the AKDS, accused Helene Stöcker in
1907 of attempting to make respectable the “shameless spirit of whoredom”
and “unadorned hedonism.”4
And yet, after about 1908 some conservative Christians became even more
vehement. In 1908, for example, Friedrich Paulsen deplored the feminist sex
reformers as “raving females” and “incoherent poets.”5 One speaker at the
Inner Mission’s 1909 conference concluded that the sex-reform ideal resembled
“an organized rabbit-hutch!”; another called sex reform “a glorious gospel for
all dissolute spirits”; and an AKDS pamphlet of 1914 accused Ellen Key of
having “more or less the mental horizons of a Herero or Hottentot” (referring
to natives of southern Africa) and of offering only “barren utopianism.”6
The escalation of rhetoric among Catholic observers was similar. In
1908 Armin Kausen, one of the leaders of the Catholic morality movement
in Munich, accused Ellen Key of spreading “methodical propaganda for sexual
license”; another essay in his journal that year denounced August Forel’s public
addresses as aiming at the “broad-gauge extirpation of all sense of shame.”7
Der Volkswart denounced the “New Ethic” as “sexual communism” or “ethical anarchism.”8 By 1914 Joseph Mausbach concluded that sex reform “is leading us into heathen immorality . . . , disparaging the value of the personality of
woman, endangering and murdering infant life, slowly but surely undermining
piety and faith.”9
Although such scurrilous attacks made good press, however, more important
was the fact that after 1907/1908 a number of leading conservative Christian
intellectuals launched a vigorous defense of the “old” morality. The single most
important of these was Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster’s influential address to the
DGBG in 1907 on sexual ethics and sexual pedagogy, which was subsequently
published as an extended essay and became one of the most widely discussed
publications on sexual morality in the prewar period. Foerster was uniquely
placed to reach a broad audience: an influential member of the Society for
3

Quoted in untitled, NG 1 (1905): 40, and in Helene Stöcker, Zehn Jahre Mutterschutz (Berlin:
Oesterheld, 1915), p. 18.
4 Quoted in “Zur Kritik der sexuellen Reformbewegung,” NG 3 (1907): 257, 409.
5 Friedrich Paulsen, Moderne Erziehung und geschlechtlche Sittlichkeit (Berlin: Reuther &
Reichardt, 1908), p. 53.
6 Quoted in Helene Stöcker, “Zur Kritik der sexuellen Reformbewegung,” NG 6 (1910): 88–89;
E. Pfennigsdorf, “Moderne Ehe- und Mutterschutzbewegung,” reprint from Brandenburgischer
Kirchenblatt, 25 February 1909, ADW CA-526; Oskar Brüssau, Ellen Key’s Ansichten über die
Ehe (Berlin: AKDS, 1914), pp. 1, 4, 8, 14, 16.
7 Otto von Erlbach, “Bühne und Moral”; Max von Gruber, “Ein flammender Weckruf gegen
die geschlechtliche Zügellosigkeit”; Reither, “Sexuelle Massenaufklärung, Randglossen zu Prof.
Forels Wandervorträgen,” all in AR 5 (1908): 372, 99, 768.
8 Winand Engel, “Und sie sangen wie ein neues Lied . . . ,” Volkswart 3 (1910): 69; Karl Waldorf
[Joseph Pappers], “Vom Sturm auf die Ehe,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 88–90.
9 Joseph Mausbach, Der Kampf gegen die moderne Sittenlosigkeit (Warendorf: Schnell, 1914),
pp. 10, 18.

Confrontations, 1908–1914

285

Ethical Culture, a small circle of mostly liberal Protestant and agnostic intellectuals centered primarily in Berlin, he later converted to an idiosyncratic personal
brand of nonsectarian Christianity and achieved wide recognition as an unusually eloquent champion of a deeply conservative but also deeply humane brand
of Christian moral thought accessible to a wide public. Foerster was highly
sympathetic to Catholicism (and in fact was often thought to have converted
to that faith); but his thinking was shaped also by liberal Protestantism and
humanism.10
The core of Foerster’s essay was a vehement rejection of the most important
foundation of sex-reform thought, the idea of the authentic sexual self, in favor
of the Christian notion of the authentic moral self. As radical individualists, the
sex reformers held that authentic and genuinely binding moral judgments had
to originate in the voice of individual conscience. Foerster insisted instead that
the essence of any practically meaningful moral sense “consists precisely in the
fact that here something impersonal can speak in our inmost interior, correcting
our subjective bias” and setting limits for our “whims” or arbitrary caprices.
Conscience had to be guided and stiffened by “a sacred tradition of the real and
the true.”11 This was particularly true with respect to sexuality, because in this
area the “human drives, desires and passions” were so strong that most people
were thoroughly ruled by them, rather than by rational thought.12 Subjection
to such an authoritative tradition did not, as the sex reformers believed, constitute “an unbearable renunciation of one’s own life and thought”; for “only
through faith in a higher wisdom is one liberated from the prison of one’s own
experience and knowledge.”13 The “old ethic” and the “absolute prohibition
of all extra-marital sexual connections” were designed to remind people of
the ethical “unity of human individuality even in our sexual actions.” Its clear
commandments were “not created to make us slaves, but in the deepest sense
to maintain our freedom” from our own subjectivity and desire.14 Thus, “the
firm and exclusively monogamous form of sexual relationship” was “the real
bulwark of moral freedom” and the “representation of the solid and lasting
self as opposed to the merely sensual self.” Its purpose was to permit people
to “act from the depths of their essential selves,” not out of “sensual drives”
and their “whims, illusions, and passions.”15 The sex-reform program, in practical terms, must lead to an “absolute dictatorship of Eros” and reduce “the
individual to a helpless slave of his erotic urges.”16
10

See Maria Hoschek, Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster (1869–1966) (Frankfurt a.M.: Lang, 2002),
esp. pp. 43–50, 57.
11 Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster, Sexualethik und Sexualpädagogik (Munich: Josef Kösel, 1907),
p. 8.
12 Ibid., p. 4.
13 Ibid., p. 9.
14 Ibid., p. 23.
15 Ibid., pp. 23–24, 25.
16 Ibid., pp. 24, 27, 26.

286

Conflict, 1908–1914

Nor was the old ethic patriarchal and oppressive to women. Instead, the
rigidity of Christian morality was a response to the simple fact that men suffered
from “vagabondish tendencies” and were likely to abandon the mothers of their
children unless reminded of their duty by “inviolable rules” and institutional
forms – it was an “only too deeply justified vote of no confidence in the
reliability and chivalry of male feeling.” The only effective “Mutterschutz,” he
held, was “that institution . . . which obliges and educates the man to protect
the mother” – Christian marriage.17 As for contraceptives, they would merely
“rob us of the last remaining beneficial constraints and encourage the sensual
excesses of men to the utmost.”18
Fundamentally, then, Foerster held that the sex reformers completely misjudged the nature of nature. Their deification of nature and specifically of
sexuality was enough to make one think that “God reveals himself no longer
in our conscience, but rather in our reproductive organs.” But the demand
that humankind obey the laws of nature was fundamentally mistaken, because
it neglected the simple fact “that nature is less than human . . . , that nature
does not bear within itself . . . its own proper boundaries, but rather receives
them from the spirit, and that wherever nature escapes from the dominion of
the spirit” it degenerated into “unnaturalness, indeed perversity.” Nature, he
held, was “not divine,” not orderly, not lawful; it was disorderly, incalculable,
ungoverned.19 Freeing it from the spirit would only create pathology.
As for eugenics, “people with weak bodies” but “fine and strong spiritual
qualities do much more in the final analysis for the health and vital energy
of the race than robust healthy people, who often, precisely due to a lack of
spirituality and conscience, become a source of moral and thereby also of physical degeneration.” Thus, the “enhancement and consolidation of the dominion
of the spirit over the flesh,” and not “the greatest possible production of meat,”
was “the foundation of all racial health.”20
Again, Foerster’s essay was particularly important among Catholics; but it
was by no means the only alternative for them. Leading Catholic intellectuals
were also publishing major works on ethics and morality, virtually simultaneously with Foerster’s essay. Joseph Mausbach and Augustin Rösler, for
example, published important works addressing sex reform and the women’s
movement more broadly in 1907 and 1908; Victor Cathrein wrote a detailed
analysis of Social Democratic thinking on the family and sexuality. None
matched Foerster’s clarity and rhetorical force; but all adopted a moderate
and authoritative tone that may have been well received within the narrower
conservative Catholic milieu.21
17

Ibid., pp. 32, 31.
Ibid., p. 37.
19 Ibid., pp. 45, 46, 47.
20 Ibid., pp. 37, 20, 42.
21 Augustin Rösler, Die Frauenfrage vom Standpunkte der Natur, der Geschichte und der
Offenbarung (Freiburg: Herder, 1907 [1893]); Joseph Mausbach, Der christliche Familiengedanke im Gegensatz zur modernen Mutterschutzbewegung (Münster: Schöningh, 1908),
18

Confrontations, 1908–1914

287

There was a similar raft of publications from conservative Protestant
thinkers; indeed here the role of sex reform in generating a renaissance of
conservative ethical thought was even clearer than among Catholics. Friedrich
Mahling admitted, in the first major Protestant response to sex reform in 1907,
that sex reform was forcing him and his colleagues to articulate more clearly
an explicitly “Protestant perspective” on sexuality.22 Specifically, he held that
in Protestant thought – unlike, he believed, Catholic thought – “sexual life is
something absolutely sacred and divine, it is an expression of a drive implanted
in our nature by God himself, and we have no reason to be ashamed of its
urgings.” A colleague similarly held at the Inner Mission’s 1909 conference
that “the whole medieval monkish conception of sexual life” had been falsely
“attributed . . . to us,” but that it was “not Christian morality as we in the
Protestant Church understand it.”23
Ultimately, however, many Protestants too came to conclusions rather similar to those drawn by Foerster. Thus Mahling held that man “stands . . . as a
creature of both body and spirit between God and animal and has the task of
ruling over the body, in all its manifestations and drives, with the spirit.” This
was what it meant to be moral; but it was also what it meant to be free, because
“conscience is . . . the innermost core of our spiritual life,” the true expression of
human selfhood.24 Friedrich Paulsen, too, held in 1908 that humanity had only
two choices: “subjection to the sensual drives” and ultimately “degradation of
the human beneath the animal” or “dominion of the spiritual self.”25 In the
same year, Johannes Jansen wrote of the permanent “tragic conflict . . . between
the demands of our lower, sensual nature and the goals of our higher, spiritual nature,” and said that “only in the struggle against the lower, sensual self
and all its whims and passions is the higher spiritual self, truly free spiritual
individuality, born.”26
The single most influential Protestant response to sex reform, however, was
Gustav von Rohden’s essay, “Marriage and Free Love,” of 1911. Von Rohden
saw much to praise in sex reform – for example, its commitment to spiritualized love, responsibility, and monogamy; and (quoting Schleiermacher) he
emphasized the common ground between sex reform and Protestant sexual
ethics.27 But he, like Foerster, insisted that the sex reformers’ commitment to

and Die katholische Moral und ihre Gegner (Cologne: Bachem, 1911); Victor Cathrein, “Die
sozialdemokratische Familie der Zukunft,” Stimmen aus Maria-Laach 72 (1907): 263–280,
380–400.
22 Friedrich Mahling, Probleme der modernen Frauenfrage (Hamburg: Rauhes haus, 1907), p. 70.
23 Mahling, Probleme, p. 71; Wurm, in CAIM, Verhandlungen des 35. Kongresses für Innere
Mission in Stuttgart, vom 4. bis 7. Oktober 1909 (Hamburg: Rauhes Haus, 1910), p. 281.
24 Mahling, Probleme, pp. 71–72.
25 Friedrich Paulsen, Moderne Erziehung und geschlechtliche Sittlichkeit (Berlin: Reuther & Reichhard, 1908), pp. 55, 56, 57, 92.
26 Johannes Jansen, Brauchen wir ein neues Ehe-Ideal? (Kiel: Cordes, 1908), pp. 15, 20–21.
27 Gustav von Rohden, Ehe und freie Liebe: Ein Wort zum Individualismus in der Frauenfrage
(Berlin: Martin Warneck, 1911), pp. 14, 15, 16, 24, 25.

288

Conflict, 1908–1914

individual sexual freedom was desperately naive. For men, he believed, sex was
“an episode,” but for women it was “the meaning of life”; “for the true woman
love is life itself.” And because true women “see their own personal happiness
in life and in love inseparably bound up with the well-being of their children,”
their primary aim must be to create “the strongest possible guarantees and protections for the healthy development of their ‘other self’” – of which, of course,
“the existing rules and form of marriage” were among the most important.28
Far from marriage having been created to hold women in subjection, then, “the
history of marriage is the history of the development, assertion and recognition of female individuality.”29 That people suffered under the institution, he
believed, was evidence only of their own “immaturity, unhealthiness, incapacity for the ideal,” and lack of love.30
Activists in the confessional women’s organizations engaged less intensively
with sex reform and the New Ethic; but they did echo their male colleagues.
The DEF’s Paula Mueller, for example, held that the New Ethic was immoral,
socially irresponsible, and bad for women; the case was that simple. In her
first essay on the BfM in 1905, she insisted that Christian women should be
guided by the “simple notions of pure morality and the sanctity of monogamous marriage,” the “simple, eternally valid moral commandments as our Lord
Jesus Christ taught and lived them.” It was true that single mothers should be
helped, she conceded; but “the concepts of guilt and sin, remorse and atonement can not be blurred, cannot be extinguished.” The realization of the principles of the BfM would “put a premium on the rule of whim, of momentary,
unconstrained emotion, of caprice, weaken the sense of moral responsibility,
and thereby encourage immorality.”31 Countess Selma von der Gröben, Paula
Mueller’s deputy in the DEF, accused the sex reformers of preaching “freedom
at any price”; sex reform amounted for her merely to “protection of frivolous
men and women.”32 The Countess of Münster, also prominent in the DEF,
believed the realization of the BfM program would create “complete anarchy,”
in which “predatory instincts” would prevail.33 The DEF journal thought the
New Ethic amounted to advocacy of “sexual self-indulgence” and “exaggerated individualism.”34

28

Ibid., pp. 39, 46, 43, 47–48.
Ibid., pp. 28, 53.
30 Ibid., pp. 25, 56, 47, 51.
31 Paula Mueller, “Der Bund für Mutterschutz und die ‘neue Ethik,’” in Die “Neue Ethik” und
ihre Gefahr, ed. Paula Mueller (Berlin: Runge, 1908), pp. 20, 21, 19.
32 S.G., “‘Die Ehe in Vergangenheit, Gegenwart und Zukunft,’” EFZ 9 (1908): 34, 35. See Hans
Otte, “Selma Gräfin von der Gröben (1856–1938),” in Frauenprofile des Luthertums: Lebensgeschichten im 20. Jahrhundert, ed. Inge Mager (Gütersloh: Gütersloher Verlagshaus, 2005),
pp. 47–64.
33 M. Gräfin Münster, “Wie bewahren wir die Jugend vor den Gefahren der neuen Ethik?” in
Mueller, ed., Die “Neue Ethik,” pp. 51, 53, 54.
34 “Die Stellung des Deutsch-Evangelischen Frauenbundes zur Neuen Ethik,” EFZ 10 (1909):
42–43.
29

Confrontations, 1908–1914

289

Catholic and Jewish women were less active in opposing the BfM but used
similar terms. Hedwig Dransfeld believed the New Ethic was simply Bebel’s
materialist sexual morality and therefore a step on the path to “moral anarchy”;
it was a “toxic rot and a sure sign of decline.” Love and charity toward single
mothers and their children must “not confuse our moral views. Those who
put themselves outside the moral order . . . must bear the consequences.” And
the worth and dignity of women could not be measured only by their role as
mothers, since “their individuality stands above their nature as sexual beings.”
As for individual freedom, Dransfeld defended “that moral compulsion that
outwardly binds and inwardly liberates.”35 The JFB’s Bertha Pappenheim simply asserted, in 1907, that eventually “women’s suffrage will make the ‘New
Ethic’ superfluous” by paving the way for laws that would realize the virtues
of “the one, true, ancient, unchanging ethic.”36
III. The Tragedy of Erotic Life: The Mainstream Women’s Movement
and Sex Reform
In short, then, despite confessional and gender differences between the various
religious morality movements, there was a high degree of unanimity in their
response to sex reform. Strikingly, the reaction of the “moderate” mainstream
women’s movement was also quite similar. As we have seen, the impetus for the
formation of the BfM came in part from a split within the IAF; and a number of
leading figures in the moderate women’s movement acted very quickly, between
1903 and 1905, to distance themselves from sex reform. Anna Pappritz, for
example, argued already in 1903 that sex-reform ideas (in this case Edward
Carpenter’s) were “mortal poison” and “would lead to moral and cultural
chaos.”37 In particular, she held that the sex reformers fundamentally failed
to understand men, who did not want love but only to have sex with lots
of women. If the existing legal barriers – however fragile – to their doing so
were removed, “this indiscipline would be immeasurably heightened.”38 Helene
Lange, the grande dame of the moderate faction within the BDF, precisely
echoed Pappritz’s position in 1905. Because women represented the spirit, and
men the body, she held, women who supported sex reform “undermine the
foundations of their own house.”39 Christian marriage was actually “a victory
35

H. Dransfeld, “Schattenseiten der modernen Frauenbewegung,” CF 3 (1905): 369, 370, 371–
372, 373.
36 Bertha Pappenheim, “Zur Sittlichkeitsfrage,” in JFB, Referate gehalten auf dem 2. Delegiertentage des jüdischen Frauenbundes (Hamburg: JFB, 1907), pp. 17, 18.
37 A. Pappritz, “‘Wenn die Menschen reif zur Liebe werden,’” Frauenbewegung 9 (1903):
35–36. On the debate within the women’s movement, see Irene Stoehr, “Fraueneinfluss
oder Geschlechterversöhnung? Zur ‘Sexualitätsdebatte’ in der deutschen Frauenbewegung um
1900,” in Frauenkörper-Medizin-Sexualität, ed. Johanna Geyer-Kordesch and Annette Kuhn
(Düsseldorf: Schwann, 1989), pp. 159–190.
38 Anna Pappritz, “Zum Liebes- und Eheproblem,” Frauenbewegung 9 (1903): 98, 99.
39 Helene Lange, “Moderne Streitfragen in der Frauenbewegung,” Frau 13 (1905): 74.

290

Conflict, 1908–1914

of woman over the polygamous instincts of man,” because women simply
“stand biologically closer to the ideal of the limitation of sexual intercourse
to monogamous marriage.”40 Gertrud Bäumer too held that monogamous
marriage was rooted “not only in our spiritual culture, but also in the biological
connection between love and motherhood in woman” – whereas men just
wanted sex. In effect, sex reform, which saw “the goal of all social institutions in
the satisfaction of the erotic instincts,” was a masculine program, which could
only produce abuse and misery for women.41 Katharina Scheven was much
more sympathetic to sex reform; but she also held that true freedom could only
exist on the basis of “inward constraint through the sense of responsibility”
and that “men are still a long way from this freedom, and therefore they have
to be educated to it.” The whole sex-reform project, she found, breathed “a
masculine spirit.”42
On a number of specific practical issues, many moderates in fact agreed
with the sex reformers. Marianne Weber, for example, conceded that “a considerable proportion of our legal marriages stand, in their motives, no higher
than prostitution.”43 Helene Lange saw the legal condition of unwed mothers
and their children as “remnants of the sexual servitude of woman and the
master-morality of man.”44 And of course the two groups had in common the
whole canon of contemporary feminist demands – equality within marriage,
full civil rights for women, equal access to the professions, the abolition of
particular disabilities for women, and so forth. As Helene Lange put it, “with
respect to the problems that we call the ‘marriage question’ or the ‘sexual question’ our paths part”; but the two movements “agree on all other questions of
principle.”45
And yet, as the sex reformers’ ideas became more and more clearly articulated after 1905, the rhetorical tone of mainstream responses gradually escalated. An intense debate within the BDF over the issue of abortion in 1908
played an important role in this process. Again, most of the leadership of the
BfM supported legalization of abortion, on the grounds that a woman had
the right to control her own body. Opinion within the mainstream women’s
40

Helene Lange, Die Frauenbewegung in ihren modernen Problemen (Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer,
1908), pp. 60, 62, 72.
41 Gertrud Bäumer, “Die ‘neue Ethik,’” Frau 12 (1904/1905): 711, 712, 715.
42 Katharina Scheven, “Selbtsbeherrschung oder freie Liebe?” Abolitionist 4 (1905): 94, 95, 96;
for Scheven’s greater openness to sex reform, see Katharina Scheven, “Sexuelle Moral,” Abolitionist 3 (1904): 49–53; “‘Wenn die Menschen reif zur Liebe werden,’” Abolitionist 2 (1903):
47–51; “Stimmungsbild vom 2. Kongress der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der
Geschlechtskrankheiten” and “Die sexuelle Frage,” both in Abolitionist 4 (1905): 45, 83–88.
43 Marianne Weber, “Sexual-ethische Prinzipienfragen,” in Frauenbewegung und Sexualethik:
Beiträge zur modernen Ehekritik, ed. Gertrud Bäumer et al. (Hildbronn: Salzer, 1909), pp. 35,
43.
44 Lange, Frauenbewegung, p. 73.
45 Helene Lange, “Die Frauenbewegung und die moderne Ehekritik,” in Bäumer et al., eds.,
Frauenbewegung und Sexualethik, p. 102.

Confrontations, 1908–1914

291

movement was more divided. Many in the moderate leadership argued that
legalization was ethically indefensible and a threat to national power. But the
BDF’s legal commission actually favored legalization in its recommendations
regarding reform of the Criminal Code. The commission’s report conceded that
“modern science teaches that the embryo is alive already from the moment of
conception.” But it went on to argue that it was “an indissoluble part of
[a woman’s] own body” and that punishing a woman for doing whatever she
wanted with her own body was “an unjustified infringement of the right of
self-determination.” Whatever the scientists said, “woman must . . . be, as a
free individual, master of her own body.” What was more, given the “unhappy
family conditions” in which many women lived, alcoholism among men, and
the suffering of single mothers as moral pariahs, abortion was in many cases
ethically justifiable in its own right.46 At the BDF’s national conference in 1908,
this recommendation sparked a heated seven-hour debate, one that helped to
cement a new alliance between the moderates and religious women in the DEF
and the JFB.
A number of leading figures in the BfM supported the legal commission’s
view that criminalizing abortion was “an unjustified assault on the right to
dispose of one’s own body – that is, on the freedom of the individual”; and
they argued also against population-policy concerns.47 Adele Schreiber, for
example, argued that “a healthy and moral populace is not attained through
use of the criminal law,” and that the proper approach would be “to stop up the
sources of abortion” by securing the welfare of all children. Käthe Schirmacher
defended “the right of self-determination,” rejecting the idea that male experts
should have the right to “decide regarding the most sacred and intimate” affairs
of women. Helene Stöcker suggested that one must not “view children already
in the mother’s womb as property of the state.”48
The arguments of the opposing side were strongly influenced by eugenic
ideas. Agnes Bluhm had been chosen to rebut the legal commission’s recommendation, presumably because she was a doctor and abortion was in part a
medical issue. Bluhm was a provocative choice, as she was the one prominent
female race hygiene expert in the country. She did not disappoint, arguing,
for example, that “granting room and board” for nine months “cannot earn
one the right to decide over life and death”; that abortion should not be legalized in cases of rape because “in this matter pregnant women lie in downright

46

Julie Eichholz, Frauenforderungen zur Strafrechts-Reform: Kritik und Reformvorschläge
(Mannheim: Vereinsdruckerei, 1908), pp. 30, 29.
47 “VIII. Generalversammlung des Bundes deutscher Frauenvereine vom 6.-9. Okt. 1908 in Breslau, Vier Jahreszeiten,” LAB, Helene-Lange Stiftung, Karton 62, Mappe 268, pp. 377, 383,
387.
48 “8. General-Versammlung des Bundes deutscher Frauen-Vereine. 1. Sitzung, Dienstag den
6.10.08. 9 Uhr,” LAB, Helene-Lange Stiftung, Karton 62, Mappe 267, pp. 45, 36, 37, 39;
“VIII. Generalversammlung,” p. 420.

292

Conflict, 1908–1914

hair-raising fashion”; and that in general women sought abortions for “trivial,
indeed frivolous reasons.” What was more, “the number of heads is not a matter of indifference . . . for a people in maintaining its place among the civilized
nations.” And it would be the more intelligent and rational women who would
get abortions if they were legalized, whereas the stupid and improvident would
continue to multiply; so the quality of the population would decline, too.49 The
BfM’s Maria Lischnewska delivered a still more extraordinary tirade, holding
that Germany was “a rising nation” that “has the mission to become the foremost civilized power on earth by conquering new economic and intellectual
territory,” and that this meant that “we need in the first instance people, and
in fact a lot of people” – as workers, as thinkers, as soldiers and sailors, and
as settlers in the colonies. One need only look to France and white America
to see what became of peoples that didn’t punish abortion: the French were
“a dying, sinking nation,” whereas in the United States “in a few decades the
Blacks . . . will decide” affairs in the country. And at the same time, however,
“we are being run into the ground by the mass of completely degenerate elements who are getting brought into the world,” and “one can not demand
of us, as healthy, hard-working people, that we throw away our taxes and
our productive energies in continuing to keep these inferiors alive.” Abortion
therefore had to be legalized in the case of rape, or when the father was an
alcoholic, syphilitic, or “mentally or physically ill” – but only when approved
by a panel of doctors.50
The ultimate outcome of the debate reflected these concerns. The assembly
voted to retain paragraph 218 (with milder penalties for women), but to allow
abortion – subject to approval by a medical panel – in cases in which childbirth
threatened the mother’s life or health, in case of rape, or “if it is to be expected
that the child will enter into life bearing a severe hereditary physical or mental
taint.”51
In practical terms (of votes), however, the key objections to legalization
voiced in the course of the debate were moral, not medical or military. Gertrud
Bäumer did discuss biology but concluded simply by remarking that “unprejudiced popular opinion” saw “abortion as something that should not happen.”52
Paula Mueller of the DEF observed with equal simplicity that “it is surely selfevident that anyone who takes the standpoint of Christian faith cannot support
the striking of this paragraph” (§218).53 Agnes Neuhaus of the KFV remarked
that she could not address questions of principle “because I am too rooted in
the Catholic conception of the sanctity of marriage.”54 Anna Pappritz equated
49

“VIII. Generalversammlung,” pp. 389, 390, 394, 398, 398, 399.
Ibid., pp. 401–402, 403.
51 Ibid., pp. 462–466.
52 Ibid., pp. 408, 410.
53 Ibid., pp. 415, 416, 417.
54 Ibid., pp. 424, 425.
50

Confrontations, 1908–1914

293

abortion with “murder” and insisted that it “has to be regarded as a crime.”55
And Bertha Pappenheim observed “that reverence for life is a fundamental
characteristic of Jewish ethics.”56
In short, the radical challenge from sex reform highlighted the JudeoChristian foundation that the moderates in the mainstream women’s movement
shared with their counterparts in the confessional women’s organizations. This
pattern was evident too in a number of important publications in the years
1907–1909, including, for example, Marianne Weber’s influential address to
the Protestant Social Congress in 1907, Helene Lange’s 1908 history of the
women’s movement, and an important volume of essays critiquing the New
Ethic published by the leading figures in the moderate faction in the BDF in
1909. Many of these essays rehearsed familiar arguments – in particular, as
Weber put it, that women “are considered by the mass of men primarily as
sexual beings,” so that any “unleashing of the sexual drives would lead to a
brutalization of emotional life,” and “it would be woman who would have to
bear the costs of [this] brutality.”57
There were, however, two new notes in the essays of these years. On the
one hand, many of them were more explicitly critical specifically of the radical
individualism of sex-reform thought. Marianne Weber was particularly insistent on this point. Even the “most loveless average marriage,” she believed, “if
it is at least a marriage of respect, testifies to the willingness of the spouses to
take on their full responsibility, that is to the subordination of their personal
lives to the idea of duty.”58 Helene Lange accused the BfM of putting “in place
of ethical individualism . . . individualism full stop, in the sense of a right to
self-realization.”59 Obviously such condemnations precisely echoed those from
conservative Christians.
A second shift in emphasis revealed a still greater affinity with conservative
Christian views, specifically with respect to the proper definition of freedom.
Marianne Weber’s 1907 address is perhaps the most striking example; for she
argued that the harmony between morality and nature that monism aimed to
achieve was simply an impossibility. The “titanic and painful conflict between
what is and what should be in our sensual-spiritual nature” was not a “problem” or a “crisis,” as the sex reformers argued; it was not something to be
reformed out of the world. Instead, it was “obviously an inescapable fate,
an explicit mark of our ‘human dignity’ in contrast to animality, and one
of the very most important means of our spiritual refinement.”60 But Helene
Lange spelled out the same perspective even more clearly in 1908 and 1909,
55

Ibid., pp. 430, 433.
Ibid., pp. 440, 441.
57 Weber, “Sexual-ethische Prinzipienfragen”; Helene Lange, “Feministische Gedankenanarchie,”
in Bäumer et al., eds., Frauenbewegung und Sexualethik, pp. 41, 46, 48, 49, 53.
58 Marianne Weber, “Prinzipien der Ehereform,” Frau 19 (1911): 4, 5.
59 Lange, Frauenbewegung, pp. 62, 69–70.
60 Weber, “Sexual-ethische Prinzipienfragen,” pp. 32–33.
56

294

Conflict, 1908–1914

remarking that “growing individualization means growing subordination of
animal instincts to the spiritual” and that “the individual as a whole has to
fight out a struggle against one part” (that is, the “animal” part).61 In these
texts, the moderates were explicitly making the central argument of many
conservative Christians: that real freedom was to be found not through the
emancipation of the flesh but through the dominion of the spirit, not through
the liberation of the authentic sexual self but through the empowerment
of the authentic moral self. And in fact explicit traces of the conversation among
these figures can be found in the texts they published – as when Helene Lange,
for example, quoted directly from Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster; when Gustav
von Rohden quoted from Alice Salomon; or when Paula Mueller published a
highly complimentary review of the 1909 collection of essays by the moderate
leadership.62
IV. Eugenic Responsibility and “Individualistic Anarchy”
Not surprisingly, the sex reformers responded to the more scurrilous and unfair
attacks of their critics with equal vehemence. In 1905 and 1906 Helene Stöcker
deplored their “unbelievable conceptual confusion,” “objective mendacity
and . . . carelessness,” and “prudery and fearfulness.”63 Kurt Hiller denounced
conservative Christians as champions of “hypocrisy,” “fertility-happiness and
a rabbit-ethos,” and the “mendacity of our official system of morality.”64
Die Neue Generation described Paula Mueller’s behavior, in 1912, as “not
only rude but un-Christian.”65 By 1914 Stöcker was so frustrated by Helene
Lange’s utterances that she accused her of “gross distortions and misrepresentations of our goals” and observed that moderate women’s “aversion to men”
suggested that they “belong to the homosexual orientation.”66
Yet the shock of confrontation also elicited a more positive response: a
progressive shift from Nietzschean individualism and Romantic individualism
toward biological or evolutionary ethics. As we have seen, within the BfM and
sex reform as a whole, eugenic and evolutionary thought played an increasingly important role, particularly precisely from 1909/1910 onward – in fact,
61

Lange, Frauenbewegung, p. 72, and Lange, “Die Frauenbewegung und die moderne Ehekritik,”
p. 81.
62 Lange, Frauenbewegung, pp. 68, 69; von Rohden, Ehe und freie Liebe, pp. 10–11; Paula
Mueller, “Frauenbewegung und Sexualethik,” EFZ 9 (1909): 185–186. See also Friedrich
Wilhelm Foerster, “Bemerkungen zu Ellen Keys ‘Lebensglauben,’” Frau 14 (1906): 65–73.
63 Stöcker, “Zehn Jahre,” pp. 12, 17, 63; “Zur Kritik der sexuellen Reformbewegung,” NG 3
(1907): 129, 304; “Die sexuelle Abstinenz und die Stützen der Gesellschaft,” NG 5 (1909): 3.
64 Kurt Hiller, “Die Strafwürdigkeit der Abtreibung,” NG 5 (1909): 159, 161.
65 “Der Bund für Mutterschutz und das christliche Familienideal,” NG 8 (1912): 54.
66 Stöcker, “Zehn Jahre,” p. 15; Helene Stöcker, “Homosexualität und Geschlechtsbewertung,”
GG 9 (1914): 279.

Confrontations, 1908–1914

295

Stöcker signaled this change explicitly in an editorial note introducing the first
issue of Die Neue Generation in 1910.67 Again, this may have been in part an
attempt to downplay divisions within the movement; and it also fit well with the
organizational strategy of building ties with other groups in the broader monist
reform milieu. But in emphasizing biology, the sex reformers collectively were
also responding specifically to criticisms that stressed the irresponsible and
exaggerated individualism of sex-reform thought. The emphasis on responsibility to the “race” was in part a response to the intensification of criticisms
that stressed the social function of sexual ethics.
Stöcker herself explicitly adopted precisely this rhetorical strategy in some
texts published just before World War I. She remarked in 1914, for example,
that “it will be . . . eugenics that . . . will be the religion of the future, that will
save us from destroying ourselves through individualistic anarchy, that will
make us self-conscious architects . . . of the future.”68 Henriette Fürth had taken
a similar position already in 1911, arguing that in advocating contraception
she was not “preaching sexual anarchy,” because in fact she was in favor of a
new degree of “responsibility. . . . We are now liable not only for the number
but also for the quality of our progeny. We owe our children . . . every form of
security that flows from the mastery of humanity over itself and over all the
expressions of its life.”69 And as we have seen, the transfer of organizational
leadership from Stöcker to Max Rosenthal may have been in part a move away
from radical Nietzschean individualism toward a more sober biological ethic
of responsibility.
V. “Moral Ruin Through Medicine”
As an organization explicitly committed to undermining the Christian sexual
order, the BfM was the focus of conservative Christian ire. But Christians did
not ignore their intellectual opponents in the sexology movement, the DGBG,
or the WHK. Indeed, given the range of medical practitioners who preached
tolerance of or understanding for sexual needs (“normal” and/or “perverse”),
it is hardly surprising that many conservative Christians were convinced, as one
Catholic commentator put it in 1909, that “precisely the doctors are abetting
moral ruin in fateful manner.”70
Of particular importance in this respect was the alienation of moral conservatives from the DGBG, as doctors who were committed to using whatever
means available to combat venereal disease drifted more and more explicitly toward acceptance of extramarital sex as an irreducible quantity. Thus
67

Helene Stöcker, “An unsere Leser,” NG 6 (1910): 1–2.
Helene Stöcker, “Eine Soziologie der Liebe und Ehe,” NG 10 (1914): 331.
69 Henriette Fürth, “Der Neomalthusiasnismus und die Soziologie,” SM 17 (1911): 1671.
70 Cato, “Sittenruin aus der Medizin,” Volkswart 2 (1909): 98–99.
68

296

Conflict, 1908–1914

Der Volkswart, in an article of 1911, condemned the DGBG’s “pessimistic
standpoint that we cannot turn back morally” and insisted instead that “sin
remains sin” and must be resisted.71 One Dr. Hans Brennecke, having warned
already at the AKDS’s conference in 1905 that the DGBG’s position on prophylactics was an example of “morally vacuous naturalism,” in 1913 accused
doctors of “abusing science in the service of Eros and performing morally subversive work of the most questionable sort under the mantle of hygiene” (and
of representing the “spirit of a foreign race,” that is, of being Jews).72 By 1910,
Katharina Scheven took for granted the fact of antagonism between women
and doctors; relations between them in fact constituted a “struggle between
two world-views . . . , one utilitarian-materialistic and the other transcendentalidealistic”; and in 1913 the IAF’s representative at the DGBG’s annual conference deplored that organization’s exclusion of women’s voices and its “purely
masculine standpoint.”73 In 1910 Hanna Bieber-Böhm reported in remarks
at the DGBG conference that, under the “barracks” system (Kasernierung),
women in the sex trade felt “justified in their recognized trade” and had
lost “any feeling for right and wrong, and all consciousness of their own
reprehensibility.”74 The solution the doctors favored, in other words, merely
encouraged shamelessness.
In contrast, as we have seen, a growing number of doctors argued simply that
morality had nothing to do with the matter. Doctors who opposed this view
were increasingly at odds with the DGBG leadership. In 1911, for example,
the DGBG newsletter carried a bitter exchange between the editors of the
journal and Max von Gruber concerning the latter’s lectures to young people
on venereal diseases. Unhappy with Gruber’s insistence that condoms posed
an “enormous race-hygienic danger” and therefore should not be advertised
openly, the editors accused him of being on the side of “clerical zealots and
immorality-sniffers . . . informers and provocateurs.”75
Moral conservatives found plenty to object to in sexology as well; for they
explicitly rejected the idea that people in general needed to know more about
sex, or that science was ethically relevant. One Catholic critic warned in 1908,
71

“Die Generalversammlung der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlschtskrankheiten,” Volkswart 4 (1911): 142.
72 “Vortrag von Sanitätsrat Dr. Brennecke – Magdeburg über das Thema: Wie ist der Kampf gegen
Geschlechtskrankheiten zu führen?” in AKDS, Die XVII. Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen
Sittlichkeitsvereine in Magdeburg vom 1.–3. Oktober 1905 (Berlin: AKDS/A. Dartsch, 1905),
p. 25.
73 “Tätigkeitsbericht des Dresdener Zweigvereins,” Abolitionist 9 (1910): 59; Katharina Scheven,
review of Käthe Schirmacher, Moderne Jugend (1910), in Abolitionist 9 (1910): 69; Marie
Wegner, “Die Tagung der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten
in Breslau,” Abolitionist 12 (1913): 75–76.
74 “Jahresversammlung,” MDGBG 8 (1910): 52.
75 “Professor Gruber und der Schutz gegen die Geschlechtskrankheiten,” MDGBG 9 (1911): 137,
136.

Confrontations, 1908–1914

297

for example, that Forel’s “one-sidedly naturalistic standpoint misleads youth
into thinking all too indulgently about excesses and aberrations of the allegedly
strongest human instinct,” while Ellen Key’s works did the same among young
women.76 Another had held in 1906 that the works of sexologists had “done
more harm than good” because they gave people too much information about
sex.77 The KDF’s Ellen Ammann found even merely the table of contents of
Iwan Bloch’s Sexual Life of Our Times to be “fateful” for young people.78
And Der Volkswart held in 1909 that the works of Krafft-Ebing were a “poisonous” and “morally ruinous influence” because they encouraged people to
believe that homosexuality was a product of “‘sickness,’ ‘degeneration,’ ‘hereditary taint,’ ‘need’” rather than a crime and a sin. The “moderate scientific
tones,” the “overly free language,” and the “completely pointless piling up”
of cases of “sexual crimes of the most disgusting nature” made his work a
threat to moral health.79 A particularly striking case was that of Friedrich
Wilhelm Foerster, who wrote in response to Freud’s essay, “Sexuality and
Modern Nervousness” (in Sexual-Probleme in 1908), that ethics had to be
founded on eternal truths, not on whatever “point of view is currently fashionable” in the sciences.80 But Samuel Keller of the AKDS had assured his
colleagues already in 1894 that “I won’t submit to modern science any more
than to Social Democracy or to the Pope. All three are traps that . . . seek to
make us . . . slaves.”81
Some conservative Christians did embrace race hygiene, attempting to construct eugenic arguments for traditional moral notions. They were happy to
borrow from the race hygienists’ denunciations of feminism, for example, as
a threat to the quality of the race, or to deplore the degeneration of the race
as a consequence of alcoholism, syphilis, homosexuality, urban life, and sexual excess. Der Volkswart even suggested in 1913 that Germany should follow the American state of Indiana in introducing sterilization as a penalty
for sex crimes, to stem the “enormous rise” in the number of the “mentally defective.”82 And yet, in aggregate, such passages were mere asides in
the broader literature of the morality movement. The morality campaigners
were primarily interested in morality, not biology. And some Christians explicitly rejected the whole idea that there should not be imperfect people in the
world. One Protestant critic asked in 1910, for example, whether “an inner
enhancement of life” did not accrue to those who “care and sacrifice” for
76

Reither, “Sexuelle Massenaufklärung,” p. 768.
Georg Sticker, “Irrungen des Geschlechtssinnes,” Hochland 3 (1906): 221, 225.
78 Ellen Ammann, “Der Anteil der Frauen an der Bekämpfung der Immoralität in Wort und Bild,”
Vereinskorrespondenz des Katholischen Deutschen Frauenbundes 1 (1911): 78.
79 Cato, “Sittenruin aus der Medizin,” pp. 97–102, 113–117.
80 F. W. Foerster, “Neurose und Sexualethik,” Hochland 6 (1908): 267, 273, 277.
81 Samuel Keller, Werden wir siegen? (Leipzig: Reinhold Werther, 1894), p. 9.
82 “Zur Frage der Sterilisation der Sittlichkeitsverbrecher,” Volkswart 6 (1913): 103–104.
77

298

Conflict, 1908–1914

the sick, because caring for the disabled awakened “slumbering moral energies. . . . Nations live from this spirit of sacrifice.”83 Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster held in the same year that “care for the weak” was the greatest teacher
of “social culture” – for example, selflessness, solidarity, compassion, and
mutual aid – and “liberates the strong from the tyranny of their instincts and
passions.”84
As we have seen, leading figures in the mainstream women’s movement often
championed similar ideas. Their position was that culture was more important
than biology. As one article in the IAF’s journal in 1911 put it, eugenics was
a moral danger because it encouraged reasonable – if unthinking – people to
imagine that national greatness rested on purely material foundations, whereas
in fact “a nation is made great by its ideas, by its ideals, by its striving,” and
not by mere biological qualities.85
As medical sexology opened to the loopier racist Right after 1908, this
animosity deepened. The third edition of Foerster’s Sexual Ethics and Sexual Pedagogy, published in 1910, retained, for example, his earlier denunciation of sex-reform ideas as an invitation to erect a “dictatorship of mere
erotic passion,” but he added a critique of Christian von Ehrenfels’s advocacy
of polygamy. Von Ehrenfels’s obsession with demographics and the “Yellow
Peril” showed merely that he had lost “any clear notion of . . . moral forces
and cultural values” and their role in relations between peoples. The truth
was that the “undeveloped races” would “bow before everything right and
spiritual in the white race just as once upon a time the Nordic races bowed
before the majesty of the cross.” As for race hygiene, Foerster conceded that
people had to recognize their “responsibility with respect to very serious and
unquestionable hereditary dangers” but rejected the “brutal and superficial
hereditarian terrorism . . . with which certain race hygienists want to impose a
regime of human breeding.”86 Other conservative critics were more straightforwardly dismissive. Der Volkswart described Hentschel’s Mittgart as a “human
thoroughbred stall such as could scarcely be more shamelessly and tastelessly
imagined.”87 The conservative Protestant Kreuzzeitung saw Hentschel’s ideas
as a “grotesque reversion to the zoological.”88 And the IAF’s journal, in 1911,
remarked of such schemes that “if this is the only way to save our nation, our
race, our culture, then we are absolutely doomed to go under. Because we’ll
never be won over to such monstrosities. And no harm done, because a nation
83

Gerhard Hilbert, Nietzsche’s Herrenmoral und die Moral des Christentums (Leipzig: Deichert,
1910), p. 45.
84 Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster, Lebensführung (Berlin: Reimer, 1910), pp. 217, 224.
85 Ernst von Düring, “Rassenhygiene und sittliche Forderungen,” Abolitionist 10 (1911): 22,
30–31, 32.
86 Friedrich Wilhelm Foerster, Sexualethik und Sexualpädagogik, third edition (Munich: Kösel,
1910), pp. 59–61, 72, 75–77, 102–103.
87 Von Gerhardt, “Falsche Propheten,” Volkswart 6 (1913): 119.
88 “Ein Bund für Polygamie,” SP 8 (1912): 751.

Confrontations, 1908–1914

299

and a culture that could only be saved at this price would certainly not be
worth saving!”89
VI. The Failure of Monist Unity
The challenge of naturalist ethics, then, increasingly drove religious activists of
all stripes – men and women, Catholics, conservative and liberal Protestants,
and Jews – to find common ground in the years before 1914. And there was
a similar circling of the wagons among their opponents, as sex reformers,
monists, psychoanalysts, neo-Malthusians, the WHK, and others (for example,
in the Weimar Cartel) built networks and connections. In one crucial respect,
however, that effort obviously failed, and indeed momentum was building in
the opposite direction. For the champions of a “natural” sexual morality failed
completely to reconcile male and female versions of that vision.
In particular, as we have seen, the hostility of sexologists toward sex reform
was palpable and deepening in the years just before World War I. Again,
sexology was quite divided, and the new Journal of Sexual Science launched in
1914 was very supportive of the agenda of the BfM and WHK. But the other
major sexology journals were ever more critical of sex reform in the years
before World War I. Both journals increasingly opened their pages to race
theorists who argued that feminism and sex reform were an existential threat
to the biological nation – as, for example, when Christian von Ehrenfels argued
in Sexual-Probleme in 1909 that the ideas of the BfM “point us in the direction
of the swamp of racial ruin and the abyss of national death.”90 And hostility
toward the homosexual rights movement, too, intensified among conservative
sexologists after 1908.
For their part, the sex reformers regarded the entire sexological theory of
absolute sexual difference as hopelessly mired in male prejudice – at best myopically masculine, at worst deliberately mendacious. Already in 1903 Helene
Stöcker had found it laughable that it was so “difficult to make it comprehensible to the other sex that we are in possession of a fully functional brain.”91 By
1913 she dismissed as “empty phrases” the sexologists’ nonsense about absolute sexual differences between men and women.92 In the same year, Katharina
Werner observed in the BfM’s journal that, for all its scientific rhetoric, sexology
amounted to date merely to a “merging of medical knowledge and the subjective masculine perspective on sexual life.”93 Ernst Schur held the ideology of

89

Von Düring, “Rassenhygiene,” p. 22.
Christian von Ehrenfels, “Ein Züchtungsfanatiker,” SP 5 (1909): 917.
91 Helene Stöcker, “Von Mann und Weib” (1903), in Helene Stöcker, Die Liebe und die Frauen
(Minden: J. C. C. Bruns, 1906), p. 108.
92 Dr. H. St., “Geschlechts-Justiz,” NG 9 (1913): 604; Helene Stöcker, “Homosexualität und
Geschlechtsbewertung,” GG 9 (1914): 280, 283.
93 Katharina Werner, “Der Mediziner und die sexuelle Frage,” NG 10 (1914): 434.
90

300

Conflict, 1908–1914

absolute gender difference to be an “inadmissibly primitive standpoint.”94 And
Grete Meisel-Hess suggested already in 1904 that it was “downright terroristic
to declare certain tendencies, characteristics or predispositions only ‘masculine’
or only ‘feminine,’” because they were in fact “often neither the one nor the
other, but rather merely human.”95 Sex reformers’ response to the ideas of
the race theorists was similarly derisive. Helene Stöcker called von Ehrenfels a
“passionate advocate of the right of the man to the greatest possible number
of women” and called him and Hentschel “unworldly fools” suffering from
“blindly masculine-egotistical . . . naive doctrinarism.”96 Even Bruno Meyer –
who was drifting gradually out of the intellectual orbit of the BfM in the decade
before 1914 – called von Ehrenfels a “race fanatic” and observed that the Asian
peoples von Ehrenfels found so terrifying were increasingly “saturated with our
culture,” and their military triumph was therefore not likely to destroy it. More
probable was a “new blossoming of culture on the foundation of the new racial
mixing,” which would be all the more creative because the Chinese were the
“fathers of their own ancient and very high culture.”97
This bitter split in monist ranks may well have been a critical reason for
the growing success of moral conservatives in driving legislative and regulatory
agendas. The views of moral conservatives were increasingly converging by
the 1910s; in the opposing camp, in contrast, the divisions between Left and
Right and between men and women were only deepening. Moral conservatives
therefore had growing success in building effective coalitions around particular
issues; the monists were mired in embittered debates about the meaning of their
primary postulates.
VII. Three Sexualities
The extent to which the lines in the debate over sexuality and sexual morality
had hardened by 1914 into impermeability should not be exaggerated. Sexology
in particular was relatively amorphous; some leading sexologists were closely
associated with sex reform, whereas others detested it as feminist claptrap, and
others still took moral positions quite close to those of Christian conservatives.
And some people and organizations were able to build bridges across organizational and intellectual divides. The DGBG’s Albert Neisser, for example,
was a member of the BfM throughout the prewar years.98 Bruno Meyer continued to publish in Die Neue Generation, Sexual-Probleme, and Geschlecht
und Gesellschaft right up to 1913. The IAF in particular was a meeting place
94

Ernst Schur, “Ueber das Erotische,” NG 4 (1908): 49.
Grete Meisel-Hess, Weiberhass und Weiberverachtung (Vienna: Wage, 1904), p. 8.
96 “Rassenveredlung durch Polygamie?” NG 1 (1905/1906): 386, 389; H.St., “Der Bund für
Polygamie,” NG 8 (1912): 55, 54.
97 Bruno Meyer, “Etwas von positiver Sexualreform,” SP 4 (1908): 715, 720, 791, 807, 810–811.
98 Obituary in NG 12 (1916): 244.
95

Confrontations, 1908–1914

301

for people with quite diverse ideas. Its governing board in 1908 included not
only Katharina Scheven (a prominent moderate) and Anna Pappritz (who had
close ties to Paula Mueller and the DEF) but also Käthe Schirmacher (who
was intellectually though not politically close to the sex-reform leadership). Its
1908 general meeting was addressed not only by Pappritz and Scheven but also
by Otto Juliusburger, Marie Stritt, Käthe Schirmacher, Maria Lischnewska,
and Rosa Mayreder, all of whom were close to sex reform; by Alfred Blaschko
of the DGBG; by Agnes Bluhm, the eugenics expert; and by Friedrich Bohn of
the AKDS.99 And rather bizarrely, given how divergent the views of most in the
DGBG were, that organization included in its traveling exhibition after 1911
some graphics prepared by the IAF.100
Nevertheless, we can identify several specific senses in which the various positions in the broad debate over sexuality were becoming increasingly
entrenched by 1913.
First, the number of organizations involved was ramifying rapidly. The
decade and a half before the outbreak of the war saw the emergence, in addition to the Protestant morality associations (AKDS, WSV, White Cross, VFJM,
and so on) that were already active, also of the Catholic morality associations;
the DEF, JFB, KDF, KFV, BDF, and IAF; the DGBG; the WHK and the Gemeinschaft der Eigenen; the BfM; and the ÄGSE and the IGS. As these organizations
multiplied, they articulated the ideas that appealed to their constituencies more
clearly – which of course also clarified their differences with other groups doing
the same thing.
Second, the increasingly intense and complex debate between these rapidly
clarifying positions only further energized and mobilized the individual groups
involved, particularly where specific policy or legislative initiatives were at
stake. Reporting on efforts to introduce Kasernierung in a growing number of
municipalities in 1910, for example, the IAF’s Dresden branch observed that
“new life and a fresh energy have come into our movement because of it.”101
But of course this was a dynamic that had already been at work at the very
birth of the Christian morality movement in the 1880s, when women’s advocacy of abolitionism helped spark the emergence of Protestant men’s morality
organizations.
Third, the clash of ideas and organizations also drove a rapid evolution of
the ideas of those involved – a tendency that helped to build the urgency of
the conflict both by further clarifying differences and by driving the emergence
of broader, and hence more threatening, political and ideological coalitions.
The leadership of the BfM stressed the theme of eugenic responsibility partly
99

“Die zweite Generalversammlung des deutsche Zweiges der I. A. Föderation,” Abolitionist
7 (1908): 50–52.
100 “Geschäftsbericht des Deutschen Zweiges der I. A. Föderation,” Abolitionist 11 (1912): 51.
101 “Jahresbericht des Dresdener Zweigvereins für die Periode 1908–1910,” Abolitionist 9 (1910):
59.

302

Conflict, 1908–1914

to avoid the charge of individualist sexual anarchism, thereby building bridges
to the DMB and associated groups. Sexology opened to the ideas of radical
racial theorists partly in response to the successes of the women’s movement,
thereby further alienating both Christian conservatives and sex reformers. The
BDF leadership discovered common ground with confessional women partly
in response to the challenge of sex reform. Conservative Protestant men drifted
toward abolitionism as their female colleagues grew more influential and articulate on the issue – in part in the course of their own conflict with the DGBG.
These broader coalitions or groupings remained themselves divided internally – between more liberal and more conservative Protestant women in the
DEF or the IAF, between revisionists and more orthodox Marxists in the SPD,
between Nietzschean women and self-identified realist men in the BfM, between
abolitionists and neoregulationists in the DGBG, and between the ÄGSE and
the IGS. And yet, as members of various and diverse organizations sought to
strengthen their position by building alliances, broader sides or camps were coalescing. This was most obvious among the various organizations committed to
more conservative sexual mores, and specifically to the idea that the moral self
was the authentic self. The process was less clear among sexual radicals in the
BfM, the WHK, and the SPD – the detonations within the BfM and the WHK
in 1906–1909 muddied the issue substantially, as did bruising debates between
orthodox Marxists and revisionists in the SPD. Nevertheless, there was in fact
a growing density of connections and exchanges within the broader social and
intellectual milieu of sexual radicalism. Sexology was least coherent of all – it
was organizationally amorphous, its advocates published in widely disparate
journals, and it was pulled in multiple ideological directions. But here too the
development of the discussion in the two key journals – Sexual-Probleme and
Geschlecht und Gesellschaft – clearly suggests that there was at least a significant minority in sexology that was increasingly antifeminist, increasingly
open to racial thought, increasingly antidemocratic, and increasingly paranoid
(whether the focus of fear was a wave of lesbianism, the Americanization of
women, the yellow peril, the Slavic menace, or racial degeneration).
By 1913, then, there were three broad activist camps or sides in the debate
over sexuality: the morality campaigners, the sex reformers, and the sexologists. Hostility and fear between and among these groupings was rising. They
were, deliberately or unconsciously, moving to stake out ever clearer and more
mutually exclusive positions. On the eve of World War I, the issues they debated
were among the most contentious in German politics – so much so that already
in 1908, for example, the Prussian minister of justice told his cabinet colleagues
that reform of the regulation of prostitution “is at present the most hotly contested question in the area of criminal law. The whole nation takes the liveliest
interest in this matter.”102
102

“Sitzung des königlichen Staatsministeriums,” Berlin, 30 November 1908, in GSAPKB, Rep
84a, no. 8407, fol. 45–48, p. 2.

Confrontations, 1908–1914

303

World War I struck this complex of ideas and forces like a sledgehammer. It
disrupted organizational life; it created new problems that called old assumptions into question; it transformed the legal and political environment in which
all sides operated; and the severe social strains it created generated a new and
unprecedented urgency in multiple legislative and policy arenas. Much of what
happened during and immediately after the war was quite unexpected. Nevertheless, by the early 1920s, the three-way struggle that was developing in
the years around 1910 emerged once again, with new clarity and intensity,
and dominated the even more politicized, intense, embittered, and still further
escalating struggle over sexuality that was one of the distinctive features of
political and cultural life in the Weimar Republic.
That will be the subject of the sequel to this study.

Conclusion
Sex, Politics, and Modernity II

The most striking feature of the struggle over sexuality, sexual morality, and
decency in Germany in the three decades before World War I is surely the
extraordinary and expanding variety of views championed by the many different parties to that debate. The philosophical foundations of these organizations,
the agendas they pursued, their social bases, and the language they employed
varied wildly. Many of these organizations and movements saw their competitors and opponents as posing existential threats to the social order, to national
power and indeed national existence, and certainly to individual and social
health and well-being. They denounced and berated one another with steadily
rising vehemence. Viewed as a whole, the debate over sexuality resembles a
Hollywood saloon brawl that starts at one table and expands outward into
chaos.
This picture contradicts a venerable tradition in European social theory
that sees modernization as a process of homogenization. Premodern societies
were societies of particularity, locality, and caste; in modern societies, mass
schooling, mass politics, massive social organizations, massive corporations,
the massive penetration of society by regulatory agencies and institutions (public and private) and their experts, mass culture and the mass media, and the
universal standards of rational organization and rational behavior have all converged to produce greater uniformity. One of the most extreme formulations
of this view is that of Zygmunt Bauman, who held in 1991 that modernity
is about order, about the desire to subject everything to rational bureaucratic
management according to scientific principles and abstract instrumental logic.
Intolerance of variety (disorder) is therefore “the natural inclination of modern practice. Construction of order . . . calls for the denial . . . of everything that

304

Sex, Politics, and Modernity II

305

cannot be assimilated.”1 Such ideas are commonplace today; historians often
use the metaphors of “weeding” society, or of “engineering” it.2
Empirically, in the case examined in this book, this view does not seem to
hold up at all. This study instead confirms the description of modern society
developed by Don Slater, in his study Consumer Culture and Modernity. Slater
argues that modern societies are marked by
pluralization. In place of a secure order of values and social positions there
is a bewildering variety and fluidity of values, roles, authorities, symbolic
resources and social encounters . . . modernity involves a “pluralization of
life-worlds” . . . modernity replaces traditional authority with “methodological
doubt” . . . ever more “lifeworlds” are made visible to us, become possible choices
of identity. . . . Modernity, then, involves the vertiginous production, display and
interaction of myriad possible ways of life, none of which has indisputable cultural
authority or value.3

That is a nice brief summary of the most obvious finding of this book. What
appears to have been happening in the debate over sexuality was not the
flattening out of difference, not the progressive articulation and imposition
of norms and normalcy, but the progressive articulation, organization, and
politicization of difference.
With respect specifically to sexuality, furthermore, the picture that emerges
here contradicts one of the central elements of the Foucauldian understanding of the place of sexuality in modern society (discussed in the introduction).
Foucault held that it was not true that “Victorian” society – European society
in the nineteenth century – was characterized by sexual repression, a taboo
on talking about sex. Instead, he believed, in modern societies people were
increasingly compelled to talk about sex to an expanding universe of medical
and psychological experts. This was how the new bourgeois social order disciplined itself – by eliciting confessions, defining pathologies, and prescribing
regimes of self-care or of medical intervention. This view does not adequately
capture the complex roles of class and gender in the politics of sexuality in this
period. Many moral conservatives and some sexologists in the decades around
1900 did insist on the need for men of the educated and governing classes to
talk more about sex. But they were very disturbed when male members of those
classes spoke to or wrote for anybody else about the topic. And as we have
seen, the taboo against women saying anything about sex, much less in public,
was intense; that against homosexuals doing so was even more so; and outside
1

Zygmunt Bauman, Modernity and Ambivalence (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991),
pp. 29, 8, 39.
2 For a discussion and references, see Edward Ross Dickinson, “Biopolitics, Fascism, Democracy:
Reflections on Our Discourse Concerning ‘Modernity,’” Central European History 37 (2004):
1–48.
3 Don Slater, Consumer Culture and Modernity (Cambridge: Polity, 1997), pp. 83–84.

306

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

of socialist circles, most regarded the opinions of working people as at best
irrelevant and at worst pernicious.
This is not to say that Foucault was simply wrong about the matter, or
that Lawrence Birken was simply right. It is certainly true that there was a
growing “institutional incitement to speak about” sex – or at least multiplying
opportunities to do so. It is also true that there were multiplying efforts at
“displacement, intensification, reorientation, and modification of desire itself,”
and that many of these efforts sought to subject sexuality to “systems of utility,
regulated for the greater good of all, made to function according to an optimum.
Sex was not something one simply judged; it was a thing one administered.”4
All the movements examined here sought to “administer” sexuality – to direct,
shape, contain, regulate, and define it, to make it socially and politically useful.
All certainly agreed that sexuality is a central and decisive part of human
identity, and that therefore the fate of humanity – social and political order,
economic and military power, and individual health and happiness – depends
in large part on our ability to manage sexuality appropriately. Specifically,
they all appear to have believed that freedom and power go hand in hand,
and that sex is the key to both. There were of course wildly varying models
of how this triad was structured. Conservative Christians held that conquering
sexual desire secured the inward freedom of the spiritual man, and that doing
so made him manly enough to defend liberty against its internal and external
enemies. Sex reformers believed that liberating sexual desire would make people
creative, joyful, and inwardly free and would thus sweep away the foundations
of the authoritarian order and unleash reproductive and cultural forces that
would guarantee national security. Hypervirile homosexuals, venereologists,
mainstream feminists, and so forth all had their own variations. But all agreed
on the world-historical importance, the sheer potency, of sex.
To that extent it makes sense to argue, as some historians have recently
done, that there was a rough consensus regarding sexuality, and particularly
regarding its political significance.5 But we should be precise about what we
know when we know that. Knowing that modern people think this way about
sexuality helps us to define a particular field of contention central to the life
of modern societies. What that field of contention creates is possibilities, however, and not outcomes. A growing number of social groups and individuals
were actively and determinedly claiming the authority to speak about sex for
themselves, often in quite self-conscious assertion of their own sexual “subjectivity,” the legitimacy and authenticity of their own experience of sex. Many
4

Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality: An Introduction, vol. I (New York: Vintage, 1990),
pp. 18, 23, 24.
5 See, e.g., Annette Timm, The Politics of Fertility in Twentieth-Century Berlin (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2010), pp. 10, 12; Atina Grossman, Reforming Sex: The German
Movement for Birth Control and Abortion Rights, 1920–1950 (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1995), p. 47.

Sex, Politics, and Modernity II

307

of them did so in the face of attempts to silence them with very intense prohibitions, taboos, and even punishments. And the whole discussion among these
interlocutors certainly did not add up to something coherent, to a regime of
sexuality. There was no deeper coherence or logic to the multiple divergent
strategies for managing sexuality that they advocated, or the multiple political
agendas to which they hitched their conceptions of sexuality. There is indeed
a logic at work in a society wracked by contention between advocates of
free love, polygamy, serial monogamy, “trial marriages,” abstinence followed
by lifelong monogamous marriage, hygienically sound prostitution, “physiological friendship,” prohibition of contraceptives and the right to abortion,
eugenics and pronatalism, authoritarian monarchy, liberal democracy, social
democracy, and racial-eugenic totalitarianism. But it is a logic of conflict, not
of coherence.6 There was consensus only as to what to disagree about.
Foucault himself defined this perspective neatly, in an early essay in which he
urged historians not to look for the coherence hidden behind social complexity
“because this search assumes the existence of immobile forms that precede the
external world of accident and succession”; it aims to “compose the finally
reduced diversity of time into a totality fully closed upon itself.” In truth,
instead, Foucault held that the “forces operating in history are not controlled
by destiny or regulative mechanisms, but respond to haphazard conflicts.”7
Bruno Latour made the same argument, suggesting that we should stop trying to
identify monolithically coherent calculations, interests, agendas, or imperatives
hidden behind the apparent complexities of modern social life – that we should
“no longer seek to be even cleverer, even more critical, even deeper into the
‘era of suspicion’” but rather take those complexities seriously, and “sort out
instead of debunking.”8 And Margaret Archer has referred to the approach
both were rejecting as “downwards conflation” – the idea that the messy
details of individual and social life don’t matter because society and culture
have a deeper, coherent structure that actually determines everything. In such
a construct, “the course of social change is never pictured as a wild zigzag,
as social groups struggle to wrest the wheel from one another.”9 This latter
description of course precisely fits the findings of this book – and the history
of Germany in the twentieth century.
It should be said, in this context, that the debate over sexual morality was
driving some people in Germany toward a new kind of authoritarianism. In
1908, for example, a prominent member of the Catholic morality movement in
6

Foucault, History, p. 144.
Michel Foucault, “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History,” in Michel Foucault: Language, CounterMemory, Practice, ed. Donald F. Bouchard (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977), 152,
142, 154.
8 Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993),
p. 47.
9 Margaret S. Archer, “Social Theory and the Analysis of Society,” in Knowing the Social World,
ed. Tim May and Malcolm Williams (Philadelphia: Open University Press, 1998), p. 75.
7

308

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

Munich argued that sex reformers constituted a “moral revolutionary movement that is advancing methodically, conquering ever more new terrain,” and
should be suppressed no less rigorously than would a movement that preached
“regicide or the confiscation of private property.”10 Helene Lange remarked in
1909 that “right about now it would not be a bad thing if a censor would forbid
any philosophizing about love and allow discussion of the sexual question only
in strictly scientific terminology.”11 In 1910 Ludwig Weber even suggested
that he would like to lynch the sex reformers.12 Already in 1907 Max von
Gruber had argued that the “overloud fools” in the sex-reform movement
should be “silenced,” and that the “disgusting brood of perverts and homosexuals” should be “stamped out.”13 And as we have seen in Chapter 11, even
some men active in sexology (Paul Näcke, Otto Adler, and Erich Lilienthal)
argued that it might be better if not so many people were interested in discussing
the topic. But the obvious point here is that the desire to make everyone shut
up was the product not of a homogenizing, bureaucratic, instrumental-rational
dynamic of modernity but precisely of its opposite. These people were sick of
arguing, of brawling, of the multiplicity of opinions, of the endless expansion
of public discussion and debate, and above all of being increasingly and multifariously disagreed with. They were sick of the pluralization and mobilization
that modernity creates.
But why was there pluralization and mobilization? Why was there a brawl?
The foregoing chapters suggest that a whole range of quite obvious and concrete
social, cultural, and indeed technological changes were crucial in fueling this
process – a process that was, moreover, characteristic of almost all aspects of
European life in this period.14
First, the ideas of those who took part in the major organizations involved
can often be derived directly from their social background. We cannot find it
extraordinary that high clergy and government officials believed that in sexual
matters everyone should fear God and be obedient to authority. It is hardly
surprising that many medical men thought that everyone should submit to a
benevolent medical “tyranny” (as Albert Neisser put it). That doctors launched
relatively effective organizational efforts to persuade people to do so merely
reflects the growing social weight of the profession: the number of doctors in
Germany grew about three times as fast as the population as a whole between
1880 and 1910, and the proportion of doctors who were members of the
major professional associations grew from less than 60 percent to more than
10

Otto von Erlbach, “Bühne und Moral,” Allgemeine Rundschau 5 (1908): 372.
Helene Lange, “Feministische Gedankenanarchie,” in Frauenbewegung und Sexualethik:
Beiträge zur modernen Ehekritik, ed. Gertrude Bäumer et al. (Heilbronn: Salzer, 1909),
p. 53.
12 Cited in Helene Stöcker, Zehn Jahre Mutterschutz (Berlin: Oesterheld, 1915), p. 18.
13 Max von Gruber, Kolonisation in der Heimat (Munich: Oldenbourg, 1907), p. 36.
14 See particularly Stefan-Ludwig Hoffmann, “Democracy and Associations in the Long Nineteenth Century: Toward a Transnational Perspective,” Journal of Modern History 75 (2003).
11

Sex, Politics, and Modernity II

309

80 percent.15 Nor is it surprising that many people active in journalism, the
arts, and cultural administration believed that freedom of expression (including
sexual self-expression) was essential to the health of the social order, and that
they organized to advance that view – for example, in the WHK or the BfM.
These professions, too, were rapidly expanding in the period – in tandem with
the expansion, for example, of the press, libraries, and museums.16 That socialist intellectuals should hold the sexual mores of the bourgeoisie to be corrupt
is not astonishing, either; and the explosive growth of the socialist movement
in both numbers and cultural competence lent their opinions growing weight.
The political position of the misogynist sexologists is less easy to read, except
insofar as they too were doctors. But a large proportion of them were also academics of one sort or another, and it makes sense both that they would try to
position themselves as having access to privileged knowledge about what was
good for the nation (or “race”) and that they would, in effect, try to preserve
the male monopoly over access to higher education and academia by insisting
that women were ineradicably stupid.
The expansion of women’s white-collar employment was clearly a particularly important instance of this broader pattern. The key role of teachers in
all the major women’s movements – including, for example, Gertrud Bäumer,
Hedwig Dransfeld, Maria Lischnewska, and Katharina Scheven – is symptomatic of a broader social development. Whereas the number of male teachers doubled between 1861 and 1891, the number of female teachers almost
quintupled.17 Other women’s professions (for instance, in health care or sales)
expanded at similar rates. And it is hardly surprising that professional women
would find objectionable laws that subjected them to arbitrary arrest – for
example, on their way home from work in the evening – and medical inspection,
or laws that required that many of them (as civil servants) be fired if they got
married.
Clearly, then, the debate over sex was in part simply a reflection of the growing complexity and diversity of German society. The rapid expansion, rising
level of organization, and expanding political activity of many professions was
generating new interests; it was also giving a growing number of people the
financial means, disposable time, and social capital to pursue those interests
through organized activism. In some important cases, those people came from
social groups – the working class or women – who had historically had far less
15

Claudia Huerkamp, Der Aufstieg der Ärzte im 19. Jahrhundert (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, 1985), p. 251.
16 On museums, see, e.g., Alon Confino, The Nation as Local Metaphor: Württemberg, Imperial
Germany, and National Memory, 1871–1918 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1997). Lynn Abrams called libraries “the flavour of the decade in the 1900s”; Abrams, Workers’
Culture in Imperial Germany (New York: Routledge, 1992), p. 149.
17 James Albisetti, Schooling German Girls and Women (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1988), p. 83; Volker Berghahn, Imperial Germany, 1871–1918 (New York: Berghahn,
2005), p. 322.

310

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

access to those resources, and had therefore been far less able to articulate their
views and interests and project them in public discussion.
Second, however, a good deal of the complexity of German society in this
period derives from the fact that it was modernizing but still far from modern.
There were still major and powerful social groups that were firmly rooted in
nineteenth-century culture and values. Again, it is no surprise that members of
the clergy, in particular, responded negatively to the cultural transformations
that formed an important part of the broader modernization process. The clergy
was very clearly in decline relative to other professions – theology students, for
example, made up about a third of those enrolled at German universities in the
1830s, a fifth in the 1880s, and a tenth in the 1910s. But the clergy was still
highly influential among the political and social elite; and some two-thirds of
the Protestant clergy identified with the orthodox Lutheran tradition, rather
than with more liberal variants.18
It is tempting to see the clergy and particularly the conservative Christian
morality campaigners as champions of premodern values. Charles Taylor, for
example, offers a description of “premodern moral order” that seems to fit the
morality movement rather well: it was “organized around a notion of a hierarchy in society that expresses and corresponds to a hierarchy in the cosmos,” in
which “some had greater dignity and value than others” and “a human being
can be a proper moral agent only when embedded in a larger social whole.”
(He sees the modern moral order, in contrast, as characterized by “an ethic
of freedom and mutual benefit” – which might be a good one-line summary
of sex reform.)19 Don Slater’s characterization of the response of traditional
society to the rise of modern consumerism fits even better: “Consumer culture . . . comes to stand for all sorts of slavery: to desire and insatiable needs,
to social scrutiny and competition, to political as well as cultural despotism
and tyranny. Liberation from social restraint really means the loss of natural
feeling and of stable social values and therefore the weakening, disorientation
and subjugation of the individual.”20
It should be obvious, however, that to view the morality campaigners as
somehow not modern would be to completely misunderstand them. The morality campaigners used modern techniques without hesitation – associations, consumer actions such as boycotts, the press, conferences, parliamentary politics,
state intervention, and so on. They did so to gain a degree of influence over
policy, public opinion, and popular behavior that they had never had before.
And they were not defending the sexual status quo, the “traditional” order of
18

Konrad H. Jarausch, Students, Society, and Politics in Imperial Germany (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1982), p. 29 (figures); Friedrich Wilhelm Graf, “Rettung der Persönlichkeit:
Protestantische Theologie als Kulturwissenschaft des Christentums,” in Kultur und Kulturwissenschaften um 1900, ed. Rüdiger vom Bruch et al. (Wiesbaden: Stuttgart, 1989), pp. 104–105,
109.
19 Charles Taylor, Modern Social Imaginaries (London: Duke University Press, 2004), pp. 9, 11,
19, 21.
20 Slater, Consumer Culture, p. 83.

Sex, Politics, and Modernity II

311

sexual relations; they were in insurrection against it – for example, against the
commonsense brutalism of male sexual culture, against the regulation of prostitution, and against the tradition of the nude in Western art. They were using
very modern techniques to make a grab for very modern forms of power. Their
campaign was no less conditioned by the opportunities created by modernity
than were sex reform or the campaign against venereal diseases.
Third, specific changes in the organization of German culture were also
clearly of critical importance. Many of the publications in which views and
interests were articulated were entrepreneurial initiatives that took advantage
of the explosive growth of the commercial market for the printed word. This
was true, for example, of Die Frau, a project of the leadership of the moderate
faction in the BDF; Stöcker’s Mutterschutz/Die Neue Generation; Vanselow’s
Geschlecht und Gesellschaft; Marcuse’s Sexual-Probleme; and the Zeitschrift
für Sexualwissenschaft at least in its 1908 incarnation. These journals could
bring new viewpoints to the public debate because there literally was a new
market for them. But the same was true of the expanding pamphlet and monographic literature on issues relating to sex and sexuality.
This point can be generalized. Moral conservatives were in fact responding
to real changes in their society; and those changes were congenial to their
opponents. The simple fact of urbanization was obviously of great importance
as an engine of diversification and debate. The formation of a homosexual
subculture specifically in Berlin, for example, played an important role in
giving rise to the homosexual rights movement – and, as we have seen, was
among the more effective “arguments” Magnus Hirschfeld used to influence
peers such as Iwan Bloch and Paul Näcke. The expanding urban market really
did support the massive growth of the media, commercial entertainments, and
prostitution. Urban people in Germany’s rapidly expanding cities – whether
working class or white-collar middle class – also had to innovate furiously to
build new lives in their new environments; among the things they developed
were new modes of courtship and sexual relationships, as well as new
forms of entertainment and socialization. The birthrate really was declining,
particularly in Germany’s cities.
Real changes in the information available to activists also played an important role in shaping the debate over sexuality. One particularly curious feature
of the debate is that very few of the bourgeois and upper-class people involved
appear to have had much notion what sexual practices in their society actually looked like. Iwan Bloch, for example, was astonished by how matter-offact most working-class people were about contraception and abortion; and
he remarked somewhat bemusedly that working people even “regard sexual
anomalies as something natural” and were not terribly bothered by anal sex or
homosexuality.21 In 1909 the Munich police, on asking registered prostitutes in
that city who their customers were, discovered that most men who paid for sex
21

Iwan Bloch, Das Sexualleben unserer Zeit (Berlin: Marcus, 1907), p. 265; Iwan Bloch, Beiträge
zur Aetiologie der Psychopathia sexualis, vol. I (Dresden: Dohrn, 1902), p. 64.

312

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

were not young, single men at all, as most assumed, but married men in search
of “variety.”22 Early survey research around 1910 shocked many observers –
for example, by revealing how early most people (men and women) first had
sex, or that virtually everyone masturbated, or how many people were attracted
to their own sex. Social statistics on the proportion of young men and women
who were unmarried helped to undermine the belief that the conservative code
of sexual morality was realistic at all. The expansion of medical knowledge too
played a crucial role in at least one case: the development of the Wassermann
test and the discovery of the true extent and social cost of venereal diseases
was an important factor in sparking the formation of the DGBG. In short,
the development of new, specifically modern forms of knowledge played an
important role in helping to inspire, and build support for, new initiatives –
although of course different groups drew diametrically opposed lessons from
such discoveries.
Fourth, the growing extent and intensity of international communications
and travel may also have played an important role in activating the debate
within Germany. The Swede Ellen Key was the single most influential theorist
of sex reform in Germany; her compatriot Anton Nyström delivered perhaps
the most articulate defense of the idea that abstinence was bad for one’s health
(at the DGBG conference of 1911); Ellen Sundström/Ammann became the
leader of the KDF in Bavaria; and Seved Ribbing was highly influential in more
conservative sexological circles.23 Josephine Butler, the key leader in the British
abolitionist movement, played a major role in motivating the German abolitionists, the most influential of whom met her personally on trips to London –
where Lida Gustava Heymann gave her a personal promise “to take up the
struggle in Germany,” and where Anna Pappritz first learned that prostitution was regulated in her own country.24 Edward Carpenter and Havelock
Ellis were very influential in German sex reform. The German National Committee Against the Traffic in Women was founded partly on the initiative of
the English National Vigilance Association; the chairman of the latter was
22

Quoted in Sybille Krafft, Zucht und Unzucht: Prostitution und Sittenpolizei im München der
Jahrhundertwende (Munich: Hugendubel, 1996), p. 143.
23 Anton Nyström, “Die Beziehungen der sexuellen Abstinenz zur Gesundheit und die sich daraus
ergebenden praktischen Folgerungen,” in DGBG, Verhandlungen der Achten Jahresversammlung der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten in Dresden am
10. und 11. Juni 1911 (Leipzig: Barth, 1911), pp. 82–92; Anton Nyström, Das Geschlechtsleben und seine Gesetze (Berlin: Walther, 1904); Alfred Kall, Katholische Frauenbewegung in
Deutschland (Paderborn: Schöningh, 1983), p. 316; translation of a letter from Ellen Ammann
to Lydia Wahlstein, 13 December 1911, Ellen Ammann papers, Archiv des Erzbistums München
und Freising, Rep. 199, Ordner 4; Seved Ribbing, Die sexuelle Hygiene und ihre ethischen Konsequenzen: drei Vorlesungen (Leipzig: Hobbing, 1891).
24 Lida Gustava Heymann and Anita Augspurg, Erlebtes – Erschautes: Deutsche Frauen kämpfen
für Freiheit, Recht und Frieden, 1850–1940 (Meisenheim/Glan: Hain, 1972), p. 50; Kerstin
Wolf, “Herrenmoral: Anna Pappritz and Abolitionism in Germany,” Women’s History Review
17 (2008): 227.

Sex, Politics, and Modernity II

313

personally present at its founding meeting in Berlin in 1899.25 Reinhold
Seeberg, probably the most influential champion of conservative Protestant
sexual ethics in the years before World War I, was an immigrant from the Russian Empire. So were Alexander von Oettingen, who wrote an influential early
work on moral statistics; the first general secretary of the AKDS, Samuel Keller;
Wilhelm Ostwald, chair of the DMB; Elisar von Kupffer and Franz Neugebauer,
both influential in the homosexual rights movement; and Willibald Hentschel.
Johannes Rutgers, an influential advocate for contraception, and L. S. A. M.
von Römer, who published frequently in the WHK’s journal, were Dutch.26
August Forel was Swiss. And Germanophone Austrians were ubiquitous in
Germany – including, for example, Grete Meisel-Hess, Adele Schreiber, and
Marie Stritt. Even when they did not immigrate to Germany, their works
were often important there – Sigmund Freud is one good example; Richard
von Krafft-Ebing, himself actually an immigrant to the Austrian Empire from
southern Germany, is another.
All these people were able to contribute to the debate in Germany because
very similar debates were taking place across the European world. In Britain,
France, Switzerland, Ireland, the United States, and elsewhere, the timing, tone,
and terms of this debate were strikingly similar.27 No doubt Germans would
25

DNBM, Der “Mädchenhandel” und seine Bekämpfung (DNBM: Berlin, 1903), pp. 13–14.
Robert C. Williams, Culture in Exile: Russian Emigrés in Germany, 1881–1941 (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1972), pp. 39–40; Thomas Pung, “Die Wissenschaftlerfamilie v. Oettingen im Baltikum,” in Deutsche im Zarenreich und Russen in Deutschland: Naturforscher,
Gelehrte, Ärzte und Wissenschaftler im 18. und 19. Jahrhundert, ed. Ingrid Kästner and
Regine Pfrepper (Aachen: Shaker, 2005), pp. 367–368; Williams, Culture, p. 42; Wilhalm
Ostwald, Lebenslinien: Eine Selbstbiographie (Berlin: Klasing, 1926); Marita Keilson-Lauritz,
Die Geschichte der eigenen Geschichte (Berlin: Rosa Winkel, 1997), p. 46; Franz Neugebauer,
Hermaphroditismus beim Menschen (Leipzig: Klinkhardt, 1908); Fabio Ricci, Ritter, Tod und
Eros: Die Kunst Elisar von Kupffers (1872–1942) (Cologne: Böhlau, 2007), p. 7; “Elisar von
Kupffer,” in Der Eigene: Ein Blatt für männliche Kultur: Ein Querschnitt durch die erste Homosexuellenzeitschrift der Welt, ed. Joachim S. Hohmann (Frankfurt: Foerster, 1981), p. 219;
Peter Emil Becker, Zur Geschichte der Rassenhygiene: Wege ins Dritte Reich (Stuttgart: Georg
Thieme, 1988), pp. 246–247.
27 See, e.g., Judith Surkis, Sexing the Citizen: Morality and Masculinity in France, 1870–1920
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2006); Andrea Mansker, Sex, Honor and Citizenship
in Early Third Republic France (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2011); Natalia Gerodetti,
Modernising Sexualities: Towards a Socio-Historical Understanding of Sexualities in the Swiss
Nation (Bern: Lang, 2005); Pamela K. Gilbert, The Citizen’s Body: Desire, Health, and the
Social in Victorian England (Columbus: Ohio University Press, 2007); Lucy Bland, Banishing the Beast: English Feminism and Sexual Morality, 1865–1914 (London: Penguin, 1995);
Angus McLaren, The Trials of Masculinity: Policing Sexual Boundaries, 1870–1930 (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1997); Margaret Jackson, The Real Facts of Life: Feminism and
the Politics of Sexuality c. 1850–1940 (Oxford: Taylor & Francis, 1994); Sheila Jeffreys, The
Spinster and Her Enemies (London: Pandora, 1985); Seth Koven, Slumming: Sexual and Social
Politics in Victorian London (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004); Lesley A. Hall,
Sex, Gender, and Social Change in Britain Since 1880 (New York: Saint Martin’s, 2000); Lisa
Fischer and Emil Brix, eds., Die Frauen der Wiener Moderne (Munich: Oldenbourg, 1997);
26

314

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

have had a lively debate about sex even if left to their own devices; but it
is equally clear that the debate in Germany was so varied and intense in part
because it was very much a European debate played out on German soil. Again,
that fact was partly a result of the rapid development of the communications
and transportation infrastructure in the late nineteenth century.
Finally, the opportunities and challenges created by the expansion of the
German state in this period played also an important role. In almost every
area of life – policing, public health, economic regulation, social welfare, and
the military – the role of the state was expanding, largely in response to rising demands for intervention from an increasingly mobilized, organized, and
politically active citizenry. As a result, public expenditures rose by 40 percent
relative to Germany’s GDP between 1880 and 1910.28 As we have seen, all the
parties to the debate over sex tried, with varying degrees of success, to make
use of the expanding state to advance their own agendas. To the extent that
they were successful, they elicited escalating responses from their opponents.
In fact, one of the features of the period around 1900 that fueled the escalation of the debate over sexuality was that the complexity and rapid expansion
of the German state and its social functions permitted almost everyone to make
real, concrete gains in shaping public policy. At the time, almost all reformers
expressed frustration at the conservatism and inertia of the Imperial state. In
fact, however, both their social profile and close ties to the major political parties and public institutions (the courts, army, bureaucracy, city government,
etc.) gave a number of reform organizations considerable leverage on various
parts of the Imperial, state, and local governments. Thus, for example, opponents of the regulation of prostitution were able to secure important changes in
the way the police treated (or at least were directed to treat) women suspected
of prostitution, and they gained some local victories against regulation; but at
the same time the advocates of regulation were able to move other cities to
adopt an even more coercive form of regulation (Kasernierung). Conservative
Christians were able to secure the introduction of important censorship measures, whether in the form of revisions to the Criminal Code or through local
police ordinances and licensing practices. Radical feminist sex reformers were

Harriet Anderson, Utopian Feminism: Women’s Movements in Fin-de-Siecle Vienna (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992); Britta McEwen, Sexual Knowledge: Feeling, Fact,
and Social Reform in Vienna, 1900–1934 (New York/Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2012); Dairmaid Ferriter, Occasions of Sin: Sex and Society in Modern Ireland (London: Profile, 2009);
Chrystel Hug, The Politics of Sexual Morality in Ireland (New York: St. Martin’s, 1999); Gaines
M. Foster, Moral Reconstruction: Christian Lobbyists and the Federal Legislation of Morality,
1865–1920 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002); Alison M. Parker, Purifying America: Women, Cultural Reform, and Pro-Censorship Activism, 1873–1933 (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1997); Laura Engelstein, The Keys to Happiness: Sex and the Search
for Modernity in Fin-de-Siècle Russia (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1994).
28 Gerd Hohorst, Jürgen Kocka, and Gerhard A. Ritter, eds., Sozialgeschichtliches Arbeitsbuch,
vol. II (Munich: Beck, 1975), p. 148.

Sex, Politics, and Modernity II

315

unable to gain any purchase on legislation, but they did make gains in local
government: the explosive growth of the system of public legal guardianship,
for example, revolutionized the position of single mothers and their children,
at least in many larger cities. (Again, that provoked horrified responses from
conservatives in the charitable establishments of the two Christian confessions,
who feared that although public officials might be more successful in securing
child support payments from fathers, they would not secure for their wards a
strong moral and religious education – and so would merely contribute to the
spiritual crisis that lay at the root of extramarital sex in the first place.)
This, then, is what modernization does: it creates greater social complexity,
while giving more people the wherewithal to articulate and assert their identities, their values, and their agendas. It creates a brawl. By 1914 the contours of
three moderately distinct coalitions, built around broadly overlapping values
and agendas, had begun to emerge from the brawl of German modernity. But
even the most coherent of these coalitions was still quite diffuse and was in fact
often wracked by internal disagreements.
Indeed, in some cases, elements of coherence, fundamental overlaps in values or ideas, merely testify to the profound depth of the hostilities that the
debate over sexuality reflected. In no case is this truer than in that of what
is surely among the most disturbing features of the broad discussion of sexuality in Germany society before World War I: the deep, pervasive hostility
toward women expressed across almost the entire spectrum of male opinion.
This hostility could be wrapped in the language of chivalrous patriarchalism, as
among conservative Christians; or in the language of cynical medical authoritarianism, as within the DGBG; or in the language of frank and aggressive
misogyny, as among sexologists; or even in the well-meaning male feminism
of reform-friendly sexologists like Iwan Bloch. But whatever the peculiarities
of intellectual and institutional codes and contexts, it seems that men almost
everywhere in German society simply had a hard time imagining that women
were, or could be, fully human. Femaleness appears to have been for most men
an essentially alien condition, a state of difference, a state specifically of deficit,
of absence. This lack might make women dangerous; it might make them inferior; it might make them mysterious; but it always made them, so to speak, not
men. For women, this hostility must have been subliminally suffocating. But
there was of course an opposite equivalent: the somewhat less pervasive conviction that men were by nature animalistic, undisciplined, violent, destructive,
and therefore unlike women. In this view men either were not entirely human
or at least represented that in humanity which turns its face from the Divine
(whether God or Life).
Taken to these extremes, in fact, the debate about the significance and
imperatives of sex suggests how fundamental the problem of sex ultimately
was to Germans in this period. What is politically possible and necessary is
fundamentally a question of what man is, and is not. That question appears to
have been, for many Germans in this period, a question about the difference

316

Sex, Freedom, and Power in Imperial Germany, 1880–1914

between men and women – perhaps because for so many people the boundary
between the sexes was instinctively felt to be precisely that fundamental but
hazy definitional boundary between the human and the not-so-human.29 At
the root of the matter, then, in a sense we can construct a closed conceptual
circle: for Germans in this period sex was “about” politics because politics
was “about” the nature of humankind, which was “about” sex. Small wonder,
then, that the stakes in the debate over sexuality seemed so high.

29

See, e.g., Simone de Beauvoir, The Second Sex, trans. and ed. H. M. Parshley (New York: Alfred
Knopf, 1968); Judith Butler, Undoing Gender (New York: Routledge, 2004).

Select Bibliography

Journals
Allgemeine Rundschau (1904–1914)
Archiv für Rassen- und Gesellschaftsbiologie (1905–1914)
Centralblatt des Bundes deutscher Frauenvereine (1899–1913)
Die christliche Frau (1902–1914)
Evangelische Frauenzeitung (1900–1914)
1900–1904: Mitteilungen des Deutsch-Evangelischen Frauenbundes
Die Frau: Monatsschrift für das gesamte Frauenleben unserer Zeit (1893–1914)
Die Frauenbewegung (1897–1914)
Frauenblätter: Organ der Sittlichkeitsbewegung für das deutsche Frauenwelt (1892–
1914)
1892–1893: Sittlichkeitsblätter (thereafter various subtitles)
Geschlecht und Gesellschaft (1906–1914)
Die Gleichheit: Zeitschrift für die Interessen der Arbeiterinnen (1896–1914)
Historisch-Politische Blätter (1900–1914)
Jahrbuch für sexuelle Zwischenstufen (1899–1908, 1913–1914)
Korrespondenzblatt der Berliner Vereine zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Sittenlosigkeit (1887–1891)
1891–1907: Korrespondenzblatt zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Sittenlosigkei
1908–1909: Zeitschrift der deutsch-evangelischen Vereine zur Förderung der Sittlichkeit
1910–1914: Zeitschrift des deutsch-evangelischen Vereins zur Förderung der Sittlichkeit
Mitteilungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten
(1903–1914)
Die Neue Generation (1905–1914)
1905–1907: Mutterschutz: Zeitschrift zur Reform der sexuellen Ethik
Die Neue Zeit (1884–1914)
317

318

Select Bibliography

Sexual-Probleme (1908–1914)
Sozialistische Monatshefte (1895–1914)
1895–1896: Der sozialistische Akademiker
Vierteljahrsberichte des wissenschaftlich-humanitären Komitees (1909–1912)
Der Volkswart (1908–1914)
Zeitschrift für Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten (1903–1914)
Zeitschrift für Sexualwissenschaft (1908, 1914)
Published Sources
AKDS, Verhandlungen der Halle’schen Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeits-Vereine
vom 8. und 9. Mai 1890 (Berlin: Berliner Stadtmission, 1890).
AKDS, Verhandlungen der Allgemeinen Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine
vom 14. und 15. Oktober 1891 zu Dresden (Berlin: AKDS, 1892).
AKDS, Verhandlungen der Allgemeinen Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine
vom 19. und 20. Oktober 1892 zu Darmstadt (Berlin: AKDS, 1893).
AKDS, Verhandlungen der Allgemeinen Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine
am 6. und 7. September 1893 zu Frankfurt a.O. (Berlin: AKDS, 1894).
AKDS, Die XVI. Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine in Köln vom
2. bis 4. Oktober 1904 (Berlin: AKDS/A. Dartsch, 1904).
AKDS, Die XVII. Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine in Magdeburg vom 1.–3. Oktober 1905 (Berlin: AKDS/A. Dartsch, 1905).
AKDS, Kampf gegen die Schund- und Schmutzliteratur: Verfügung des Königlichen
Konsistoriums der Provinz Sachsen (Berlin: AKDS, 1910).
Altenloh, Emilie, Zur Soziologie des Kino: Die Kino-Unternnehmung und die sozialen
Schichten ihrer Besucher (Leipzig: Spamer, 1914).
Baars, Ernst, Sexuelle Ethik (Berlin: Akademischer Bund Ethos, 1908).
Bachem, Karl, Vorgeschichte, Geschichte und Politik der deutschen Zentrumspartei
(Cologne: Bachem, 1929).
Bäumer, Gertrud, Agnes Bluhm, Ika Freudenberg, Anna Kraussneck, Helene Lange,
Anna Pappritz, Alice Salomon, and Marianne Weber, Frauenbewegung und Sexualethik: Beiträge zur modernen Ehekritik (Heilbronn: Salzer, 1909).
Bäumer, Gertrud, and Helene Lange, eds., Handbuch der Frauenbewegung, Teil II:
Frauenbewegung und soziale Frauenthätitgkeit in Deutschland nach Einzelgebieten
(Berlin: W. Moeser, 1901).
Bebel, August, Die Frau in der Vergangenheit, Gegenwart und Zukunft (Zurich:
Schweizerische Volksbuchhandlung, 1887).
Bebel, August, Die Frau und der Sozialismus (Die Frau in der Vergangenheit, Gegenwart
und Zukunft), twenty-first printing (Stuttgart: Dietz, 1893).
Bebel, August, Die Frau und der Sozialismus (Stuttgart: Dietz, 1910).
BfM, Mutterschutz und Sexualreform: Referate und Leisätze des I. Internationalen
Kongresses für Muttershutz und Sexualreform in Dresden 28./30. Setptember 1911
(Breslau: Preuss & Jünger, 1912).
Blanck, Anna, 50 Jahre Freundinnenarbeit 1877–1927: Festschrift zum Jubiläum (Heidelberg: Evangelischer Verlag, 1927).
Blaschko, Alfred, Syphilis und Prostitution vom Standpunkte der öffentlichen Gesundheitspflege (Berlin: Karger, 1893).

Select Bibliography

319

Blaschko, Alfred, Die gesundheitlichen Schäden der Prostitution und deren Bekämpfung
(Berlin: Loewenthal, 1904).
Bloch, Iwan [pseudonym Eugen Dühring], Das Geschlechtsleben in England (Charlotenburg: Barsdorf, 1901).
Bloch, Iwan, Beiträge zur Aetiologie der Psychopathia sexualis, 2 vols. (Dresden: Dohrn,
1902/1903).
Bloch, Iwan, Die Perversen (Berlin: Pan, 1905).
Bloch, Iwan, Das Sexualleben unserer Zeit (Berlin: Marcus, 1907).
Bölsche, Wilhelm, Das Liebesleben in der Natur: Eine Entwickelungsgeschichte der
Liebe, vol. 3 (Leipzig: Eugen Diederichs, 1903).
Bohn, Friedrich, ed., Kongress zur Bekämpfung der unsittlichen Literatur: Köln im Jahre
1904 (Berlin: AKDS, 1905).
Bohn, Friedrich, Unsere Forderungen zum Vorentwurf des neuen Strafgesetzbuches
(Berlin: AKDS, 1910).
Bohn, Friedrich, Was dann? Positive Vorschläge zur Lösung der Prostitutionsfrage
(Berlin: AKDS, 1914).
Bornträger, Jean, Der Geburtenrückgang in Deutschland, seine Bewertung und
Bekämpfung [also published as Veröffentlichungen aus dem Gebiete der Medizinalverwaltung, vol. 1, no. 13] (Berlin: Richard Schoetz, 1912).
Bré, Ruth, Das Recht auf die Mutterschaft: Eine Forderung zur Bekämpfung der
Prostitution, der Frauen- und Geschlechtskrankheiten (Leipzig: Frauen-Rundschau,
1903).
Bré, Ruth, Staatskinder oder Mutterrecht? (Leipzig: Verlag der Monatsschrift für
Harnkrankheiten und sexuelle Hygiene, 1904).
Brunner, Karl, Unser Volk in Gefahr! Ein Kampfruf gegen die Schundliteratur
(Pforzheim: Verlag der Volkstümlichen Bücherei, 1911).
Brunner, Karl, Der Kinematograph von heute–eine Volksgefahr (Berlin: Vaterländische
Schriftenverband, 1913).
CAIM, Frauenarbeit und Familienwohl: Ein Nachwort des Central-Ausschusses für die
innere Mission (Berlin: Stadtmission, 1885).
CAIM, Zur Frage der öffentlichen Sittenlosigkeit (Berlin: CAIM, 1892).
CAIM, ed., Statistik der Inneren Mission der deutschen evangelischen Kirche (Berlin:
CAIM, 1899).
CAIM, Welche Ziele und Schranken sind der Frauenbewegung durch das Evangelium
gesetzt? (Berlin: CAIM, 1899).
CAIM, Verhandlungen des 32. Kongresses für Innere Mission in Braunschweig vom 21.
bis 24. September 1903 (Braunschweig: Hellmuth Wollermann, 1903).
CAIM, Verhandlungen des 35. Kongresses für Innere Mission in Stuttgart, vom 4. bis
7. Oktober 1909 (Hamburg: Rauhes Haus, 1910).
CAIM, Verhandlungen des 36. Kongresses für Innere Mission in Stettin vom 25. bis 28.
September 1911 (Hamburg: Agentur des Rauhen Hauses, 1911).
Cathrein, Victor, “Die sozialdemokratische Familie der Zukunft,” Stimmen aus MariaLaach 72 (1907): 263–280, 380–400.
Cauer, Minna, 25 Jahre Verein Frauenwohl, Gross-Berlin (Berlin: Loewenthal, 1913).
DEF, 30 Jahre Deutsch-Evangelischer Frauenbund (Hanover: DEF, 1929).
Dohm, Hedwig, Helene Stöcker, Käte Schirmacher, Ida Boy-Ed, Franziska Mann,
Elisabeth Dauthendey, Anita Augspurg, Adele Schreiber, Grete Meisel-Hess, Hans

320

Select Bibliography

von Kahlenberg, Hermione von Preuschen, Toni Schwabe, and Ruth Bré, Ehe? Zur
Reform der sexuellen Moral (Berlin: Internationale Verlagsanstalt für Kunst und Literatur, 1911).
Elberskirchen, Johanna, Die Prostitution des Mannes (Zurich: Verlags-Magazin, 1896).
Elberskirchen, Johanna, Die Sexualempfindung bei Weib und Mann, betrachtet vom
physiologisch-soziologischen Standpunkte (Leipzig: Jacques Hegner, 1903).
Elberskirchen, Johanna, Die Liebe des dritten Geschlechts: Homosexualitat, eine bisexuelle Varietät keine Entartung – keine Schuld (Leipzig: Spohr, 1904).
Elberskirchen, Johanna, Was hat der Mann aus Weib, Kind und sich gemacht? Revolution und Erlösung des Weibes (Leipzig: Magazin, 1904).
Ellger, Frauenbewegung und Sittlichkeitsbewegung (Hamburg: Rauhes Haus, 1909).
Engels, Friedrich, Der Ursprung der Familie, des Privateigentums und des Staates
(Zurich: Ring-Verlag, 1934).
Eulenburg, Albert, Sadismus und Masochismus (Wiesbaden: Bergmann, 1911).
Flexner, Abraham, Prostitution in Europe (New York: Century, 1914).
Foerster, Friedrich Wilhelm, Sexualethik und Sexualpädagogik: Eine Auseinandersetzung mit den Modernen (Munich: Josef Kösel, 1907).
Foerster, Friedrich Wilhelm, Lebensführung (Berlin: Reimer, 1910).
Foerster, Friedrich Wilhelm, Sexualethik und Sexualpädagogik, third edition (Munich:
Kösel, 1910).
Forel, August, Sexuelle Ethik (Munich: Reinhardt, 1906).
Forel, August, Die sexuelle Frage (Munich: Reinhardt, 1907).
Forel, August, Kulturbestrebungen der Gegenwart (Munich: Reinhardt, 1910).
Forel, August, Malthusianismus oder Eugenik? (Munich: Reinhardt, 1911).
Forel, August, Out of My Life and Work (New York: Norton, 1937).
Freud, Sigmund, Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie (Leipzig: Deuticke, 1915).
Friedländer, Benedict, Renaissance des Eros Uranios (Berlin: Lehmann, 1904).
Friedländer, Benedict, “Mitteilungen der Sezession des wissenschaftlich-humanitären
Komitees,” in Benedict Friedländer, Die Liebe Platons im Lichte der modernen Biologie (Berlin: Zack, 1909).
Fürth, Henriette, Das Geschlechtsproblem und die moderne Moral (Leipzig: Dietrich,
1908).
Fürth, Henriette, Staat und Sittlichkeit (Leipzig: Wehner, 1912).
Fürth, Henriette, “Der Rückgang der Geburten als soziales Problem,” Jahrbücher für
Nationalökonomie und Statistik 45 (1913).
Fürth, Henriette, Streifzüge durch das Land eines Lebens (Wiesbaden: Kommission für
die Geschichte der Juden in Hessen, 2010).
Gruber, Max von, Hygiene des Geschlechtslebens (Stuttgart: Moritz, 1905).
Gruber, Max von, Kolonisation in der Heimat (Munich: Oldenbourg, 1907).
Guillaume-Schack, Gertrud, Ein Wort zur Sittlichkeitsfrage (Berlin: Dolfuss, 1881).
Guillaume-Schack, Gertrud, Ueber unsere sittlichen Verhältnisse und die Bestrebungen und Arbeiten des Britisch-Continentalen und Allg. Bundes (Berlin: Dolfuss,
1882).
Gumplowicz, Ladislas, Ehe und freie Liebe (Berlin: Socialistische Monatshefte, 1900).
Häberlin, H., Die Ethik des Geschlechtslebens (Berlin: Franz Wunder, 1908).
Hellwig, Albert, Kind und Kino (Langensalza: Beyer & Söhne, 1914).
Hennig, H., ed., Quellenbuch zur Geschichte der Inneren Mission (Hamburg: Rauhes
Haus, 1912).

Select Bibliography

321

Hentschel, Willibald, Mittgart: Ein Weg zur Erneuerung der germanischen Rasse
(Leipzig: Fritsch, 1906).
Heymann, Lida Gustava, and Anita Augspurg, Erlebtes – Erschautes: Deutsche Frauen
kämpfen für Freiheit, Recht und Frieden 1850–1940 (Meisenheim/Glan: Hain, 1972).
Hilbert, Gerhard, Nietzsche’s Herrenmoral und die Moral des Christentums (Leipzig:
Deichert, 1910).
Hiller, Kurt, Leben gegen die Zeit (Reinbek: Rowohlt, 1969).
Hirschfeld, Magnus [pseudonym Th. Ramien], Sappho und Sokrates oder Wie erklärt
sich die Liebe der Männer und Frauen zu Personen des eigenen Geschlechts? (Leipzig:
Spohr, 1896).
Hirschfeld, Magnus, Berlin’s Drittes Geschlecht (Berlin: Rosa Winkel, 1991/Seemann,
1904).
Hirschfeld, Magnus, Die Kenntnis der homosexuelle Natur eine sittliche Forderung
(Berlin: Stolt, 1907).
Hirschfeld, Magnus, Sexualpsychologie und Volkspsychologie (Leipzig: Wigand’s,
1908).
Hirschfeld, Magnus, Naturgesetze der Liebe (Berlin: Pulvermacher, 1912).
Hirschfeld, Magnus, Die Homosexualität des Mannes und des Weibes (Berlin: Marcus,
1920).
Hirschfeld, Magnus, Von einst bis jetzt: Geschichte einer homosexuellen Bewegung
1897–1922 (Berlin: Rosa Winkel, 1986).
Jellinek, Camilla, Petition des Bundes Deutscher Frauenvereine, zur Reform des Strafgesetzbuches und der Strafprozessordnung (Mannheim: Bensheimer, 1909).
Jellinek, Camilla, Petition deutscher Frauen betreffend das Verbot weiblicher Bedienung
in Gast- und Schankwirtschaften (Gautzsch/Leipzig: Dietrich, 1910).
JFB, Referate gehalten auf dem 2. Delegiertentage des jüdischen Frauenbundes (Hamburg: JFB, 1907).
Kahl, W., Franz von Liszt, K. von Lilienthal, and J. Goldschmidt, Gegenentwurf zum
Vorentwurf eines deutschen Strafgesetzbuches (Berlin: Guttentag, 1911).
Kaisig, Karl, and Karl Rotter, Wo stehen Wir? Eine Orientierung im Kampfe gegen die
Schund- und Schmutzschriften (Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer, 1914).
Kemmer, Ludwig, Die graphische Reklame der Prostitution: Nach amtlichem Material
und nach eigenen Beobachtungen geschildert (Munich: Beck, 1906).
Key, Ellen, Missbrauchte Frauenkraft (Leipzig: Langen, 1898).
Key, Ellen, Liebe und Ethik (Berlin: Pan, 1905).
Key, Ellen, Der Lebensglaube: Betrachtungen über Gott, Welt, und Seele (Berlin:
Fischer, 1906).
Key, Ellen, Die Frauenbewegung (Frankfurt: Rütten & Loening, 1909).
Key, Ellen, Über Liebe und Ehe (Berlin: S. Fischer, 1911).
Key, Ellen, The Renaissance of Motherhood, trans. Anna E. B. Fried (New York: G. P.
Putnam’s Sons, 1914).
Kisch, Enoch Heinrich, Das Geschlechtsleben des Weibes in physiologischer,
pathologischer und hygienischer Beziehung (Berlin: Urban & Schwarzenberg,
1904).
Krafft-Ebing, Richard von, Lehrbuch der gerichtlichen Psychopathologie (Stuttgart:
Enke, 1875).
Krafft-Ebing, Richard von, Psychopathia sexualis mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der
Conträren Sexualempfindung (Stuttgart: Enke, 1892).

322

Select Bibliography

Krafft-Ebing, Richard von, Der Konträrsexuale vor dem Strafrichter (Leipzig: Deuticke,
1895).
Lange, Helene, Die Frauenbewegung in ihren modernen Problemen (Leipzig: Quelle &
Meyer, 1908).
Leixer, Otto von, Zur Reform unserer Volkslitteratur (Berlin: Drewitz, 1891).
Lennartz, Ernst, Der Kölner Männerverein zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen Unsittlichkeit: Seine Geschichte und sein Wirken (Cologne: Josef Zacher, n.d.).
Lennartz, Ernst, Duncan – She – Desmond: Beiträge zur Beurteilung und Geschichte
der Nackt-Kultur (Cologne: Benziger, 1908).
Liese, Wilhelm, Wohlfahrtspflege und Caritas im Deutschen Reich, in DeutschÖsterreich, der Schweiz und Luxemburg (Mönchen-Gladbach: Volksverein, 1914).
Liese, Wilhelm, Geschichte der Caritas (Freiburg: Caritas, 1923).
Lüders, Else, Der “linke Flügel”: Ein Blatt aus der Geschichte der deutschen Frauenbewegung (Berlin: Loewenthal, 1904).
Lux, Heinrich, Die Prostitution (Berlin: Vorwärts, 1892).
Mahling, Friedrich, Probleme der modernen Frauenfrage (Hamburg: Rauhes haus,
1907).
Mahling, Friedrich, Die Innere Mission (Gütersloh: Bertelsmann, 1937).
Mausbach, Joseph, Der christliche Familiengedanke im Gegensatz zur modernen Mutterschutzbewegung (Münster: Schöningh, 1908).
Mausbach, Joseph, Die katholische Moral und ihre Gegner (Cologne: Bachem, 1911).
Mausbach, Joseph, Der Kampf gegen die moderne Sittenlosigkeit (Warendorf: Schnell,
1914).
Meisel-Hess, Grete, Weiberhass und Weiberverachtung (Vienna: Wage, 1904).
Meisel-Hess, Grete, Die sexuelle Krise (Jena: Diederichs, 1909).
Michels, Robert, Die Grenzen der Geschlechtsmoral (Munich: Frauenverlag, 1911).
Möbius, Paul, Geschlecht und Unbescheidenheit (Halle: Marhold, 1904).
Möbius, Paul, Ueber den physiologischen Schwachsinn des Weibes (Halle: Marhold,
1908).
Moll, Albert, Die konträre Sexualempfindung (Berlin: Fischer, 1893).
Moll, Albert, Untersuchungen über die Libido sexualis (Berlin: Fischer, 1898).
Moll, Albert, Das Sexualleben des Kindes (Leipzig: Vogel, 1909).
Moll, Albert, Handbuch der Sexualwissenschaften (Leipzig: Vogel, 1912).
Mueller, Paula, ed., Die “Neue Ethik” und ihre Gefahr (Berlin: Runge, 1908).
Mueller, Paula, ed., Handbuch der Frauenfrage (Berlin: Runge, 1908).
Mueller, Paula, Modernes Leben und sittliche Ideale (Berlin: Runge, 1912).
Mueller, Paula, Zur Abwehr: Eine Widerlegung der Angriffe gegen den DeutschEvangel. Frauenbund (Berlin: Runge, 1913).
Mueller, Paula, Frauenbewegung und persönliches Leben (Berlin: Runge, 1914).
Nyström, Anton, Das Geschlechtsleben und seine Gesetze (Berlin: Walther, 1904).
Oberbreyer, Max, Die Leipziger Sittlichkeitsbewegung (Leipzig: Reinhold Werther,
1892).
Olberg, Oda, Das Weib und der Intellektualismus (Berlin: Edelheim, 1902).
Pappritz, Anna, Herrenmoral (Leipzig: Frauen-Rundschau, n.d.).
Pappritz, Anna, Eine Kundgebung des Abolitionismus (Leipzig: Malende, 1906).
Pappritz, Anna, Die Welt, von der man nicht spricht! (Aus den Papieren einer PolizeiBeamtin) (Leipzig: Dietrich, 1907).

Select Bibliography

323

Pappritz, Anna, and Katharina Scheven, Die positiven Aufgaben und strafrechtlichen
Forderungen der Föderation (Dresden: n.p., 1909).
Paulsen, Friedrich, Moderne Erziehung und geschlechtliche Sittlichkeit (Berlin: Reuther
& Reichardt, 1908).
Reuter, Gabriele, Liebe und Stimmrecht (Berlin: Fischer, 1914).
Ribbing, Seved, Die sexuelle Hygiene und ihre ethischen Konsequenzen: drei Vorlesungen (Leipzig: Hobbing, 1891).
Ribbing, Seved, Zwei sexuell-hygienische Abhandlungen (Stuttgart: Hobbing & Büchle,
1896).
Roeren, Hermann, Die öffentliche Unsittlichkeit und ihre Bekämpfung (Cologne: J. P.
Bachem, 1904).
Rohden, Gustav von, Ehe und freie Liebe: Ein Wort zum Individualismus in der Frauenfrage (Berlin: Martin Warneck, 1911).
Rohleder, Hermann, Die Masturbation: Eine Monographie für Ärzte und Pädagogen
(Berlin: Fischer’s Medicinische Buchhandlung, 1899).
Rohleder, Hermann, Vorlesungen über Geschlechtstrieb und gesamtes Geschlechtsleben
des Menschen, vols. I and II (Berlin: Fischer, 1907).
Rosenthal, Max, [pseudonym Max Thal], Mutterrecht, Frauenfrage und Weltanschauung (Breslau: Schottlaender, 1903).
Rosenthal, Max, [pseudonym Max Thal], Sexuelle Moral: Ein Versuch zur Lösung des
Problems der geschlechtlichen, insbes. der sogenannten “Doppelten Moral” (Breslau:
Koebner, 1904).
Rosenthal, Max, Was heisst “neue Ethik”? Was will der Bund für Mutterschutz?
(Breslau: Bund für Mutterschutz, 1911).
Rosenthal, Max, Die Liebe: Ihr Wesen und ihr Wert (Breslau: Preuss & Jünger, 1912).
Rosenthal, Max, Zur Geschichte des deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz (Breslau: BfM,
1912).
Rösler, Augustin, Die Frauenfrage vom Standpunkte der Natur, der Geschichte und der
Offenbarung (Freiburg: Herder, 1907).
Rutgers, J[ohannes], Sexuelle Abstinenz und Lebensenergie (Berlin: BFM, 1909).
Scheven, Katharina, Denkschrift über die in Deutschland bestehenden Verhältnisse in
Bezug auf das Bordellwesen (Dresden: Böhmert, 1904).
Schmidt, Peter, ed., Am Born der Gemeinnützigkeit: Festgabe zum 80. Geburtstage
des Herrn Geh. Reg.-Rat Prof. Dr. jur. Victor Böhmert (Dresden: O. V. Böhmert,
1909).
Schreiber, Adele, Mutterschaft: Ein Sammelwerk für die Probleme des Weibes als Mutter
(Munich: Albert Langen, 1912).
Schrenck-Notzing, Albert von, Die Suggestions-Therapie bei krankhaften Erscheinungen des Geschlechtssinnes (Stuttgart: Enke, 1892).
Schultze, Ernst, Die Schundliteratur: Ihr Vordringen–Ihre Folgen–Ihre Bekämpfung
(Halle: Buchhandlung des Waisenhauses, 1909).
Schultze, Fritz, Über geschlechtliche Sittlichkeit (Leipzig: H. G. Wallmann, 1897).
Schurtz, Heinrich, Altersklassen und Männerbünde (Berlin: Reimer, 1902).
Seeberg, Reinhold, Probleme der modernen Frauenbewegung (Hamburg: Rauhes Haus,
1907).
Seeberg, Reinhold, Sinnlichkeit und Sittlichkeit: Alte oder neue Moral? (Berlin: Trowitzsch, 1909).

324

Select Bibliography

Seeberg, Reinhold, System der Ethik im Grundriss (Leipzig: Deichert, 1911).
Seeberg, Reinhold, Der Geburtenrückgang in Deutschland: Eine sozialethische Studie
(Leipzig: Deichert, 1913).
Seeberg, Reinhold, ed., Reden und Aufsätze von Adolf Stoecker (Leipzig: Deichert,
1913).
Sperlings Zeitschriften-Adressbuch, vol. 47 (Stuttgart: Sperling, 1912).
Statistisches Reichsamt, Statistik der Frauenorganisationen im deutschen Reich (Berlin:
Statistisches Reichsamt, 1909).
Stöcker, Helene, ed., Resolutionen des Deutschen Bundes für Mutterschutz, 1905–1916
(Berlin: BfM, n.d.).
Stöcker, Helene, Bund für Mutterschutz (Berlin: Pan, 1905).
Stöcker, Helene, Die Liebe und die Frauen (Minden: J. C. C. Bruns, 1906).
Stöcker, Helene, Die Liebe und die Frauen, second edition (Minden: J. C. C. Bruns,
1908).
Stöcker, Helene, Krisenmache: Eine Abfertigung (n.p.: n.p., 1910).
Stöcker, Helene, Zehn Jahre Mutterschutz (Berlin: Oesterheld, 1915).
Streitberg, Gisela von, Die falsche Moral im Leben des Weibes (Berlin: Fried, 1891).
Ströhmberg, C., Die Prostitution: Ein Beitrag zur öffentlichen Sexualhygiene und
zur staatlichen Prophylaxe der Geschlechtskrankheiten (Stuttgart: Ferdinand Enke,
1899).
Stursberg, H., Die Prostitution in Deutschland und ihre Bekämpfung (Düsseldorf:
Rheinisch-Westfälische Gef ängnisgesellschaft, 1887).
Tarnovsky, Benjamin, Die krankhaften Erscheinungen des Geschlechtssinnes (Berlin:
Hirschwald, 1886).
Tarnowsky, Benjamin, Prostitution und Abolitionismus (Hamburg: Leopold Voss,
1890).
Via-Villany, Adorée, Tanz-Reform oder Pseudo-Moral (Paris: Villany, 1912).
Vorentwurf zu einem Deutschen Strafgesetzbuch (Berlin: Guttentag, 1909).
Vorentwurf zu einem Deutschen Strafgesetzbuch: Begründung (Berlin: Guttentag,
1909).
Weber, Ludwig, and Ellger, 25 Jahre der Sittlichkeitsbewegung: Bilder aus der
Geschichte des Westdeutschen Sittlichkeitsvereins und der Allgemeinen deutschen
Sittlichkeits-Konferenz (Duisburg: WSV, 1910).
Weber, Marianne, Ehefrau und Mutter in der Rechtsentwicklung (Tübingen: Mohr,
1907).
Weigl, Franz, Die interkonfessionellen Männervereine zur Bekämpfung der öffentlichen
Unsittlichkeit (Hamm: Breer & Theimann, 1910).
Weininger, Otto, Geschlecht und Charakter: Eine prinzipielle Untersuchung (Vienna:
Wilhelm Braumüller, 1925).
Weisskreuzbund, Dreissig Jahre Weisskreuzarbeit (n.p.: Buchhandlung des Weissen
Kreuzes, 1921).
WHK, Gewichtige Stimmen über das Unrecht des §175 unseres Reichsstrafgesetzbuchs
§250 des Entwurfs zu einem neuen Deutschen Reichsstrafgesetzbuch (Leipzig: Spohr,
1914).
Wittenberg, H., and E. Hückstädt, eds., Die gesellschaftlich-sittlichen Verhältnisse
der evangelischen Landbewohner im Deutschen Reich (Leipzig: Reinhold Werther,
1895).

Select Bibliography

325

WSV, 50 Jahre Kampf für Volkssittlichkeit und Volkskraft: Die Geschichte des Westdeutschen Sittlichkeitsvereine von seinen Anfängen his heute (1885–1935) (Schwelm:
Meiners, 1935).
Secondary Works
Abrams, Lynn, Workers’ Culture in Imperial Germany: Leisure and Recreation in the
Rhineland and Westphalia (New York: Routledge, 1992).
Allen, Ann Taylor, “Mothers of the New Generation: Adele Schreiber, Helene Stöcker,
and the Evolution of a German Idea of Motherhood, 1900–1914,” Signs 10 (1985):
418–438.
Allen, Ann Taylor, “German Radical Feminism and Eugenics, 1900–1908,” German
Studies Review 11 (1988): 31–55.
Anderson, Susan C., “Otto Weininger’s Masculine Utopia,” German Studies Review
19 (1996): 433–453.
Archer, Margaret S., “Social Theory and the Analysis of Society,” in Knowing the Social
World, ed. Tim May and Malcolm Williams (Philadelphia: Open University Press,
1998), pp. 69–95.
Bauman, Zygmunt, Modernity and Ambivalence (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1991).
Baumann, Ursula, Protestantismus und Frauenemanzipation in Deutschland 1850–
1920 (Frankfurt: Campus, 1992).
Becker, Peter Emil, Zur Geschichte der Rassenhygiene: Wege ins Dritte Reich ( Stuttgart:
Georg Thieme, 1988).
Bergmann, Anna, Die verhütete Sexualität: Die Anfänge der modernen Geburtenkontrolle (Hamburg: Rasch & Röhrig, 1992).
Biale, David, “1906: The Discipline of Sexualwissenschaft Emerges in Germany,” in
Yale Companion to Jewish Writing and Thought in German Culture, 1096–1996,
ed. Sander Gilman and Jack Zipes (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1996),
pp. 273–279.
Birken, Lawrence, Consuming Desire: Sexual Science and the Emergence of a Culture
of Abundance, 1871–1914 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988).
Blasius, Dirk, “Scheidung und Scheidungsrecht im 19. Jahrhundert: Zur Sozialgeschichte
der Familie,” Historische Zeitschrift 241 (1985): 329–360.
Blasius, Mark, and Shane Phelan, eds., We Are Everywhere: A Historical Sourcebook
of Gay and Lesbian Politics (New York: Routledge, 1997).
Bollé, Michael, ed., Eldorado: Homosexuelle Frauen und Männer in Berlin 1850–1950;
Geschichte, Alltag und Kultur (Berlin: Frölich & Kaufmann, 1984).
Borelli, Siegfried, Hermann-Joseph Vogt, and Michael Kreis, eds., Geschichte der
Deutschen Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung der Geschlechtskrankheiten (Berlin: Blackwell Wissenschaft, 1992).
Braun, Christina von, “Ist die Sexualwissenschaft eine ‘jüdische Wissenschaft?’”
Zeitschrift für Sexualforschung 14 (2001): 1–17.
Breuer, Gisela, Frauenbewegung und Katholizismus: Der Katholische Frauenbund
1903–1918 (Frankfurt: Campus, 1998).
Brodthage, Heike, and Sven Olaf Hoffmann, “Die Rezeption der Psychoanalyse in der
Psychologie,” in Die Rezeption der Psychoanalyse in der Soziologie, Psychologie und

326

Select Bibliography

Theologie im deutschsprachigen Raum bis 1940, ed. Johannes Cremerius (Frankfurt:
Suhrkamp, 1981), pp. 135–253.
Bruns, Claudia, Politik des Eros: Der Männerbund in Wissenschaft, Politik und Jugendkultur (1880–1934) (Cologne: Böhlau, 2008).
Butler, Judith, Undoing Gender (New York: Routledge, 2004).
Clemens, Bärbel, “Menschenrechte haben kein Geschlecht!” (Pfaffenweiler: Centaurus,
1988).
Dickinson, Edward Ross, “Biopolitics, Fascism, Democracy: Reflections on Our Discourse Concerning ‘Modernity,’” Central European History 37 (2004): 1–48.
Dickinson, Edward Ross, “Policing Sex in Germany, 1882–1982: A Preliminary Statistical Analysis,” Journal of the History of Sexuality 16 (2007): 204–250.
Dickinson, Edward Ross, “‘Must We Dance Naked?’ Art, Beauty, and Politics in
Munich and Paris, 1911 and 1913,” Journal of the History of Sexuality 20 (2011):
95–131.
Dienel, Christine, Kinderzahl und Staatsräson: Empfängnisverhütung und Bevölkerungspolitik in Deutschland und Frankreich bis 1918 (Münster: Westfälisches Dampfboot, 1995).
Evans, Richard, The Feminist Movement in Germany, 1894–1933 (London: Sage,
1976).
Fabian, Reinhard, ed., Christian von Ehrenfels: Leben und Werk (Amsterdam: Rodopi,
1986).
Flemming, Jens, “‘Sexuelle Krise’ und ‘Neue Ethik,’” in Liebe, Lust und Leid: Zur
Gefühlskultur um 1900, ed. Helmut Scheur and Michael Grisko (Kassel: Kassel University Press, 1999), pp. 27–56.
Foucault, Michel, “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History,” in Michel Foucault: Language,
Counter-Memory, Practice, ed. Donald F. Bouchard (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1977), pp. 139–164.
Foucault, Michel, The History of Sexuality: An Introduction, vol. I (New York: Vintage,
1990).
Fout, John C., “Sexual Politics in Wilhelmine Germany: The Male Gender Crisis, Moral
Purity, and Homophobia,” in Forbidden History, ed. John C. Fout (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), pp. 259–292.
Frederiksen, Elke, ed., Die Frauenfrage in Deutschland 1865–1915 (Stuttgart: Reclam,
1981).
Fritzsche, Peter, “Did Weimar Fail?” Journal of Modern History 68 (1996): 629–656.
Fritzsche, Peter, “Nazi Modern,” Modernism/Modernity 3 (1996): 629–656.
Georgen, Jeanpaul, “Der pikante Film: Ein vergessenes Genre der Kaiserzeit,” in Kino
der Kaiserzeit: Zwischen Tradition und Moderne, ed. Thomas Elsaesser and Michael
Wedel (Munich: text + kritik, 2002), pp. 45–59.
Gerhard, Ute, Unerhört: Die Geschichte der deutschen Frauenbewegung (Reinbek:
Rowohlt, 1990).
Grau, Günter, Iwan Bloch: Hautarzt, Medizinhistoriker, Sexualforscher (Berlin:
Hentrich & Hentrich, 2007).
Greven-Aschoff, Barbara, Die bürgerliche Frauenbewegung in Deutschland 1894–1933
(Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1981).
Groschopp, Horst, Dissidenten: Freidenkerei und Kultur in Deutschland (Berlin: Dietz,
1997).

Select Bibliography

327

Gross, Matthias, “Die evangelische Sittlichkeitsbewegung im Deutschen Kaiserreich:
Entstehung, Ideologie und Tätigkeitsfelder von der Mitte der 1880er Jahre bis zum
Beginn der Ersten Weltkriegs,” MA thesis, Hamburg 1994.
Grossman, Atina, Reforming Sex: The German Movement for Birth Control and Abortion Rights, 1920–1950 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995).
Hamelmann, Gudrun, Helene Stöcker, der “Bund für Mutterschutz” und “Die Neue
Generation” (Frankfurt am Main: Haag + Gerchen, 1992).
Hergemöller, Bernd-Ulrich, Mann für Mann: Biographisches Lexikon zur Geschichte
von Freundesliebe und mannmännlicher Sexualität im deutschen Sprachraum (Hamburg: MännerschwarmSkript, 1998).
Herzer, Manfred, Magnus Hirschfeld (Hamburg: Männerschwarm, 2001).
Herzer, Manfred, “Hirschfelds Utopie, Hirschfelds Religion und das dritte Geschlecht
der Romantik,” in Durch Wissenschaft zur Gerechtigkeit? ed. Andreas Seeck
(Münster: Lit, 2003), pp. 157–199.
Herzer, Manfred, “Drei dritte Geschlechter: Magnus Hirschfeld, Adolf von Harnack
und Leo Baeck,” in Der Sexualreformer Magnus Hirschfeld, ed. Elke-Vera Kotowski
and Julius H. Schoeps (Berlin: be.bra, 2004), pp. 157–169.
Hill, Andreas, “May the Doctor Advise Extramarital Intercourse?” in Sexual Knowledge, Sexual Science, ed. Roy Porter and Mikulas Teich (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1994), pp. 284–302.
Himmelsbach, Christianne, “Verlass ist nur auf unsere eigne Kraft!” Lida Gustava
Heymann – eine Kämpferin für die Frauenrechte (Oldenburg: BIS-Verlag, 1996).
Hoffmann, Stefan-Ludwig, “Democracy and Associations in the Long Nineteenth Century: Toward a Transnational Perspective,” Journal of Modern History 75 (2003):
269–299.
Hohmann, Joachim S., ed., Der Eigene: Ein Blatt für männliche Kultur: Ein Querschnitt
durch die erste Homosexuellenzeitschrift der Welt (Frankfurt: Foerster, 1981).
Hong, Young-Sun, “Neither Singular nor Alternative: Narratives of Modernity and
Welfare in Germany, 1870–1945,” Social History 30 (2005): 133–153.
Hoschek, Maria, Freidrich Wilhelm Foerster (1869–1966) (Frankfurt: Lang, 2002).
Huerkamp, Claudia, Der Aufstieg der Ärzte im 19. Jahrhundert (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1985).
Ivory, Yvonne, “The Urning and His Own: Individualism and the Fin-de-Siècle Invert,”
German Studies Review 26 (2003): 333–352.
Jäger, Georg, “Der Kampf gegen Schmutz und Schund: Die Reaktion der Gebildeten
auf die Unterhaltungsliteratur,” Archiv für Geschichte des Buchwesens 31 (1988):
163–191.
Janssen-Jurreit, Marielouise, “Nationalbiologie, Sexualreform und Geburtenrückgang,” in Die Überwindung der Sprachlosigkeit, ed. Gabriele Dietze (Darmstadt:
Luchterhand, 1979), pp. 139–157.
Janssen-Jurreit, Marielouise, “Sexualreform und Geburtenrückgang,” in Frauen in der
Geschichte, vol. 1, ed. Annette Kuhn and Gerhard Schneider (Düsseldorf: Schwann,
1979), pp. 56–82.
Jarausch, Konrad H., Students, Society, and Politics in Imperial Germany (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1982).
Jelavich, Peter, Munich and Theatrical Modernism: Politics, Playwriting, and Performance, 1890–1914 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985).

328

Select Bibliography

Kall, Alfred, Katholische Frauenbewegung in Deutschland (Paderborn: Schöningh,
1983).
Kaloyanova-Slavova, Ludmila, Übergangsgeschöpfe: Gabriele Reuter, Hedwig Dohm,
Helene Böhlau und Franziska von Reventlow (New York: Lang, 1998).
Kaplan, Marion, The Jewish Feminist Movement in Germany: The Campaigns of the
Jüdischer Frauenbund, 1904–1938 (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1979).
Kaufmann, Doris, Frauen zwischen Aufbruch und Reaktion (Munich: Piper, 1988).
Keilson-Lauritz, Marita, Die Geschichte der eigenen Geschichte (Berlin: Rosa Winkel,
1997).
Keilson-Lauritz, Marita, and Rolf F. Lang, eds., Emanzipation hinter der Weltstadt:
Adolf Brand und die Gemeinschaft der Eigenen (Berlin: Müggel-Verlag Rolf F. Lang,
2000).
Keilson-Lauritz, Marita, and Friedemann Pfäfflin, eds., 100 Jahre Schwulenbewegung an
der Isar: Die Sitzungsberichte des wissenschaftlich-humanitären Komitees München
1902–1908 (Munich: Forum Homosexualität und Geschichte Munich, 2003).
Kerchner, Brigitte, “‘Unbescholtene Bürger’ und ‘gefährliche Mädchen’ um die Jahrhundertwende,” Historische Anthropologie 6 (1998): 1–32.
Kift, Dagmar, ed., Kirmes–Kneipe–Kino: Arbeiterkultur im Ruhrgebiet zwischen Kommerz und Kontrolle (1850–1914) (Paderborn: Ferdinand Schöningh, 1992).
Kilchenstein, Gabriele, Frühe Filmzensur in Deutschland (Munich: diskurs film, 1997).
Klausmann, Christina, Politik und Kultur der Frauenbewegung im Kaiserreich: Das
Beispiel Frankfurt am Main (Frankfurt: Campus, 1997).
Krabbe, Wolfgang R., Gesellschaftsveränderung durch Lebensreform: Strukturmerkmale einer sozialreformerischen Bewegung im Deutschland der Industrialisierungsperiode (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1974).
Krafft, Sybille, Zucht und Unzucht: Prostitution und Sittenpolizei im München der
Jahrhundertwende (Munich: Hugendubel, 1996).
Kuhn, Annette, ed., Frauen in der Geschichte, vol. 4 (Düsseldorf: Schwann, 1983).
Latour, Bruno, We Have Never Been Modern (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1993).
Lautmann, Rüdiger, and Angela Taeger, eds., Männerliebe im alten Deutschland (Berlin:
Rosa Winkel, 1992).
Lees, Andrew, Cities, Sin, and Social Reform in Imperial Germany (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2002).
Lenman, Robin, “Mass Culture and the State in Germany, 1900–1926,” in Ideas into
Politics, ed. Roger Bullen, Hartmut Pogge von Strandmann, and Anthony Polonsky
(London: Croom Helm, 1984), pp. 51–59.
Lindemann, Gesa, “Magnus Hirschfeld,” in Homosexualität: Handbuch der Theorieund Forschungsgeschichte, ed. Rüdiger Lautmann (Frankfurt: Campus, 1993),
pp. 91–104.
Linse, Ulrich, “‘Geschlechtsnot und Jugend’: Über Jugendbewegung und Sexualität,” in
“Mit uns zieht die neue Zeit”: Der Mythos Jugend, ed. Thomas Koebner, Rolf-Peter
Janz, and Frank Trommler (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1985), pp. 245–309.
Lisberg-Haag, Isabell, “Die Unzucht–das Grab der Völker”: Die evangelische Sittlichkeitsbewegung und die “sexuelle Moderne” (1870–1918) (Hamburg: Lit, 1999).
Loentz, Elizabeth, Let Me Continue to Speak the Truth: Bertha Pappenheim as Author
and Activist (Cincinnati, OH: Hebrew Union College Press, 2007).

Select Bibliography

329

Maase, Kaspar, Grenzenloses Vergnügen: Der Aufstieg der Massenkultur, 1850–1970
(Frankfurt: Fischer, 1997).
Maase, Kaspar, “Massenkunst und Volkserziehung: Die Regulierung von Film und Kino
im deutschen Kaiserreich,” Archiv für Sozialgeschichte 41 (2001): 39–77.
Maase, Kaspar, and Wolfgang Kaschuba, eds., Schund und Schönheit: Populäre Kultur
um 1900 (Cologne: Böhlau, 2009).
Mager, Inge, ed., Frauenprofile des Luthertums: Lebensgeschichten im 20. Jahrhundert
(Gütersloh: Gütersloher Verlagshaus, 2005).
Major, Patrick, “‘Smut and Trash’: Germany’s Culture Wars against Pulp Fiction,” in
Mass Media, Culture, and Society in Twentieth-Century Germany, ed. Karl Christian
Büttner and Corey Ross (Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan, 2006), pp. 234–250.
Matysik, Tracie, “In the Name of the Law: The ‘Female Homosexual’ and the Criminal
Code in Fin de Siècle Germany,” Journal of the History of Sexuality 13 (2004): 26–48.
Matysik, Tracie, Reforming the Moral Subject: Ethics and Sexuality in Central Europe,
1890–1930 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2008).
Mehlmann, Sabine, “Das doppelte Geschlecht: Die konstitutionelle Bisexualität und die
Konstruktion der Geschlechtergrenze,” Feministische Studien 18 (2000): 36–51.
Melander, Ellinor, “Toward the Sexual and Economic Emancipation of Women: The
Philosophy of Grete Meisel-Hess,” History of European Ideas 14 (1992): 695–713.
Meyer, Michael, Theaterzensur in München 1900–1918 (Munich: Kommissionsverlag
UNI-Druck, 1982).
Mildenberger, Florian, “ . . . in der Richtung der Homosexualität verdorben”: Psychiater, Kriminalpsychologen und Gerichtsmediziner über männliche Homosexualität
1850–1970 (Hamburg: Männerschwarm, 2002).
Moses, A. Dirk, “Genocide and Modernity,” in The Historiography of Genocide, ed.
Dan Stone (Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan, 2008), pp. 156–193.
Müller, Klaus, “Aber in meinem Herzen sprach eine Stimme so laut” (Berlin: Rosa
Winkel, 1991).
Mybes, Fritz, Der Evangelisch-Kirchliche Hilfsverein und seine Frauenhilfe (Cologne:
Rheinland, 1988).
Niggemann, Heinz, ed., Frauenemanzipation und Sozialdemokratie (Frankfurt: Fischer,
1981).
Niggemann, Heinz, Zwischen Sozialismus und Emanzipation: Die sozialdemokratischen Frauenbewegung im Kaiserreich (Wuppertal: Hammer, 1981).
Nowacki, Bernd, Der Bund für Mutterschutz (1905–1933) (Husum: Matthiesen, 1983).
Oellers, Norbert, “Die Bonner Schriftstellerin Johanna Elberskirchen – von der Zeit
verschluckt?” in Bonn und das Rheinland, ed. Manfred Rey and Dietrich Höroldt
(Bonn: Bouvier, 1992), pp. 527–544.
Olenhausen, Irmtraud Goetz von, Thomas Mergel, Sylvia Paletschek, Relinde Meiwes,
Ursula Baumann, Birgit Sack, Martin König, Antonia Leugers, and Jochen-Christoph
Kaiser, Frauen unter dem Patriarchat der Kirchen: Katholikinnen und Protestantinnen
im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1995).
Oosterhuis, Harry, “Homosexual Emancipation in Germany before 1933: Two Traditions,” in Homosexuality and Male Bonding in Pre-Nazi Germany, ed. Harry
Oosterhuis and Hubert Kennedy (New York: Haworth Press, 1991), pp. 1–28.
Oosterhuis, Harry, Step-Children of Nature: Krafft-Ebing, Psychiatry, and the Making
of Sexual Identity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000).

330

Select Bibliography

Peukert, Detlev, “Der ‘Traum der Vernunft,’” in Max Webers Diagnose der Moderne,
ed. Detlev Peukert (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1989), pp. 55–91.
Peukert, Detlev, “The Genesis of the ‘Final Solution’ from the Spirit of Science,” in
Reevaluating the Third Reich, ed. Thomas Childers and Jane Kaplan (New York:
Holmes & Meier, 1993), pp. 234–252.
Planert, Ute, Antifeminismus im Kaiserreich (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht,
1998).
Pretzel, Andreas, “Zur Geschichte der ‘Ärztlichen Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft’
(1913–1933),” Mitteilungen der Magnus-Hirschfeld-Gesellschaft 24/25 (1997): 35–
122.
Pretzel, Andreas, “Sexualreform im Spannungsfeld weltanschaulicher Voraussetzungen
und sozialpolitischer Auseinandersetzungen,” in Verqueere Wissenschaft? ed. Ursula
Ferdinand, Andreas Pretzel, and Andreas Seeck (Münster: Lit, 1998), pp. 229–242.
Pretzel, Andreas, “Des Kaisers neue Kleider . . . Karl Vanselows Beitrag zur
Schönheitsbewegung und Sittenreform im deutschen Kaiserreich,” in Das bewegte
Buch: Buchwesen und soziale, nationale und kulturelle Bewegungen um 1900, ed.
Mark Lehmstedt and Andreas Herzog (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1999), pp. 267–
311.
Pretzel, Andreas, “Disziplinierungsbestrebungen: Magnus Hirschfeld und die Ärztliche
Gesellschaft für Sexualwissenschaft,” in Der Sexualreformer Magnus Hirschfeld, ed.
Elke-Vera Kotowski and Julius H. Schoeps (Berlin: be.bra, 2004), pp. 137–156.
Quataert, Jean H., Reluctant Feminists in German Social Democracy, 1885–1917
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1979).
Quataert, Joan, “Introduction 2: Writing the History of Women and Gender in Imperial
Germany,” in Society, Culture, and the State in Germany, 1870–1930, ed. Geoff Eley
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996), pp. 43–72.
Reagin, Nancy R., A German Women’s Movement: Class and Gender in Hanover,
1880–1933 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 1995).
Reuveni, Gideon, “Der Aufstieg der Bürgerlichkeit und die bürgerliche Selbstauflösung,”
Zeitschrift für Geschichtswissenschaft 51 (2003): 131–143.
Roseman, Mark, “National Socialism and the End of Modernity,” American Historical
Review 116 (2011): 688–701.
Ross, Corey, Media and the Making of Modern Germany (London: Oxford University
Press, 2008).
Sauer-Burghard, Brunhilde, “Frauenbefreiung und ‘Rassenveredelung,’” Beiträge zur
feministischen Theorie und Praxis 38 (1994): 131–144.
Sauerteig, Lutz, “Frauenemanzipation und Sittlichkeit: Die Rezeption des englischen
Abolitionismus in Deutschland,” in Aneignung und Abwehr: Interkultureller Transfer
zwischen Deutschland und Grossbritanien im 19. Jahrhundert, ed. Rudolf Muhs,
Johannes Paulmann, and Willibald Steinmetz (Bodenheim: Philo, 1998), pp. 159–
197.
Sauerteig, Lutz, Krankheit, Sexualität, Gesellschaft: Geschlechtskrankheiten und
Gesundheitspolitik in Deutschland im 19. und frühen 20. Jahrhundert (Stuttgart:
Steiner, 1999).
Schlör, Joachim, Nachts in der grossen Stadt: Paris, Berlin, London 1840–1930
(Munich: Artemis & Winkler, 1991).
Schlüpmann, Heide, “Radikalisierung der Philosophie,” Feministische Studien 3 (1984):
11–33.

Select Bibliography

331

Schmackpfeffer, Petra, Frauenbewegung und Prostitution: Über das Verhältnis der alten
und neuen deutschen Frauenbewegung zur Prostitution (Oldenburg: Bibliotheks-und
Informationssystem der Universität Oldenburg, 1989).
Schröder, Iris, Arbeiten für eine bessere Welt: Frauenbewegung und Sozialreform, 1890–
1914 (Campus: Frankfurt, 2001).
Schuster, Marina, “Sexualaufklärung im Kaiserreich,” in Sexualmoral und Zeitgeist im
19. und 20. Jahrhundert, ed. Anja Bagel-Bohlan and Michael Salewski (Opladen:
Leske & Budrich, 1990), pp. 71–81.
Schuster, Marina, “Antiker Eros um 1900,” in Liebe, Lust und Leid: Zur Gefühlskultur
um 1900, ed. Helmut Scheur and Michael Grisko (Kassel: Kassel University Press,
1999), pp. 123–146.
Seeck, Andreas, “Wilhelm Ostwald, Monistenbund, Energie und Sexualwissenschaft,”
Mitteilungen der Magnus-Hirschfeld-Gesellschaft 22/23 (1996): 67–97.
Seeck, Andreas, “Das Verhältnis von Wissenschaft und Politik im Selbstverständnis
der Sexualwissenschaft” in Verqueere Wissenschaft? ed. Ursula Ferdinand, Andreas
Pretzel, and Andreas Seeck (Münster: Lit, 1998), pp. 199–212.
Seeck, Andreas, ed., Durch Wissenschaft zur Gerechtigkeit? (Münster: Lit, 2003).
Sigusch, Volkmar, Geschichte der Sexualwissenschaft (Frankfurt: Campus, 2009).
Slater, Don, Consumer Culture and Modernity (Cambridge: Polity, 1997).
Sommer, Kai, Die Strafbarkeit der Homosexualität von der Kaiserzeit bis zum Nationalsozialismus (Frankfurt: Lang, 1998).
Stark, Gary D., “Pornography, Society, and the Law in Imperial Germany,” Central
European History 14 (1981): 200–229.
Stark, Gary, “Cinema, Society and the State,” in Essays on Culture and Society in
Modern Germany, ed. Gary Stark and B. K. Lackner (College Station: Texas A&M,
1982), pp. 122–166.
Stark, Gary D., Banned in Berlin: Literary Censorship in Imperial Germany, 1871–1918
(New York: Berghahn, 2012).
Steakley, James D., The Homosexual Emancipation Movement in Germany (New York:
Arno, 1975).
Steakley, James D., “Iconography of a Scandal: Political Cartoons and the Eulenburg
Affair in Wilhemin Germany,” in Hidden from History: Reclaiming the Gay and
Lesbian Past, ed. Martin B. Duberman, Martha Vicinus, and George Chauncey, Jr.
(New York: New American Library/Penguin, 1989), pp. 233–263.
Stoehr, Irene, “Fraueneinfluss oder Geschlechterversöhnung? Zur ‘Sexualitätsdebatte’
in der deutschen Frauenbewegung um 1900,” in Frauenkörper-Medizin-Sexualität,
ed. Johanna Geyer-Kordesch and Annette Kuhn (Düsseldorf: Schwann, 1989),
pp. 159–190.
Storim, Mirjam, Ästhetik im Umbruch: Zur Funktion der ‘Rede über Kunst’ um
1900 am Beispiel der Debatte um Schmutz und Schund (Tübingen: Max Niemeyer,
2002).
Süchting-Hänger, Andrea, Das “Gewissen der Nation”: Nationales Engagement und
politisches Handeln konservativer Frauenorganisationen 1900 bis 1937 (Düsseldorf:
Droste, 2002).
Sweeney, Dennis, “Reconsidering the Modernity Paradigm: Reform Movements, the
Social and the State in Wilhelmine Germany,” Social History 31 (2006): 405–
434.
Taylor, Charles, Modern Social Imaginaries (London: Duke University Press, 2004).

332

Select Bibliography

Telman, Jeremy, “Adolf Stoecker: Anti-Semite with a Christian Mission,” Jewish History 9:2 (1995): 93–112.
Timm, Annette, The Politics of Fertility in Twentieth-Century Berlin (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010).
Uhlig, Christa, Reformpädagogik: Rezeption und Kritik in der Arbeiterbewegung
(Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 2006).
Walter, Tilmann, “Begrenzung und Entgrenzung: Zur Genealogie wissenschaftlicher
Debatten über Sexualität,” in Von Lust und Schmerz: Eine Historische Anthropologie
der Sexualität, ed. Claudia Bruns and Tilmann Walter (Cologne: Böhlau, 2004),
pp. 129–174.
Wassenberg, Hedwig, Von der Volksschullehrerin zur Volkslehrerin: Die Pädagogin
Hedwig Dransfeld, 1871–1925 (Frankfurt: Lang, 1994).
Wawrzyn, Heidemarie, “Als die ‘Mutter der Nation’ Abschied nahmen von den
Menschenrechten,” in Nation, Politik, und Geschlecht, ed. Ute Planert (Frankfurt:
Campus, 2000), pp. 182–197.
Weikart, Richard, From Darwin to Hitler: Evolutionary Ethics, Eugenics, and Racism
in Germany (New York: Palgrave, 2004).
Weiland, Daniela, Geschichte der Frauenemanzipation in Deutschland und Österreich
(Düsseldorf: ECON, 1983).
Welch, David, “Cinema and Society in Imperial Germany, 1905–1918,” German History 8 (1990): 28–45.
Wickert, Christl, Helene Stöcker (Bonn: Dietz, 1991).
Wilke, Jürgen, “Die periodische Presse im Kaiserreich,” Archiv für Geschichte des
Buchwesens 31 (1988): 221–230.
Wischermann, Ulla, Frauenbewegungen und Öffentlichkeiten um 1900: Netzwerke–
Gegenöffentlichkeiten–Protestinszenierungen (Königstein: Helmer, 2003).
Wobbe, Theresa, Gleichheit und Differenz: Politische Strategien von frauenrechtlerinnen um die Jahrhundertwende (Frankfurt: Campus, 1989).
Wolf, Kerstin, “Herrenmoral: Anna Pappritz and Abolitionism in Germany,” Women’s
History Review 17 (2008): 225–238.
Wolfes, Matthias, “Otto Weininger: ‘Geschlecht und Charakter’: Das Werk und seine
Wirkung,” in Historische Mitteilungen 13 (2000): 76–93.
Wollasch, Andreas, Der katholische Fürsorgeverein für Mädchen, Frauen und Kinder
(1899–1945) (Freiburg: Lambertus, 1991).
Woycke, James, Birth Control in Germany, 1871–1933 (London and New York:
Routledge, 1988).

Index

§175. See section 175
Abolitionist, Der, 80, 89, 90, 91, 92,
100, 103, 150
abortion, 36, 45, 46, 70, 117, 149,
194–195, 255, 277, 290–293
Adams-Lehman, Hope Bridges, 143, 178,
238
Adler, Otto, 246, 270, 274, 308
advertising, 35, 71
aesthetics, 38, 43–44
Aktphotos, 32
Allgemeine Konferenz der deutschen
Sittlichkeitsvereine (AKDS), 15, 17,
18, 19, 20, 23–25, 27, 56, 65, 69,
71, 80, 90, 91, 116, 118–119, 120,
123, 125, 171, 188, 284, 296, 301,
313
and abolitionism, 104, 105
anti-Semitism in, 72–73
and DFHS, 81, 87
Allgemeiner Deutscher Frauenverein,
82
Altenloh, Emilie, 68
Ammann, Ellen, 100, 297, 312
Animierkneipen, 36, 93, 129, 139
anti-Semitism, 72–73, 88, 112, 231,
277, 296
Archer, Margaret, 307
Archiv für Kriminal-Anthropologie und
Kriminalistik, 246

Archiv für Rassen- und
Gesellschaftsbiologie, 246, 266, 276
Ärztliche Gesellschaft für
Sexualwissenschaft und Eugenik
(ÄGSE), 167, 175, 240, 249, 301
Aschaffenburg, Gustav, 156
Augspurg, Anita, 79, 80, 99, 196, 202,
224–225
Baars, Ernst, 196, 198, 209, 223
Bauman, Zygmunt, 302, 304
Bäumer, Gertrud, 93, 94, 95, 100, 102,
113, 290, 292, 309
Bebel, August, 2, 15, 137, 138, 139, 141,
143, 144, 149, 157, 191, 279, 289
Woman and Socialism, 141, 191,
279
Berliner Männerbund zur Bekämpfung
der Unsittlichkeit (BMBU), 40, 44,
78, 115, 118
Berlin Psychoanalytic Association, 166,
239
Bernstein, Eduard, 141, 142, 157, 239
Bieber-Böhm, Hanna, 78, 80, 90, 98,
102, 103, 114, 178, 296
Birken, Lawrence, 3
birthrate, 70–71, 229–230
birth strike, 146–147
Blaschko, Alfred, 149, 179, 181, 183,
185, 186, 187, 188, 192, 213, 301
333

Index

334
Bloch, Iwan, 163, 164–165, 167, 190,
192, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200,
204, 209, 213, 231, 240, 249,
250–251, 252–253, 259, 260, 263,
266, 268, 271, 272, 276, 278, 279,
297, 311, 315
Sexual Life of Our Times, 253, 274,
297
Blüher, Hans, 174, 176
Bluhm, Agnes, 112, 291, 301
Boettger, Hugo, 192
Bohn, Friedrich, 23, 24, 54, 119, 125,
185, 284, 301
Bölsche, Wilhelm, 199–200
Borgius, Walter, 191, 198, 200, 201,
212, 223
Bornträger, Jean, 48, 70, 111, 229
Boy-Ed, Ida, 206
Brand, Adolf, 157, 161, 167, 171
Braun, Heinrich, 192
Braun, Lily, 143, 147, 192, 194, 235,
238
Bré, Ruth (Elisabeth Bouness), 191, 193,
195, 208, 210, 223, 224, 230, 257
Brennecke, Hans, 296
Brinkmann, Wilhelm, 62, 66
British, Continental and General
Federation for the Abolition of
Prostitution as a Legal or Tolerated
Institution. See International
Abolitionist Federation
Brunner, Karl, 34, 37, 41, 67, 68
Bund deutscher Frauenvereine (BDF), 44,
78, 80, 90, 91, 93, 94, 96, 98, 103,
104, 109, 110, 111, 173, 181, 206,
289, 290–293, 301, 302, 311
Bund für Mutterschutz (BfM), 44, 98,
166, 167, 189, 190, 191–195, 196,
201, 203, 204, 206, 208, 209, 211,
213, 215, 224, 227–228, 230–231,
232–236, 238–240, 249, 253, 254,
255, 256, 278, 282, 283–284, 288,
289, 290, 291, 292, 295, 299, 300,
301, 302, 309
position on homosexuality, 210–211
Neue Generation, Die, 193, 197, 198,
206, 227, 230, 235, 245, 294, 300

Butler, Josephine, 312
capitalism, 65–68, 148, 204
Carpenter, Edward, 191, 289, 312
Catholic Welfare Association for
Women, Girls, and Children. See
Katholischer Fürsorgeverein für
Mädchen, Frauen und Kinder
Catholic Women’s League of Germany.
See Katholischer deutscher
Frauenbund
Cathrein, Victor, 286
Cauer, Minna, 85
child abuse, sexual, 37, 57, 73, 86, 89,
92, 120–121, 138, 187, 195, 201,
270
Christian Social Party, 14, 72
christliche Frau, Die, 107, 111
cinema, 32, 38, 68, 129–130
Civil Code, 80
Cologne Men’s Association for
Combating Public Immorality. See
Kölner Männerverein für die
Bekämpfung der öffentlichen
Unsittlichkeit
Community of the Peculiar. See
Gemeinschaft der Eigenen
contraception, 36, 37, 70, 71, 90, 111,
130, 142, 252, 255, 256, 271, 295
Criminal Code, 14, 20, 21, 44, 66, 79,
121–125, 128, 172, 173, 174, 186
dance, 36, 42, 45, 132
Darwin, Charles, 47, 64, 73, 199
David, Eduard, 192, 225–226, 230, 239
Deutsche Gesellschaft zur Bekämpfung
der Geschlechtskrankheiten (DGBG),
44, 177–189, 191, 237, 240, 283,
284, 295–296, 300–301, 312, 315
Deutsche Nationalkomitee zur
internationalen Bekämpfung des
Mädchenhandels (DNBM), 131
Deutscher Caritasverband (DCV), 18, 20,
21–26, 83
Deutscher Frauenverein zur Hebung der
Sittlichkeit (DFHS), 17, 81, 85, 86,
108, 109

Index
Deutscher Monistenbund (DMB), 166,
167, 175, 190, 226, 238, 239, 282,
302
Deutscher Zweig der Internationalen
Abolitionistischen Föderation
(DZIAF). See International
Abolitionist Federation
Deutsch-Evangelischer Frauenbund
(DEF), 81–82, 83, 84, 85, 93, 97,
99, 104, 108, 109, 110, 111, 125,
126, 132, 188, 288, 291, 301, 302
display windows, 36
Dohm, Hedwig, 192, 195, 203, 213, 231
Dransfeld, Hedwig, 87, 110, 289, 309
Driesmans, Heinrich, 274
Duensing, Frieda, 192
Ehrenfels, Christian von, 192, 245, 256,
263–265, 271, 272, 276, 279, 298,
299, 300
Eigene, Der, 157, 161, 162, 167, 170
Eisner, Kurt, 178
Elberskirchen, Johanna, 175, 195, 206,
207, 211
Ellis, Havelock, 312
Engels, Friedrich, 137, 142, 143, 144
Origin of the Family, Private
Property, and the State, 142
episcopate, Catholic, 39, 46, 63
Erb, Wilhelm, 185
Erhard, Friedrich, 266
Erkelenz, Anton, 192, 194
eugenics, 112–113, 146, 149, 193, 218,
219, 223, 226, 227, 231, 246, 251,
252, 277, 278–279, 286, 291–292,
295, 297, 298
Eulenburg, Albert, 167, 172, 175, 178,
187, 192, 227, 240, 248, 249, 253,
260, 262, 271, 276, 279
Eulenburg, Prince Philip zu, 170
Evangelische Frauenzeitung, 86
Evangelischer Bund, 19
evolution, theory of, 71, 214, 218, 219,
224, 294
family, conceptions of, 2, 17, 37, 51, 52,
56, 61–62, 74, 80, 92, 94, 100,

335
107–108, 115, 138, 140, 142, 143,
148, 151, 154, 172, 195, 202, 203,
204, 208, 253, 262, 264, 265, 286
Fehlinger, Hans, 149, 273
Ferdy, Hans, 189, 245
Fischer, Edmund, 147, 148
Fischer-Dückelmann, Anna, 46
Flesch, Max, 184, 192, 200, 208, 234
Foerster, Friedrich Wilhelm, 48, 55, 60,
61, 63, 185, 187, 188, 284–286,
294, 297, 298
Forel, August, 192, 251–252, 259, 262,
266, 276, 278, 284, 313
Foucault, Michel, 3, 305–306, 307
Frank, Ludwig, 239
Frau, Die, 95, 96, 100, 102, 103, 112,
113, 150, 311
Frauenbewegung, Die, 85, 97, 103, 150,
202
Freud, Sigmund, 166, 210, 239, 245,
247–249, 259, 266, 297, 313
Freudenberg, Ika, 95, 97
Friedländer, Benedict, 160, 161,
167–170, 172, 174, 231
Renaissance des Eros Uranios,
168–169
Fürth, Henriette, 141, 144, 146, 149,
194, 202, 203, 204, 207, 209, 213,
221, 224, 226, 231, 238, 295
Gemeinschaft der Eigenen (GE), 157,
160, 161, 163, 172, 301
General Conference of German Morality
Associations. See Allgemeine
Konferenz der deutschen
Sittlichkeitsvereine
German National Committee Against the
Traffic in Girls. See Deutsche
Nationalkomitee zur internationalen
Bekämpfung des Mädchenhandels
German Monist League. See Deutscher
Monistenbund
German-Protestant Women’s League. See
Deutsch-Evangelischer Frauenbund
Geschlecht und Gesellschaft, 245, 246,
254–255, 261, 266, 272, 274, 277,
300, 302, 311

336
Gewerbeordnung. See Industrial Code
Gleichheit, Die, 114, 137, 138, 139, 140,
142, 144, 147, 150
Gröben, Selma von der, 288
Grotjahn, Alfred, 178, 249
Gruber, Max von, 183, 185, 271, 278,
279, 296, 308
Guillaume-Schack, Gertrud, 16, 79, 98,
99, 103
Gumplowicz, Ladislas, 143
Hacker, Agnes, 192
Haeckel, Ernst, 85, 159, 175, 190,
240
Hallermeyer, August, 273, 277
Hammer, Wilhelm, 149, 185
Harden, Maximilian, 170
Harnack, Adolf von, 178
Hegar, Alfred, 258, 262, 270, 275, 278,
279
Hellpach, Willy, 140
Hellwig, Albert, 35
Henning, Adolf, 20, 24, 25, 39, 40
Hentschel, Willibald, 265, 277, 298, 300,
313
Hessen, Robert, 273
Heymann, Lida Gustava, 79, 178, 189,
312
Hiller, Kurt, 175, 200, 231, 245, 294
Hirsch, Max, 255
Hirschfeld, Magnus, 44, 157–160, 161,
163, 164, 165, 166–167, 169, 171,
174, 175, 190, 231, 240, 249, 254,
256, 311
Industrial Code, 128–129
Inner Mission, 13, 14, 16, 20, 23, 27, 51,
64, 81, 99, 284, 287
and abolitionism, 105
International Abolitionist Federation
(IAF), 15, 16, 17, 79, 80, 85, 87, 89,
91, 93, 97, 99, 100, 102, 104, 110,
111, 112, 119, 132, 173, 182, 245,
283, 289, 296, 298, 300–301, 302
Internationale Abolitionistische
Föderation. See International
Abolitionist Federation

Index
Internationale Bund für Mutterschutz
und Sexualreform (IBMS), 237, 238,
239
Internationale Gesellschaft für
Sexualforschung (IGS), 250, 301
International League for Motherhood
Protection and Sexual Reform. See
Internationale Bund für
Mutterschutz und Sexualreform
International Society for Sex Research.
See Internationale Gesellschaft für
Sexualforschung
Jäger, Gustav, 170
Jahrbuch für sexuelle Zwischenstufen
(JSZ), 160, 163, 172, 174, 175
Jansen, Johannes, 287
Jellinek, Camilla, 96, 97
Jewish Women’s League. See Jüdischer
Frauenbund
Jüdischer Frauenbund (JFB), 83, 84, 99,
100, 105–106, 109, 111, 289, 291,
301
Juliusburger, Otto, 301
Kasernierung, 26, 115, 120, 121, 122,
126, 131, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185,
187, 296, 301, 314
Katholikentag, 20, 26, 60, 83, 99
Katholischer deutscher Frauenbund
(KDF), 83, 84, 87, 93, 99, 107, 109,
110, 119, 301, 312
and abolitionism, 105–106
and socialism, 110
Katholischer Fürsorgeverein für
Mädchen, Frauen und Kinder (KFV),
82, 93, 106, 292, 301
Kausen, Armin, 284
Keller, Samuel, 27, 53, 54, 57, 58, 297,
313
Kellnerinnenfrage, 96
Kemmer, Ludwig, 35
Key, Ellen, 192, 197, 201, 207, 209, 211,
212, 215–220, 221, 227, 230, 231,
253, 257, 267, 268, 284, 297, 312
Kisch, Enoch Heinrich, 261
Klaar, Alfred, 257

Index
Koerber, Heinrich, 239
Kölner Männerverein für die
Bekämpfung der öffentlichen
Unsittlichkeit (KMV), 17, 19, 20, 67
and prostitution, 26
Korrespondenzblatt, 15, 40, 54, 56, 60,
119, 126, 150
anti-Semitism in, 72
Krafft-Ebing, Richard von, 153–155,
163, 253, 258, 261, 269, 297,
313
Psychopathia sexualis, 154, 258
Kromayer, Ernst, 223, 235
Kupffer, Elisar von, 170, 313
Lange, Helene, 94, 96, 97, 106–107, 289,
290, 293–294, 308
Latour, Bruno, 307
League for the Protection of Motherhood.
See Bund für Mutterschutz
League of German Women’s
Associations. See Bund deutscher
Frauenvereine
Lebensreform, 45
Leixner, Otto von, 32, 41, 43, 61, 64,
178
Lemme, Ludwig, 39, 47, 57, 59, 64, 66,
67
Lennartz, Ernst, 69
Lessing, Theodor, 229
lex Heinze, 80, 121–124, 127, 129, 138,
157, 186
Lilienthal, Erich, 308
Lischnewska, Maria, 186, 189, 191, 196,
205, 213, 229, 230, 233, 292, 301,
309
Liszt, Franz von, 178, 192
Loewenherz, Johanna, 221
Lux, Heinrich, 138
MacKay, John Henry, 170
Mahling, Friedrich, 46, 59, 287
Marcuse, Julian, 186
Marcuse, Max, 117, 121, 183, 186–187,
191, 193, 234, 245, 250, 253, 255,
256, 258, 259, 262, 266, 269, 270,
273, 274, 276, 278, 279, 311

337
Marian Girls’ Protection Associations.
See Marianische
Mädchenschutzvereine
Marianische Mädchenschutzvereine
(MMSV), 83, 84
marriage, conceptions of, 37, 62, 63, 70,
92, 94, 102, 107, 109, 111, 140,
142, 143, 144–145, 150, 185, 188,
194, 201, 202–203, 204, 206, 208,
209, 210, 211, 212, 230, 236, 264,
265
Martin, Marie, 108
masturbation, 21, 37, 116, 121, 154,
155, 156, 164, 171, 174, 262–263,
271
Mausbach, Joseph, 36, 41, 60, 62, 63,
284, 286
Mayet, Paul, 235
Mayreder, Rosa, 196, 255, 301
media and publishing industries, 30, 49
Medical Society for Sexual Science and
Eugenics. See Ärztliche Gesellschaft
für Sexualwissenschaft und Eugenik
Meisel-Hess, Grete, 195, 204, 211, 214,
221, 224, 225, 227, 230, 231, 232,
300, 313
Men’s Alliance for Combatting Public
Immorality. See Berliner
Männerbund zur Bekämpfung der
Unsittlichkeit
Meyer, Bruno, 192, 200, 202, 203, 210,
227, 245, 257, 262, 266, 269, 271,
272, 274, 275, 300
Meyer-Benfey, Heinrich, 209, 212
Michels, Robert, 260
Möbius, Paul, 267
modernism, artistic, 43, 65, 69, 86, 87
modernity, modernization, 4–6, 94,
304–315
Moll, Albert, 155–156, 163, 171, 192,
247, 250, 253, 254, 258, 261, 262,
268, 270, 275, 278, 279
monism, 191, 197, 218, 240, 281, 282,
293, 295, 299, 300
motherhood, 96, 102, 107, 147, 197,
198, 202, 219–220, 222, 252, 268,
290

338
Mueller, Paula, 82, 85, 86, 87, 99, 104,
105, 188, 288, 292, 294, 301
Münster, Countess of (M. Gräfin
Münster), 85, 104, 288
Näcke, Paul, 117, 165, 245, 247, 248,
261, 262, 274, 278, 308, 311
national organization of Catholic
charities. See Deutscher
Caritasverband
National Socialism, 8
Naumann, Friedrich, 192, 229
Neisser, Albert, 179–181, 183–184, 188,
192, 231, 240, 300, 308
neo-Malthusian movement, 46, 282,
299
Neue Generation, Die. See under Bund
für Mutterschutz
Neue Zeit, Die, 137, 140, 143, 149, 150
Neugebauer, Franz, 313
Neuhaus, Agnes, 292
New Ethic, 44, 97, 193, 207, 234, 238,
284, 288–289, 293
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 47, 64, 73, 85, 190,
194, 215, 236, 294, 295, 302
Noack, Victor, 274
Nostitz, Robert von, 48
nudism, 45
Nyström, Anton, 187, 245, 246, 262,
312
Oettingen, Alexander von, 313
Olberg, Oda, 145, 146, 148, 239
Ostwald, Wilhelm, 313
Pappenheim, Bertha, 83, 100, 103, 106,
289, 291
Pappritz, Anna, 79, 88, 89, 90, 91, 93,
97, 101, 103, 111, 112, 119, 123,
125, 130, 132, 173, 178, 180, 181,
188, 189, 245, 289, 292, 301, 312
Paulsen, Friedrich, 59, 60, 284, 287
Philipps, Wilhelm, 14, 24, 25, 44, 55, 56,
127, 161
Ploetz, Alfred, 192, 193
Politisch-Anthropologische Revue (PAR),
246, 266, 276

Index
popular culture, 30–42, 65, 164, 196
prostitution, regulation of, 20, 21–26,
130, 194, 302. See also Kasernierung
race hygiene. See eugenics
racism, 71–73, 111, 275, 277, 298
Reichsstrafgesetzbuch (RStGB). See
Criminal Code
Reuter, Gabriele, 204, 221, 223
Ribbing, Seved, 312
Roeren, Hermann, 20, 36, 38, 71, 132,
283
Rohden, Gustav von, 132, 183, 287–288,
294
Rohleder, Hermann, 226, 245, 249, 253,
261, 262, 268, 271, 272, 279
Römer, Lucien (L. S. A. M. von Römer),
160, 313
Rosenthal, Max (Max Thal), 202, 212,
214, 224, 231, 235–236, 237, 246,
257, 259, 260, 268, 269, 295
Rösler, Augustin, 286
Rutgers, Johannes, 200, 201, 203, 313
Salomon, Alice, 93, 97, 102, 294
Schallmeyer, Wilhelm, 226
Scheven, Katharina, 79, 80, 88, 89, 90,
91, 93, 98, 101, 102, 109, 125, 173,
178, 181, 185, 188, 189, 290, 296,
301, 309
Schirmacher, Käthe, 196, 211, 291, 301
Schleiermacher, Friedrich, 190, 287
Schmitz, Oscar A. H., 260, 270, 279
Schmutz and Schund, 31, 37, 69, 70, 87,
91, 128, 130, 196
Schreiber, Adele, 192, 194, 195, 198,
200, 201, 209, 210, 223, 224, 226,
231, 233, 234, 237, 238, 291, 313
Schrenck-Notzing, Albert Freiherr von,
250
Schultze, Ernst, 34, 37, 41, 62
Schund. See Schmutz and Schund
Schur, Ernst, 299
Schurtz, Heinrich, 170
Scientific-Humanitarian Committee. See
Wissenschaftlich-humanitäre
Komitee

Index
section 175 (RStGB), 44, 61, 125, 152,
153, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 162,
164, 165, 166, 171, 172, 174, 210,
275
Seeberg, Reinhold, 52, 61, 246, 250, 313
Sellheim, Hugo, 250, 258
Sello, Erich, 192
sex education, 45, 193
Sexual-Probleme, 245, 246, 255–257,
266, 270, 273, 276, 277, 278, 299,
300, 302, 311
Siebert, Friedrich, 188–189, 246, 279
Slater, Don, 305, 310
Social Democratic Party of Germany
(SPD), 15, 44, 58, 99, 114, 137–151,
157, 166, 175, 176, 188, 191, 199,
205, 231, 282, 297, 302, 309
morality campaigners’ views on,
58–64, 73, 110
revisionism in, 139, 141, 145, 147,
148, 149–150, 238
and sex reform, 238
Society for Combating Venereal Diseases.
See Deutsche Gesellschaft zur
Bekämpfung der
Geschlechtskrankheiten
Society for Ethical Culture, 167, 285
Society for Race Hygiene, 246
Sombart, Werner, 192
Sozialistische Monatshefte, 137, 139,
142, 147, 149, 150, 238, 252
Spier-Irving, Isaak, 255, 266, 269, 273,
274, 275
Springer, Bruno, 233
Stéenhof, Frida, 202, 204
Steinach, Eugen, 247, 250
Stekel, Wilhelm, 239
Stern, Wilhelm, 248
Stöcker, Helene, 102, 166, 175, 176,
189, 190, 191, 194, 196, 197,
199, 202, 203, 204, 205, 207,
208, 210, 211, 212, 213, 221–223,
226, 229, 230, 231, 232–233, 234,
236, 237, 239, 246, 249, 255, 256,
272, 284, 291, 294–295, 299, 300,
311
Stoecker, Adolf, 14, 20, 72, 73, 108

339
Streitberg, Gisela von (Countess Bülow
von Dennewitz), 207
Stritt, Marie, 173, 178, 192, 301,
313
suffrage. See women’s suffrage
Taube, Max, 178
Taylor, Charles, 310
Ulrichs, Karl Heinrich, 152–153, 158,
163, 168
Union of Progressive Women’s
Associations. See Verband
Fortschrittlicher Frauenvereine
Vaerting, Matilda, 227
Vanselow, Karl, 245, 311
Verband Fortschrittlicher Frauenvereine
(VFF), 80, 82, 97, 191, 224
Verein der Freundinnen junger Mädchen
(VFJM), 81, 93, 301
Verein Jugendschutz (VJS), 78
Volksverein für das katholische
Deutschland, 19, 20, 21, 100
Volksverein zur Bekämpfung des
Schmutzes in Wort und Bild, 32
Volkswart, Der, 18, 26, 28, 40, 57, 58,
59, 60, 68, 128, 132, 150, 174, 284,
296, 297, 298
Weber, Ludwig, 14, 16, 17, 24, 28, 47,
52, 55, 56, 57, 60, 62, 63, 68, 81,
104, 119, 122, 128, 132, 178, 181,
308
Weber, Marianne, 95, 290, 293
Weber, Max, 192
Wedekind, Frank, 269
Weigl, Franz, 39
Weimar Cartel, 167, 238
Weininger, Otto, 267
Werner, Katharina, 299
Westdeutscher Sittlichkeitsverein (WSV),
14, 17, 53, 58, 301
West German Morality Association. See
Westdeutscher Sittlichkeitsverein
White Cross Association, 301
Wiese, Leopold von, 199, 200, 223

340
Wilde, Oscar, 156, 157, 163
Wissenschaftlich-humanitäre Komitee
(WHK), 44, 157, 161, 162–164,
166, 167, 169, 171, 172, 173, 174,
175, 176, 184, 232, 238, 240, 249,
253, 254, 282, 295, 299, 301, 302,
309, 313
petition on §175, 162–163, 165
Wolf, Julius, 247, 250
Wolgast, Heinrich, 38
Woltmann, Ludwig, 192

Index
Women’s Association for the
Improvement of Morality. See
Deutscher Frauenverein zur Hebung
der Sittlichkeit
women’s suffrage, 80, 88, 97, 99, 110,
195, 204, 315
Wulffen, Erich, 58
Zepler, Wally, 139, 144, 145, 148, 178
Zetkin, Clara, 142, 146, 147, 148
Zietz, Luisa, 146

