HONOR, POLITICS, AND THE
LAW IN IMPERIAL GERMANY,
1871–1914

Honor in nineteenth-century Germany is usually thought of as an
anachronistic aristocratic tradition conﬁned to the dueling elites.
In this innovative study Ann Goldberg shows instead how honor
pervaded all aspects of German life and how, during an era of rapid
modernization, it was adapted and incorporated into the modern
state, industrial capitalism, and mass politics. In business, state
administration, politics, labor relations, gender and racial matters,
Germans contested questions of honor in an explosion of defamation litigation. Dr. Goldberg surveys court cases, newspaper
reportage, and parliamentary debates, exploring the conﬂicts of
daily life and the intense politicization of libel jurisprudence in an
era when an authoritarian state faced oﬀ against groups and
individuals from “below” claiming new citizenship rights around
a democratized notion of honor and law. Her fascinating account
provides a nuanced and important new understanding of the
political, legal and social history of imperial Germany.
ann goldberg is an associate professor of History at the
University of California, Riverside. She is the author of Sex,
Religion, and the Making of Modern Madness (1999).

NEW STUDIES IN EUROPEAN HISTORY

Edited by
P E T E R B A L D W I N , University of California, Los Angeles
C H R I S T O P H E R C L A R K , University of Cambridge
J A M E S B . C O L L I N S , Georgetown University
M I A R O D R Í G U E Z - S A L G A D O , London School of Economics and Political Science
L Y N D A L R O P E R , University of Oxford
T I M O T H Y S N Y D E R , Yale University

The aim of this series in early modern and modern European history is to publish
outstanding works of research, addressed to important themes across a wide geographical range, from southern and central Europe, to Scandinavia and Russia, from
the time of the Renaissance to the Second World War. As it develops the series will
comprise focused works of wide contextual range and intellectual ambition.
A full list of titles published in the series can be found at:
www.cambridge.org/newstudiesineuropeanhistory

HONOR, POLITICS, AND THE
LAW IN IMPERIAL GERMANY,
1871–1914
ANN GOLDBERG
University of California, Riverside

cambridge university press
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo, Delhi
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge cb2 8ru, UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521198325
© Ann Goldberg 2010
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2010
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data
Goldberg, Ann.
Honor, politics and the law in imperial Germany, 1871–1914 / Ann Goldberg.
p. cm. – (New studies in European history)
isbn 978-0-521-19832-5 (hardback)
1. Honor – Germany – History. 2. Political culture – Germany – History. 3. Libel and
slander – Germany – History. 4. Germany – History – 1871–1918. I. Title. II. Series.
bj1533.h8g65 2010
306.20943′09034–dc22
2009045832
isbn-13: 978-0-521-19832-5 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or
accuracy of URLs for external or third-party Internet websites referred to in
this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is,
or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Contents

page ix
xi

Acknowledgements
List of abbreviations
Introduction

1

1

The development of the law

19

2 Honor disputes and everyday life

37

3

The state

81

4

Politicization

115

5

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

157

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

193

Index

213

vii

Acknowledgements

The research for this book was enabled by the generosity of several
institutions and funding organizations, whom I would like to thank.
The idea for the section of chapter 5 dealing with mad people ﬁrst
emerged years ago as a result of an initial research foray at the
Landeshauptarchiv Koblenz, during a visiting fellowship at the
Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung in Bonn. Subsequent trips to German
archives were partially funded by the University of California,
Riverside and the National Endowment for the Humanities. Many
thanks, as well, to the following institutions for access to their
research holdings and for their helpful staﬀ: Geheimes Staatsarchiv
Preussischer Kulturbesitz; Bundesarchiv Berlin-Lichterfelde; Brandenburgisches Landeshauptarchiv; Nordrhein-Westfälisches Hauptstaatsarchiv; Stiftung Neue Synagoge Berlin; Institut für Geschichte
der Medizin, Berlin; Staatsbibliothek, Berlin. In Düsseldorf, the
Heinrich-Heine-University supplied a place to stay and the company of a terriﬁc group of international scholars. In Berlin, Roswitha
Gronich, Ilan Gronich, Uschi Hoﬀmann, and Max Hoﬀmann provided lodging and, much more importantly, their friendship and
company.
Earlier versions of parts of the book were presented at the European
Social Science History Conference; Association for Jewish Studies
Conference; German Studies Association Conference; a forum on
German history at U.C. Berkeley; and U.C. Riverside’s Legal Studies
Workshop. I thank for their comments, suggestions, and probing
questions Margaret Anderson, James Brophy, Darcy Buerkle, Eric
Engstrom, Kenneth Ledford, Kees Gispen, Atina Grossmann, Paul
ix

x

Acknowledgements

Lerner, Peter Loewenberg, Glenn Penny, Richard Wetzell, and the
members of U.C. Riverside’s Legal Studies Workshop.
Special thanks go to Peter Baldwin, who read the entire manuscript and oﬀered insightful advice. Other colleagues and friends
who have helped over the years are Sharon Gillerman, Benjamin
Hett, Steve Loewenstein, Guenther Roth, Emmanuel Saadia, David
Sabean, Heinz-Peter Schmiedebach, Dana Simmons, Jonathan
Sperber, Kathy Stuart, and Ulrich Raulﬀ. My very warm thanks go
to Michael Watson at Cambridge University Press, whose professionalism and cordiality were extremely important to me; it was
a pleasure working with him. At Cambridge University Press I
would also like to thank Joanna Breeze, Joanna Garbutt, and
Laurence Marsh.

Abbreviations

BA
BLA
CJA
GStPK
HdR
IdR
IR
NWHSA
SBR
SBPA
StPO

Bundesarchiv, Berlin-Lichterfelde
Brandenburgisches Landeshauptarchiv
Stiftung Neue Synagoge Berlin – Centrum Judaicum,
Archiv
Geheimes Staatsarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz
Handwörterbuch zur deutschen Rechtsgeschichte
Im deutschen Reich
Irrenrechts-Reform
Nordrhein-Westfälisches Hauptstaatsarchiv
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des
deutschen Reichstags
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des
Preussischen Hauses der Abgeordneten
Strafprozessordnung (code of criminal procedure)

xi

Introduction

Germans have long been a thin-skinned people, easily insulted and,
when provoked, exceptionally ready to sue. Three anecdotes, spanning
the seventeenth and twentieth centuries, give a sense of what was at
stake in their lawsuits. The ﬁrst is of a Saxon blacksmith in 1671 whose
wife was called a “whore” (allegedly she had had sex for money with her
male servant).1 For the dishonoring remark, made by a drunken tanner,
the blacksmith ﬁled charges and the tanner was called to court to account
for his insult (though eventually acquitted). The second case, over 300
years later, is of the Berlin court actor Siegwart Gruder, a man whose
successful career peaked during the Kaiserreich (1871–1918). Now, in
1927, aging, ill, and living oﬀ a meagre pension, he goes to the telephone
exchange to complain about service, and has a ﬁt when the woman at the
desk fails to treat him with the respect he thinks he deserves (allegedly
she didn’t heed the sign he had made (Blinkzeichen) calling for her
attention). Having called in her supervisor, Gruder blusters, “I am an
academic [sic] and I don’t have to let myself be treated like this by an
uneducated vagrant street girl and daughter of a [mere] postman
[Postschaﬀner].” This tiny moment of rancour became the basis subsequently of a court case, the state charging and convicting Gruder of
insulting a civil servant (Beamtenbeleidigung).2 The third case took place
in the 1950s in West Germany between an agricultural worker, who
had recently moved from East Berlin, and his employer, a farmer who
was also the worker’s landlord. During a disagreement over rent
1

Eileen Crosby, “Claiming Honor: Injury, Honor, and the Legal Process in Saxony,
1650–1730” (PhD diss., Cornell University, 2004), pp. 264ﬀ.
2
I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 58224, GStPK.
1

2

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

and wages, the farmer called the worker a “jailbird” (Zuchthäusler) and a
“Communist.” The worker promptly turned around and sued for insult
(whether he prevailed in court is unknown).3
Despite some important diﬀerences,4 what is most striking about
these cases is the continuity – the tenacity over centuries and within
vastly diﬀerent settings – of an honor culture litigated in the courts.
Honor was serious business. The time and monetary risk of bringing a
lawsuit over even a trivial insult was taken in stride by many Germans
because, as the anthropologists tell us, what they were defending went
to the heart of their sense of self and social identity, honor being “the
value of a person in his own eyes and in the eyes of his society. It is his
estimation of his own worth, his claim to pride, but it is also the
acknowledgment of that claim, his excellence recognized by society,
his right to pride,” – namely, respect and deference.5 And that value,
symbolic as it was, translated into all the important material things in
life – social status, jobs, credit, marriage, and power – honor being
a kind of currency that could be turned into goods and services, or, to
the contrary, squandered and lost. The extravagant disproportion of
Gruder’s reaction to an inattentive telephone employee, strange as it
seems, did have a certain logic and pathos, that of a man whose world no
longer recognized him – a man of honor and status – as he saw himself.
Neither the devotion to honor nor the use of defamation law for
policing speech was unique to Germany. To this day, England’s
notoriously restrictive libel statutes continue to inhibit free speech in
that country and, via a globalized publishing industry, increasingly in
the US as well. The French were obsessed in the nineteenth century
with issues of honor and respect, and elite men dueled just as avidly
there as in Germany.6 But legally and historically, the honor cultures
3

Hans-Georg Doering, Beleidigung und Privatklage (Göttingen, 1971), pp. 41–42.
For example, it would have been illegal for a seventeenth-century worker to bring
an honor lawsuit against his master.
5
Julian Pitt-Rivers, “Honour and Social Status’” in J. G. Peristiany (ed.), Honour and
Shame: The Values of Mediterranean Society (Chicago, 1966), p. 21.
6
Robert Nye, Masculinity and Male Codes of Honor in Modern France (Berkeley, 1993);
William Reddy, The Invisible Code: Honor and Sentiment in Postrevolutionary France,
1814 – 1848 (Berkeley, 1997); Edward Berenson, The Trial of Madame Caillaux
4

Introduction

3

of those countries developed along diﬀerent lines – both from each
other and from Germany. The result was that in France the mechanisms regulating civility and respect (i.e. behavior according with
a person’s honor and status) developed outside of the court system –
in the schools and bourgeois voluntary associations, according to a
recent study7 – and thus did not juridify interpersonal conﬂicts as
they did in Germany. In England and the US, a property-oriented
view of defamation had long largely decoupled honor and the law
of slander, setting, accordingly, high standards of legal proof
(a plaintiﬀ was required to show evidence of material harm to his
or her ﬁnancial existence) that minimized such lawsuits.8 And, in
the US, particularly since a 1964 Supreme Court decision, defamatory speech has been signiﬁcantly narrowed in order to protect
First Amendment rights.9
By contrast, since at least the late Middle Ages, Germans have
been successfully suing one another for not only public speech that
harms reputation, but for insults (Beleidigungen) that make them feel
disrespected, irrespective of whether their reputations have actually
(Berkeley, 1992). On Italian honor, see Steven C. Hughes, Politics of the Sword
(Columbus, OH, 2007).
7
James Whitman, “Enforcing Civility and Respect: Three Societies,” Yale Law
Journal 109 (2000), 1279–398. Whitman’s comparative study of France,
Germany, and the US is extremely useful and thought-provoking. I do take issue
with a number of his factual assertions and interpretations (see Conclusion). For
more details on French and British libel statutes, see below (ch. 1).
8
Very good discussions of comparative defamation law can be found in Mittermaier
et al. (eds.), Vergleichende Darstellung des deutschen und ausländischen Strafrechts:
Besonderer Teil vol. 4 (Berlin, 1906). For a recent analysis of British and US law, see
Paul Mitchell, The Making of the Modern Law of Defamation (Oxford and Portland,
OR, 2005). For comparison of German and US defamation law, see Georg Nolte,
Beleidigungsschutz in der freiheitlichen Demokratie (Berlin, 1992); Pawel Lutomski,
“Private Citizens and Public Discourse: Defamation Law as a Limit to the Right
of Free Expression in the US and Germany,” German Studies Review 24 (2001),
571–92.
9
The majority ruling in this case, New York Times v. Sullivan, raised the bar very far
for plaintiﬀs, requiring them to “prove actual malice on the disseminator’s part”: Ian
Loveland, Political Libels (Oxford, 2000), p. 69. The case derived from a lawsuit
brought against the New York Times for publishing an advertisement (containing
minor factual errors) critical of Alabama’s harassment of civil rights activists.

4

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

or potentially been harmed.10 Indeed, in modern German insult
law – a kind of “rudeness regulation”11 – no knowledge of the
insult by a third party is required for the complainent to sue (as in
the worker-farmer case above) and to do so successfully. In the
Kaiserreich, moreover, such lawsuits became actionable in criminal
law – a situation that in eﬀect “criminalized” disrespectful behavior12 – and Germans were given the right to bring these actions
themselves in private prosecutions (Privatklage). This Privatklage
provision of German law, perhaps more than any other single
factor, kept honor intensely alive in popular culture and ensured
that the interpersonal conﬂicts of daily life became lawsuits on an
unparalleled scale. To this day, Germany is a country that
guarantees in its Grundgesetz a “right” to honor; it still has an
“insult” provision of its defamation laws regulating respectful
treatment such that, under certain circumstances, one can be prosecuted for, say, giving the ﬁnger to a driver as he cuts you oﬀ on
the road.13
The nineteenth century played a critical role in perpetuating
Germany’s juridiﬁed honor culture. Indeed, judging by the numbers,
it was the Kaiserreich in particular that massively expanded that
culture. An epidemic of libel litigation characterized this era. There
were 52,645 criminal indictments for libel in 1883. By 1910, that ﬁgure

10

For early-modern German defamation litigation, see, in addition to Crosby, “Claiming
Honor,” in Ralf-Peter Fuchs, Um die Ehre: Westfälische Beleidigungsprozesse vor dem
Reichskammergericht, 1525–1805 (Paderborn, 1999); Klaus Schreiner and Gerd
Schwerhoﬀ (eds.), Verletzte Ehre: Ehrkonﬂikte in Gesellschaften des Mittelalters und der
frühen Neuzeit (Cologne, 1995); Martin Dinges, “Die Ehre als Thema der
Stadtgeschichte: Eine Semantik im Übergang vom Ancien Regime zur Moderne,”
Zeitschrift für historische Forschung 16 (1989), 409–40; idem, Der Mauermeister und der
Finanzrichter (Göttingen, 1994).
11
Whitman, “Enforcing Civility,” 1295. 12 Ibid., 1296.
13
Whitman, “Enforcing Civility,” Doering, Beleidigung und Privatklage, and Rüdiger
Koewius, Die Rechtswirklichkeit der Privatklage (Berlin, 1974) are sociological
studies of insult litigation in West Germany. On East German honor litigation:
Paul Betts, “Property, Peace, and Honor: Neighborhood Justice in Communist
Berlin,” Past and Present 201 (2008), 215–54.

Introduction

5

had grown to 84,058.14 This was an increase of over 59 percent at a
time when the population, itself rapidly expanding, grew at a rate of
41 percent. These ﬁgures, moreover, do not include the tens of
thousands of libel actions that were settled out of court each year.
Indeed, contemporaries estimated that in Prussia, for example, more
than half of all insult proceedings were settled through pretrial
mediation.15 The comparable ﬁgures for France, for example, are
miniscule by comparison, even when one factors in that country’s
smaller population.16 Finally, it was the Kaiserreich that granted
almost all Germans the extraordinary right of the Privatklage.
This should not have been happening according to a body of
scholarship on honor reaching back to the turn-of-the-century work
of sociologist Max Weber. Honor was central to Weber’s typological
distinction between traditional corporate and modern class societies.17 Corporate societies, according to Weber, categorize people
according to hierarchically ranked, exclusive estates (Stände) in
which membership and status is determined by honor, a quality
displayed in a particular lifestyle (Lebensführung) – dress, comportment, titles – that distances and elevates higher, more honorable
estates and individuals from lower ones. By contrast, modern market
14

1883 is the ﬁrst year for which there are libel suit ﬁgures in the Reich’s oﬃcial
statistics. I calculated the rate of increase using the years 1883, 1890, 1900, 1910.
In all of these decades, libel indictments outstripped population growth, but the
gaps varied by decade. 1890–1900 saw the smallest gap – ca. 1.5%; the period of
1883–1890 saw the largest (ca. 9%). Statistisches Jahrbuch für das deutsche Reich,
vols. 6, 13, 23, 33.
15
Heinrich Gerland, “Die systematische Stellung des Privatklageverfahrens im
Strafprocess,” Der Gerichtssaal 60 (1902), 161. The numbers are opaque in some
respects. For example, they do not normally tell us what proportion of these cases
were prosecuted by the state. They also do not reveal much about the litigants’
social backgrounds.
16
France recorded its defamation statistics somewhat diﬀerently and thus the comparison is not exact, but the French ﬁgures for 1897 give a sense of the wide gap
between it and Germany. In that year, the French criminal courts (cours d’assises
and the tribunaux correctionnels) adjudicated ca. 2,400 cases of public defamation
and insult; an additional 4,017 cases of private insult were brought at a lower level
as police misconduct charges (akin to a parking ticket violation) in the tribunaux de
simple police: Annuaire Statistique 20 (Paris, 1968), 117, 129.
17
Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft vol. 2 (Tübingen, 1956), pp. 534ﬀ.

6

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

societies are governed by “objective criteria” and have “no idea about
honor,”18 grouping people instead in social classes that are purely
economic, determined by a person’s “relations to production.”19
Weber’s distinction between modernity and honor entered recent
scholarship via the work of anthropologists in the mid-twentieth
century. Their ethnographic studies of Mediterranean societies
closely associated an abiding attachment to the values of honor
with rural, preindustrial settings.20 As Peristiany put it, “Honour
and shame are the constant preoccupation of individuals in small
scale, exclusive societies where face to face personal, as opposed to
anonymous, relations are of paramount importance …”21 It is such
settings, structured by rank and the power of the social group, where
reputation and respect, displayed and fought over through the rituals
of honor, are of paramount importance.22 In this view, by contrast,
modernization erodes the value of honor by developing diﬀerentiated, complex structures and non-overlapping social roles that undermine the power of the small group over the individual. An external
and group-deﬁned sense of self, status, and respect is replaced by an
individualized, internal identity that makes “honor,” as a social
value, less relevant or irrelevant.23 Accordingly, urban gangs, the
18

Ibid., p. 538.
Weber’s historical (as opposed to theoretical and ideal-typical) analysis of market
societies was in fact much more nuanced and complex, viewing honor-estatist values
as continuing to coexist and be intertwined with economic classes: for example, ibid.,
p. 535. For a historical narrative, based on Weberian ideas, on how modernization
“brought about the decline of honour and its replacement by the notion of dignity,”
see Peter Berger et al., The Homeless Mind: Modernization and Consciousness (New
York, 1974); Pat O’Malley, “From Feudal Honour to Bourgeois Reputation.
Ideology, Law and the Rise of Industrial Capitalism,” Sociology 15 (1981), 79, oﬀers
a critique of modernization theory that continues to use the dichotomy of modernity
and honor but reformulates it within a Marxist paradigm.
20
Classic work done by Pitt-Rivers, Peristiany, and others. See, e.g., Peristiany,
Honour and Shame.
21
Ibid., p. 11. 22 Ibid., pp. 21ﬀ.
23
An inﬂuential analysis of the development of Western honor within this Weberian
modernization mode is Peter Berger’s “On the Obsolescence of the Concept of
Honor,” Archives Européennes de Sociologie 11 (1970), 339–47. A modernization
view applied to German honor in the nineteenth century can be found in Ute
Frevert, “Ehre – männlich/weiblich. Zu einem Identitätsbegriﬀ des 19.
19

Introduction

7

Sicilian Maﬁa, and immigrant Turks24 in the modern West, groups
whose values continue to be structured around honor, have a whiﬀ of
archaism about them, being seen as holdovers from the past or
displaying signs of deprivation and underdevelopment.
It is diﬃcult to ﬁt Germany’s honor culture into this schema, given
that it continued unabated even as the country rapidly modernized,
developing in the nineteenth century social and political structures –
impersonal cities, bureaucracies, industrial workforce, mass voting
and mass press – that should have undermined the role of honor.
Even as far back as the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, honor in
Germany was not progressing along the lines set out by modern
anthropologists. In her study of early-modern guild honor, the
historian Kathy Stuart found that, contrary to the “anthropological
assumption … that the signiﬁcance of honor recedes as societies
become more complex and diversiﬁed,” in Germany “the larger the
city, the more stringent the honor code” among municipal craft
guilds.25
Perhaps the contradiction in Germany is reﬂective of the continued strength of traditional values and preindustrial elites? This is the
conclusion one inescapably gets from studies of the duel, which
dominate the scholarship on nineteenth-century honor. A dramatic
but minor phenomenon compared to the defamation lawsuit, the duel
in Germany was nevertheless spreading downward before World
War One via university student fraternities and the reserve oﬃcer
corps to encompass wide swaths of the educated bourgeoisie. This
development, to be sure, was occurring elsewhere, most notably in
republican France and liberal post-Risorgimento Italy. It thus does
not, as one scholar clariﬁes, signal any uniquely illiberal features on
Jahrhunderts,” Tel Aviver Jahrbuch für deutsche Geschichte 21 (1992), 22, 28; and,
implicitly, in Whitman, “Enforcing Civility.”
24
Clementine van Eck, Puriﬁed by Blood: Honour Killings amongst Turks in the
Netherlands (Amsterdam, 2003), a fascinating anthropological study that traces
present-day honor killings among Turkish immigrants to the Mediterranean values
they are bringing and re-adapting from rural Turkish village culture.
25
Kathy Stuart, Deﬁled Trades and Social Outcasts: Honor and Ritual Pollution in Early
Modern Germany (Cambridge, 1999), p. 11.

8

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

the part of the German bourgeoisie that would support the notion of a
German Sonderweg – a pathological departure from the developmental norms of the West.26 And yet, given the duel’s aristocraticmilitary ethos, it is hard to interpret this form of honor (whether in
Germany, France,27 or the US South28) as anything but a reﬂection
of the persistence of preindustrial norms and practices of old elites
into the modern era.
Perhaps, as in one recent study,29 the modern German defamation
lawsuit should be seen, accordingly, as an anachronism reﬂecting the
continued power of traditional hierarchical values? Certainly, there
were strong links in Germany between honor and premodern or even
anti-modern values. One sees this in the defense of entrenched
corporate interests in the military and the civil service, and in the
way professional disciplinary courts (Ehrengerichte) deﬁned honor in
opposition to the maligned values of the marketplace (chapter 2).
The authorities’ use of defamation prosecutions on a massive scale to
censor political dissent (chapter 3), furthermore, certainly reﬂected
resistance to a modern liberal state guaranteeing freedom of speech
and opinion.
This said, the notion of a dichotomy between honor and modernity is far too simplistic.30 It does not begin to capture the complexity
of how Germany’s honor culture interacted with the transformations
26

It is “doubtful whether it is possible to interpret [German bourgeois dueling] as a
drive towards feudalization on the part of the middle class.” Ute Frevert, Men of
Honor: A Social and Cultural History of the Duel, trans. Anthony Williams
(Cambridge, 1995), p. 7. By contrast, a Sonderweg argument is explicitly the
point of Kevin McAleer, Dueling: The Cult of Honor in Fin-de-Siècle Germany
(Princeton, 1994).
27
Robert Nye’s study of French honor in the nineteenth century, Masculinity and
Male Codes of Honor, shows that the French bourgeoisie were just as passionate
about dueling as their German counterparts.
28
The literature on honor for both the antebellum and postbellum South is too large
to cite here. A good starting point is the work of Bertram Wyatt-Brown, Southern
Honor: Ethics and Behavior in the Old South (Oxford, 1983) and The Shaping of
Southern Culture: Honor, Grace, and War, 1760s–1880s (Chapel Hill, 2001).
29
Whitman, “Enforcing Civility.”
30
Weber himself understood this and wrote about a complex overlapping of the
values and practices of corporate and class societies. See fn. 17.

Introduction

9

of modern life. This culture was woven into the social fabric as an
idiom of social relations with multiple functions and tremendous
adaptability to new conditions and interests. Honor codes were
ﬂexible, multipurpose, and, far from anachronistic, being incorporated into the modern state, industrial capitalism, and mass politics in
the age of democracy. Professional honor courts, for example, were
not holdovers from the past but the creations of the late nineteenth
century and part of the professionalization (modernization) of medicine, law, and other areas of professional life. The state’s draconian
libel prosecutions of its opponents were tremendously controversial,
producing, in the age of parliaments and a mass press, a vigorous and
“modern” debate about state power, free speech, political and administrative accountability, and the role of honor in a Rechtsstaat (constitutional state). Even the conservative courts were of diﬀerent
minds on these issues. Finally, the institution most responsible for
maintaining and expanding insult and libel litigation, the Privatklage,
far from being an extension of aristocratic “private prosecutions,”31
was the product of the liberalization of Germany’s criminal justice
system in the nineteenth century.
Privatklagen, which made up the majority of libel actions, were
breathtakingly pervasive and multifunctional. Anywhere one looks
at German society at the turn of the twentieth century – politics,
business, the Churches, professions, press, daily life, gender and labor
relations – one ﬁnds clashes over competing honor claims that ended
up in court. No social interaction, no gesture or statement, however
trivial, seemed immune from denunciation and litigation. The
motives and interests behind these lawsuits were extremely varied:
revenge, rage, jealousy, setting the record straight, restoring one’s
reputation, defeating an opponent, shaming an enemy. So were the
circumstances that brought people to litigation: land disputes, rude
behavior, drinking and gossip, bad reviews, contested business deals,
hostilities between strikers and strikebreakers, to name just a few.
What underlay all of these suits was the propensity of Germans to
turn their disputes into lawsuits, and what this entailed was the
31

Whitman, “Enforcing Civility,” 1321.

10

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

articulation of material and symbolic interests within a language of
honor, an idiom embedded in the legal terms of the defamation
lawsuit itself. The political and social ﬂexibility of this idiom is
striking, providing as it did a language of dispute at all levels of
society and among both reactionaries and socialists, defenders of
corporate interests and rebels against those interests, the powerful
and the powerless.
On the one hand, there was the continuation of traditional corporate notions of identity and honor and sharp class distinctions. On the
other hand, industrial capitalism and the democratization of German
society were undermining the paternalistic and deferential relations
that had been the basis of a hierarchical corporate society. Indeed, the
fact that so many Germans were feeling disrespected suggests a
society in massive transition where ﬁrm markers of status were
being undermined or challenged, and where geographical mobility,
urbanization, and industrial capitalism were bringing more and more
strangers and mixed classes into contact, causing anxiety and confusion about social roles and the norms of behavior.
Accordingly, many of these suits, particularly those of the middle
classes, were shot through with status anxiety. As early as the 1850s,
at least one legal expert was making precisely this point, arguing that
“the loosening of the ﬁrm fundament of the bourgeoisie is gradually
making necessary a more touchy honor and strengthening its weight
in public opinion,” with a resulting “epidemic” of defamation litigation.32 Still other lawsuits were from marginalized or outsider
groups – Jews, workers, women, psychiatric patients – people
(with the exception of the latter) who had long defended their
honor in court, but who were doing so now in new ways, ﬁling suit
against superiors, organizing in political groupings as pressure
groups, adopting and reshaping honor ideas for new purposes related
to the claims of citizenship rights. They were also addressing the
public in new ways with a barrage of inventive pamphlet writing that
appealed in print to the court of public opinion.
32

C. Reinhold Köstlin, Abhandlungen aus dem Strafrechte (Tübingen, 1858), pp. 71, 79.

Introduction

11

This was an extraordinary move in the history of honor. To put it
in technical terms, while most libel lawsuits remained “horizontal”
(i.e. those between social equals), “vertical” lawsuits between
unequals, which had always been brought by superiors because of
their higher honor and social status, could also now involve legal
actions of inferiors against their social superiors and even against
government oﬃcials. At the same time, defamation lawsuits were
more and more likely to involve press libels outside the area of
interpersonal, face-to-face relations, to reﬂect, in other words, the
growth of a mass press, which tremendously expanded the opportunities, kinds and publicity of insults, as well as oﬀering new venues
for individuals to defend their honor.
What was coming into existence in the Kaiserreich, in other
words, was a hybrid legal culture that harnessed a traditional idiom
of honor to a democratic politics of rights. The association of honor
and rights, to be sure, was neither new nor unique to the Kaiserreich.
As the anthropologist Frank H. Stewart puts it, all assertions of honor
cross-culturally are in some way “rights claims” to a certain status
and respect.33 But what was new in the German nineteenth century
was the association of these “claim rights” with those of modern
citizenship and equal rights, together with practices associated with
mass, participatory politics.34
This democratization of honor reﬂected the social changes
brought about by industrial capitalism, liberalism, urbanism, and
mass politics. It was also the product of changes within honor itself.
Alongside the continued strength of collective, corporate honor
ideas, honor, in the course of the nineteenth century, was becoming
fragmented and individualized. Traditionally, honor was based on a
person’s membership in a hierarchically ranked corporation (Stand).
It was deﬁned in terms of the person’s reputation and standing in his
or her community and demonstrated through group-deﬁned external
33
34

Stewart, Honor, pp. 75–78, 146–47; Crosby, “Claiming Honor”, pp. 5–6.
For an excellent study about politics and honor in an earlier period in the US, see
Joanne Freeman, Aﬀairs of Honor: National Politics in the New Republic (New
Haven, 2001).

12

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

markers: birth and lineage, profession, guild membership, religion,
sexuality and gender. Towns, for example, treated Jews, criminals,
the illegitimately born, non-citizens and members of tainted trades as
dishonorable. Beginning in the eighteenth-century Enlightenment, a
new bourgeois notion of honor arose – a moral, internalized, and
vernünftige concept of the man or woman of virtue, whose honor was
deﬁned and determined not by the group or Stand, but by the
individual himself through the cultivation of a rational and moral
life. As Fichte put it:
I do not in any way base my judgment regarding the honor of my behavior
according to the opinion of others …, rather on my own opinion. My opinion
of my behavior depends on whether it accords with who I am or whether this
behavior brings me in conﬂict with myself. In the ﬁrst case I can approve the
behavior. In the second I would have dishonored myself and all I can do to
re-establish my honor is to candidly, and with all my strength, retract and
correct [my behavior].35

It was this new kind of honor – (ideally) self-determined and freed
from the strictures of rank, hierarchy, and birth – that, like modern
citizenship itself, opened new possibilities for claiming honor rights
and that underlay the new uses of defamation litigation discussed in
this book.36
Despite its democratizing and liberalizing trends, imperial
Germany remained constrained within illiberal forms of government
and the outsized power of an authoritarian monarchy, military, and
bureaucracy. Since the 1980s,37 historians have been rethinking that
illiberalism, and one eﬀect, after years of debate, is the possibility of
less polemical and teleological treatments of the era, ones that seek to
understand the society on its own terms without the pitfalls associated
with reading back into the Kaiserreich Germany’s later history (i.e.,
the Third Reich). We now know, for example, from a study of the
35

Fichte (1862), quoted in Zunkel, “Ehre, Reputation,” in Otto Brunner et al. (eds.),
Geschichtliche Grundbegriﬀe vol. 2 (Stuttgart, 1975), p. 27.
36
See ch. 2 for an in-depth discussion of this issue that problematizes the notion of
modern honor.
37
For an inﬂuential book within and about these debates, see David Blackbourn and
Geoﬀ Eley, The Peculiarities of German History (Oxford, 1984).

Introduction

13

Kaiserreich’s electoral politics that, alongside its authoritarianism,
democratic ideas and practices – a “legalistic culture” in Anderson’s
term – were making deep inroads into German society.38
That culture of legalism is the topic of this book. Focusing on the
interactions of culture and politics, it shows the way Germans
experienced the changes of modernization through the lens of an
entrenched but evolving culture of honor and extreme litigiousness.39
It analyzes German litigiousness in the context of both mass political
institutions (press, parliaments) and the authoritarian state. On the
one hand, it shows honor lawsuits to be tools of state repression and
the defense of corporate interests. In this sense, honor and its
litigation functioned to reinforce existing hierarchies and power
structures. On the other hand, the defamation suit was becoming a
tool of democracy, one that made sense in a society where status and
identity remained closely bound up with honor. Taken together,
these two aspects of libel litigation had the eﬀect of massively
juridifying conﬂict, creating a society of surveillance and censorship
that, to an extraordinary extent, brought the state at every turn into
the lives of private citizens, politicians, and public oﬃcials.
The vast majority of court records were destroyed, but several
hundred still exist in the archives. Libel litigation also left its traces in
many other places. Newspapers regularly carried notices about individual cases, as well as commentaries about the legal, social, and
political controversies surrounding honor and defamation law. I have
culled information from published collections of legal judgments, the
scholarly legal literature, and the record books of court mediators, a
small number of which still survive in the archives. A type of popular
38

Margaret Lavinia Anderson, Practicing Democracy: Elections and Political Culture in
Imperial Germany (Princeton, 2000). Among the many other excellent works in a
post-Sonderweg mode that I have found useful for the topic of this book is Kevin
Repp’s Reformers, Critics, and the Paths of German Modernity (Cambridge, MA,
2000).
39
That litigiousness was not conﬁned to libel lawsuits. It also manifested itself, for
example, in conﬂicts over welfare claims. See, Greg Eghigian, Making Security
Social: Insurance, Disability, and the Birth of the Social Entitlement State in Germany
(Ann Arbor, 2000).

14

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

memoir written in pamphlet form by litigants themselves was essential reading for understanding experiences and mentalities. On the
political aspects, the essential sources, besides the press, were the
minutes of parliamentary debates in the Reichstag and the Prussian
lower house, reports of the meetings of the Prussian Ministry of State,
and other government records.
Chapter 1 traces the long-term development of defamation law. The
origin and purpose of libel laws were always about state attempts to
limit violent clashes in the population, including those of the aristocratic duel. But the dueling link has been so overemphasized in the
scholarship that it has blinded us to the existence of a parallel but
quite diﬀerent story: libel law’s connections to the history of German
liberalism. This is the focus of chapter 1, which traces the eﬀorts of
liberals to limit arbitrary and absolutist state power. In the process,
those reformers ended up democratizing libel law while, ironically,
helping to perpetuate Germany’s traditional honor culture.
Whereas chapter 1 is interested in the long-term development of
defamation law, chapter 2 focuses synchronously on one slice of time –
the years of the Kaiserreich before World War One (1871–1914) – and
the multiple meanings and uses of honor litigation in that era’s popular
culture. These lawsuits oﬀer a kaleidoscope of the Kaiserreich’s social
history. They show a distinct culture of complaint and interpersonal
conﬂict revolving around the honor idiom and the practices of the
defamation suit. They also suggest the complex, tension-ridden ways
that honor values were embedded in a society undergoing rapid
modernization. As a marker of social status and a mode of behavior,
honor was a critical component of Germany’s highly rationalized
bureaucracy. I analyze the status anxieties and forms of institutional
self-disciplining that manifested themselves among oﬃcials and wouldbe oﬃcials around clashing honor claims and defamation litigation. In
the economic realm, honor was both crucial to business relations and,
as a result of the defamation litigation it spawned, a disruption of the
free ﬂow of information necessary to market capitalism. Labor relations were likewise stamped by such litigation, the battles of labor and
management, employee and employer, often playing out in the

Introduction

15

courtroom in a language of reputation, insult, and honor. Among
professionals – doctors, lawyers, journalists, and the like – the idiom
of honor, institutionalized in the honor courts and codes of conduct of
newly formed professional organizations, accompanied and undergirded the modernization of academic and professional expertise.
Gender roles were deﬁned around competing conceptions of male
and female honor. And, while the latter, deﬁned in terms of sexual
chastity, was historically bound up with preserving women’s inferior
status, I show the remarkable ways in which women also appropriated
notions of female honor to unmask and punish sexual harassers and
rapists – in one case with tragic results for the woman herself. The
chapter ends with the day-to-day mechanics of politics. Defamation
litigation, I show, not only pervaded electoral campaigning and parliamentary practices; it formed a distinct method of doing politics.
The Kaiserreich’s authoritarian political system, established under
its architect, the conservative ﬁrst chancellor of Germany, Otto von
Bismarck, at the time of German uniﬁcation in 1871, granted universal manhood suﬀrage in the lower house of the national parliament
(Reichstag). But it was intentionally constructed to limit democracy
and the power of the Reichstag in the interests of conservative forces
within the Prussian bureaucracy, military, and landed elite – a regime
headed by the Kaiser and his ministers with only minimal oversight
of the Reichstag. This system, which had bought oﬀ many erstwhile
liberal critics with the promise of national uniﬁcation, was riven by
political and social tensions associated with nation-building (religious divisions between Protestants and Catholics; political divisions
between the federal states and the Prussian-dominated central government) as well as the rapid modernization of the German economy.
The system became increasingly unstable with the growth in particular of a militant labor movement and Socialist political party (Social
Democratic Party – SPD), whose Marxist rhetoric and socialdemocratic demands were anathema to the propertied classes and
the powers that be.40 Government attempts to stem the Socialist tide
40

For a classic structuralist account of this history, see Hans-Ulrich Wehler, The
German Empire, 1871–1918, trans. by Kim Traynor (Providence, RI, 1985).

16

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

and democratic reform – most famously with the repressive antisocialist laws of 1878–1890, the granting of social insurance to workers in the 1880s, and the Sammlungspolitik of a defensive alliance of
capitalists and landowners41 – formed one of the most important
political dynamics of the era. The war against social democracy (by
1912, the SPD had become the largest political party in the Reichstag)
was complicated by the shift in these years from an elitist form of
notable politics in the 1860s and 1870s to mass democracy after 1880,
a phenomenon reﬂected not only in the SPD on the Left, but in the
rising inﬂuence of extra-parliamentary interest groups, many representing a new rightist populism of nationalism, xenophobia, and
antisemitism.
These elements form the political context of the state’s repressive
libel policies (chapter 3) and the intense politicization of libel jurisprudence under the Kaiserreich (chapter 4). Chapter 3 – on the
policies, debates, and practices of the government, the bureaucracy,
and the courts – examines the libel suit as a form of state rule. It
emphasizes the extent to which an idiom of state honor underpinned
the authoritarian practices of the government and the lengths to
which it and the courts went in repressing allegedly libelous speech
by government opponents. This was most prominently the case in a
massive campaign of censorship – via the defamation lawsuit – of the
Socialist press. But repression in the interests of state honor went
much further, pervading the daily life of citizens, as oﬃcials at all
levels enforced their rights, as representatives of the state, to respect
and obedience (Beamtenbeleidigung). Large areas of speech, including
not only the press but citizen petitions, letters of complaint, and
speeches at public meetings, were subject to this logic of state authority. The chapter begins at the top, with the policies of Bismarck and
his successors, and with the Prussian Ministry of State strategizing
about ways to deal with the problem of public libels against the state.
From there, it moves out to the world of lower oﬃcialdom and
clashes between citizens and state in daily life. The chapter ends
41

Geoﬀ Eley, Reshaping the German Right: Radical Nationalism and Political Change
after Bismarck (Ann Arbor, 1980), p. 4.

Introduction

17

with a consideration of the courts, particularly the very narrow
interpretation by the Reichsgericht (Supreme Court) of “legitimate
interest” in a clause of the defamation laws (§193) that would otherwise have protected the oppositional press from prosecution. The
courts, as I show, played a critical role in legitimizing state repression, but they were at the same time split from within over libel law
and free speech rights.
Chapter 4 focuses on the great political controversies attending
libel law and state prosecutorial practices. The debates – from the
seemingly technical and abstruse (e.g. interpretations of “legitimate
interest” in the penal code) to the special honor status of state oﬃcials
(Beamtenbeleidigung) and a revised lèse-majesté bill – constituted
important (and hitherto unexamined) forums in which battles over
free speech, civil rights, and state power took place. In the press and
the parliaments, the debates pitted roughly two very diﬀerent conceptions of honor: one traditional, corporate, and hierarchical; the
other, most radically and forcefully articulated by Socialists, egalitarian and democratic. This division corresponded with broadly
diﬀerent conceptions of civil society and the state. Thus, the debates,
whose intensity drew from the high political stakes involved and the
way they intersected with popular culture, divided the political class
and the public along ideological lines that in part mirrored and
reinforced the broader rifts in German society. Certain high proﬁle
defamation trials that stamped German public life, most notably
the Eulenburg Aﬀair, formed the backdrop to these events and the
shifting political dynamics analyzed in the closing section of the
chapter.
Part of the expansion and transformation of libel litigation in the
nineteenth century was the seizure of a juridical honor idiom by
outsider and disempowered groups. This went back at least to the
early nineteenth century in individual cases. But by the later decades
of the century, injured honor was being mobilized in grassroots
movements, two of which are explored in chapter 5: those of Jews
and lunatics. Here, I discuss the rise in the 1890s among Jews and
lunatics of a bourgeois politics from “below” that appropriated and
modernized an old corporate language of honor in order to make

18

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

democratic claims for the rights of citizenship. The multiple
responses of Jews to the rise of political antisemitism, from conversion and assimilation to Zionism, have been explored at length in the
scholarship. Less understood is the role of honor in the politics of
Jewish emancipation, which, I argue, formed a cultural lens or
framework through which Jews experienced and sought to resist
antisemitism in their daily lives and in contests with political antisemites. I follow this history in the defamation cases of individual
Jews and in the literature and practices of Germany’s ﬁrst organized
Jewish defense league.
The second part of the chapter charts the contemporaneous rise of
“lunatic’s rights” (Irrenrechtsreform), a movement spearheaded by the
“mad” themselves, whose horror stories of wrongful incarcerations
and legal incapacitations became the subject of widespread media
coverage, parliamentary debate, and an organized pressure group.
Lunatics’ rights, a species of bourgeois populism, built a protest
movement around merging questions of honor, law, and the asylum
issue, with a new style of grassroots politics that extended the democratic functions of the public square. They did this, I show, through
adopting the tools of political organizing; just as importantly – and
perhaps more interesting for social and cultural history – was their use
of the self-revelatory pamphlet, which, in the interests of defending
and recovering an individual’s reputation and honor, commodiﬁed
private experience and ended up politicizing madness.
The conclusion brieﬂy takes the story past the Kaiserreich through
the Weimar Republic, the Third Reich, and into the present. It is a
story of both transformation and tremendous continuity – despite
political upheaval and reform, across the regime changes of the
twentieth century – in Germany’s litigious honor culture. The conclusion ends with a return to the historiography and the broader
question of tradition and continuity in German history.

CHAPTER 1

The development of the law

German modernization, far from loosening the hold of a culture of
honor, strengthened and expanded it. The law itself was crucial in
this respect. In the course of the nineteenth century, German law was
liberalized as it moved from an adjudication system based on estate
(Stand) to one of formal equality and civil rights. Defamation law
followed suit and was reconstituted along more democratic lines. But
this transformation, rather than undermining the old values of honor,
provided them with a new lease on life. The result, by the
Kaiserreich, was a hybrid legal culture that merged key liberal legal
principles – the Rechtsstaat, legal equality, civil rights – with a
jurisprudence that assumed and protected the social hierarchies and
status diﬀerences embedded in the concept of honor. In so doing, it
provided the institutional basis for the vast expansion of defamation
lawsuits, as the conﬂicts of modern society came to play themselves
out in honor disputes. Legal developments in Prussia were key here,
since it was Prussia’s criminal code that formed the basis for the
statutory laws regulating defamation after German uniﬁcation in
1871. Two critical developments determined the shape of the
Kaiserreich’s defamation laws: (1) the end of a jurisprudence based
on legally unequal estates; (2) the liberal rediscovery of the
Privatklage, which was part of the broader ﬁght against an arbitrary,
politicized justice system – a cause that profoundly stamped midcentury liberalism.
Medieval and early-modern justice looked very diﬀerent from what it
would become in the nineteenth century. The state did not
19

20

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

monopolize all judicial functions; litigants were subject to diﬀerent
legal jurisdictions depending upon their corporate estate, and many
legal functions were privately administered in patrimonial courts by
lords of the manor (Gutsherren).1 Under the inquisitorial court system, many of whose features lasted into the nineteenth century,
criminal trials were secret and written, employed torture, and presided over by jurists who combined the functions of both prosecutor
and judge. Lacking all transparency, such trials did not grant defendants the ability to confront their accusers or see the evidence against
them. Judges lacked political and administrative independence, being
subject to arbitrary dismissal or their verdicts being overruled by
monarchs and other heads of government.
The notion of legal equality was foreign to this society, organized
as it was by estate, a legal classiﬁcation based on a person’s birth
or profession. Honor litigants, accordingly, received diﬀerential
justice – the type of court, level of punishment, and even the cost
of litigation – based on their corporate status.2 Under Prussia’s law
code, the Allgemeines Landrecht (1794), modiﬁed by a December 30,
1798 circular, all cases of minor insult were heard before a civil
magistrate, but plaintiﬀs of birth and position (the upper echelon
of commoners or höher Bürgerstand, the aristocracy, and military
oﬃcers), were given the option of an appeal in the regular courts
with a court-appointed ﬁskalischer Bedienter3 (a kind of proto-state
prosecutor) and a thorough judicial investigation of their cases.4
There could be no clearer message that the honor of the privileged
was more valuable than that of their social inferiors. The message was
1

W. Sellert, “Standesgerichtsbarkeit,” in Adalbert Erler et al. (eds.), Handwörterbuch
zur deutschen Rechtsgeschichte vol. 4 (Berlin, 1990), pp. 1916–17.
2
Berlin Kammergericht to King, May 27, 1799, I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 49524, GStPK,
pp. 1a-1f, and passim (pp. 16–22).
3
The Fiskalat, which lay outside of but intertwined with the regular court system, was
a kind of nascent state attorney, whose job it was to represent the state in court cases
aﬀecting the state treasury (“soweit das Vermögensinteresse des Fiskus bei
Geldstrafen und Vermögenseinziehungen in Betracht kam.”): Conrad Bornhak,
Preussische Staats- und Rechtsgeschichte (Berlin, 1979), pp. 186–87.
4
I HA Rep. 84a Nr. 49524, GStPK p. 4ﬀ; Evers, “Erörterungen über den preussischen
Injurien-Prozess,” Archiv für preussisches Strafrecht 8 (1860), 609–17.

The development of the law

21

reinforced by the disparate sentences meted out by estate. Legal
redress for insult came in two forms: the Privatgenugtuung, a formal
ritualized apology, retraction, and/or declaration of respect (Abbitte,
Widerruf, and Ehrenerklärung); and the public punishment for violation of state laws. In the latter case, “minor insults” among people of
the same estate or between parties belonging to the “peasant or the
lower commoner estates,” for example, brought sentences of the
workhouse or prison of between 24 hours and 3 days. The same
oﬀense among people of the higher third estate (Bürgerstand) and
aristocracy, and military oﬃcers brought, respectively, jail time of
8–14 days and 2–4 weeks.5 The Privatgenugtuung diﬀered as well by
estate.6 When, for example, the violator belonged to a higher estate
than the injured party, the former was allowed to perform the
Ehrenerklärung in writing rather than in person before witnesses
and a judge. Those found guilty of insulting their direct superiors
(e.g. children their parents; pupils their teachers; servants their
masters) were required to perform the Abbitte kneeling in court.7
Perversely, in this system, court costs were set in inverse proportion
to a plaintiﬀ’s ability to pay. When plaintiﬀs from the privileged
orders (upper Bürgerstand, the aristocracy, and the military) lost their
cases, the costs were paid out of a state fund (Kriminal Fond).
Plaintiﬀs from the lower orders, by contrast, paid out of their own
pockets; this applied even when the plaintiﬀ won his or her lawsuit, if
the convicted defendant lacked the means to pay.8
By the early nineteenth century, meanwhile, the Prussian government was busy enacting a series of laws and regulations intended
to shield the military and bureaucracy from popular lawsuits by
progressively undermining the jurisdiction of the regular courts.
An 1808 decree, for example, required the courts to petition the
5

ALR, II Theil, 20. Titel, §607–609.
Friction surrounding the Privatgenugtuung requirement was often itself the cause of
further defamation litigation; it was abolished in 1811. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 49524,
GStPK, p. 76.
7
ALR, II. Theil, 20. Titel, §584ﬀ.
8
Oberlandesgerichtspräsident Lent, March 6, 1842. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 49528,
GStPK.
6

22

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

government in advance before ﬁling charges against a public oﬃcial
accused of wrongdoing, and, in cases of insult lawsuits against oﬃcials,
required the courts to inform the government beforehand. An 1835
law went further, preventing insult complaints against oﬃcials from
being brought directly to the courts; they were required to be lodged
beforehand with the oﬃcial’s superiors who would determine whether
or not an oﬀense had occurred and thus whether the lawsuit
could proceed. This trend was strengthened by the Disziplinargesetz
of 1844 and the creation in 1847 of a Kompetenz-Gerichtshof to decide
matters of jurisdiction between the administrative and the regular
courts.9
Unequal, secretive, and politically repressive, this judicial system was helping to fuel the discontent that broke out in revolution
in 1848. It also drove liberal attempts to reform defamation law in
the decades leading up to the Reich legal statutes of the 1870s.
Liberal outrage drew from abundant ﬁrsthand experience. Two
causes célèbres at mid-century indicate what reformers faced in
these years. In the 1840s, the liberal leader Johann Jacoby was
charged with treason and lèse-majesté (Majestätsbeleidigung) for
his famous pamphlet Vier Fragen (1841) that had the audacity to
call for a constitutional state in Prussia.10 In the 1860s, the
parliamentary deputy Karl Twesten, a champion of judicial and
constitutional reform, was tried and convicted of calumny for a
speech he gave on the ﬂoor of the Prussian parliament in which he
condemned at length the “systematic corruption” of the courts, by
which he meant their lack of impartiality and their use as a tool
for persecuting government critics. Twesten’s was a particularly
egregious case, still cited decades later, because his prosecution
violated the supposed legal immunity of statements made by
politicians in parliament.11
9

Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Preussischen Hauses der
Abgeordneten (SBPA) (Berlin, 1861), p. 901.
10
He was eventually acquitted. The pamphlet and other documents in the case can be
found in Johann Jacoby, Gesammelte Schriften und Reden (Hamburg, 1872).
11
Veronika Renner, “Karl Twesten, Vorkämpfer der liberalen Rechtsstaatsidee”
(PhD thesis, University of Freiburg, 1954), pp. 150ﬀ.

The development of the law

23

Before 1848, legal reform had very limited success. To be sure,
torture had been abolished.12 In defamation law, the absolutist state’s
rationalization of the courts had incrementally expanded equality by
lowering and equalizing penalties, for example, for all “minor defamations among people of the same estate.”13 A 1911 decree ended the
humiliating and much-hated Privatgenugtuung.14 But overall, these
changes had done little to ameliorate the system’s fundamental
problems.
Then came 1848/49, an event that swept away the old legal order,
bringing with it legal equality; the end of patrimonial jurisdiction; the
introduction of direct, public, oral, and jury trials;15 and measures to
end the special legal protections of state oﬃcials.16 Another extremely
important development were reforms to create an independent
judiciary through the separation of judicial and prosecutorial functions, as well as the creation of a public state attorney’s oﬃce
(Staatsanwaltschaft) modeled after the French Criminal Code of
1808.17 Legal equality, in turn, forced on the Prussian regime,
which was otherwise doing its best to crush the revolution, the
democratization of defamation law. On December 18, 1848, just
weeks after Prussian troops occupied Berlin, forcing the breakup of
12

This development did not aﬀect defamation litigation. On, more generally, the
centralization and rationalization of the legal systems of the absolutist German
states, see Erich Döhring, Geschichte der deutschen Rechtspﬂege seit 1500 (Berlin,
1953). On Prussia’s patrimonial courts, see Monika Wienfort, Patrimonialgerichte in
Preussen (Göttingen, 2001).
13
The punishment was set at 2–6 hour jail time. Decree of December 30, 1798,
Section 4, §17. Carl Ludwig Heinrich Rabe (ed.), Sammlung preussischer Gesetze und
Verordnungen vol. 5 (Halle and Berlin, 1817), p. 269.
14
Laws of 1798 and 1811, respectively.
15
Wienfort, Patrimonialgerichte, pp. 322ﬀ. The key royal decree for reforming trial
procedure and introducing a state prosecutor’s oﬃce was that of January 3, 1849.
16
This included the declaration that “no prior authorization from the government is
necessary” for bringing lawsuits against the civil and military authorities: Article 95
of the Constitution of December 5, 1848.
17
In Prussia, these reforms were instituted in two stages in 1846 and 1849.
In southwestern Germany – the Rhineland (1810), Baden (1832), and
Württemberg (1843) – they had occurred before the revolution. M. Frommel,
“Staatsanwaltschaft,” in Erler, Handwörterbuch zur deutschen Rechtsgeschichte
vol. 4 (Berlin, 1990), pp. 1809–10.

24

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

the new parliament, the king issued a decree that took a big step
toward granting equality in insult proceedings.18 Henceforth, these
actions (excepting those against state oﬃcials and those involving
grievous physical harm), irrespective of the litigants’ social class,
were to be heard before a civil magistrate. Punishments were likewise
equalized.19
Most of the reforms of the revolutionary period remained in
Prussia’s revised 1851 legal code. Yet, the law was still far from
fully liberalized, and the defeat and conservative backlash against
the revolution brought with it the reassertion with a vengeance of the
old order, in the form of a reactionary 1854 law that gave the
authorities a tool to block or complicate lawsuits against military
and administrative oﬃcials.20 Libel oﬀenses against state oﬃcials,
moreover, continued to be treated in the 1851 code as separate crimes
meriting much more severe punishments than libels against private
citizens.21
It was in the repressive political environment of the 1850s that
liberals began to critically reassess an institution that had once
looked so promising, indeed for which they had passionately and
successfully advocated as a way of checking the arbitrary inﬂuence
over the courts of politics and the state: the public prosecutor’s
oﬃce. Far from creating judicial fairness, the Staatsanwaltschaft was
proving to be eminently corruptible: many of its prosecutions were
discriminatory and highly selective, based on political and other
extra-legal considerations. By the early 1860s, momentum was
thus building in legal and political circles for reforming the
18

I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 49528, GStPK, pp. 161ﬀ.
They were set at a maximum of 300 Thaler or 6 months’ detention.
20
The law gave the oﬃcial’s superiors or the central government an authorization
Konﬂikte zu erheben, which then forced a special judicial hearing of the merits of the
case: “Bericht der Kommission über den Gesetz-Entwurf, betreﬀend die gerichtliche
Verfolgung von Beamten …,” SBPA, Anlagen 6 (Berlin, 1861), pp. 959–61.
21
Defaming an oﬃcial, a member of a political body, a “religious servant” or a
member of the military got a defendant one week’s to one year’s incarceration.
The same oﬀense against a private citizen was punishable with a maximum ﬁne of
300 Thaler or incarceration up to six months: Das preussische Straf-Gesetzbuch nebst
dem Einführungs-Gesetz (Berlin, 1851), pp. 78, 101.
19

The development of the law

25

Staatsanwaltschaft by ending its monopoly over prosecutions.
In searching for a way at once to check its power but not dismantle
its progressive aspects, reformers seized on a device with a longstanding tradition in Germany: the Privatklage.22 The Privatklage
was poised in the next few years to become a crusade of liberal legal
reformers.
The norm for centuries in ancient Germanic law, Privatklage trials,
initiated by the accuser him-/herself, were originally “confrontational, oral, and public” events in which “adversaries [we]re brought
face to face in a contest” resembling a duel.23 The development of the
state in the late Middle Ages gradually began to replace this procedure with the inquisitorial trial, but the tradition was far from lost.24
By the nineteenth century, the Privatklage, in which plaintiﬀs
brought and tried their own lawsuits before a magistrate, had
migrated to the area of the law dealing with minor civil oﬀenses, in
particular insult and bodily harm.25 This was the case in Prussia’s 1851
Criminal Code, which incorporated the Privatklage for those two
22

Another model for liberal reform of the Staatsanwaltschaft came from British law,
which had retained an accusatory trial system. A. Esmein, A History of Continental
Criminal Procedure (Boston, 1913), pp. 571, 580, 588–90. For British defamation
law in comparative perspective, see Carl Kade, Die Privatklage in den
Strafprozessordnungen der Jetztzeit (Berlin, 1900).
23
Esmein, History of Continental Criminal Procedure, p. 6; Rainer Schröder,
Rechtsgeschichte (Münster, 2004), p. 7. Roman law also had a form of Privatklage
for civil trials, about which there is scholarly disagreement over whether it was the
ancestor of the modern German Privatklage.
24
G. Buchda, “Anklage,” Handwörterbuch zur deutschen Rechtsgeschichte vol. 1,
pp. 171–74.
25
For example, Baden (GBG, March 6, 1845, p. 71f.); Württemberg (StPO, April 17,
1868, section 413); Braunschweig (law of August 22, 1849, sections 2, 2a); Oldenburg
(law of Nov. 2, 1857, section 446); Frankfurt (law of May 15, 1856, section 48);
Saxony’s Privatklage provisions were the most extensive (StPO, August 11, 1855),
cited in Heinrich Gerland, “Die systematische Stellung des Privatklageverfahrens im
Strafprocess,” Der Gerichtssaal 60 (1902); Motive, Anlage IV, in C. Hahn (ed.),
Die gesammten Materialien zur Strafprozessordnung vol. 1 (Berlin, 1880), pp. 431ﬀ;
pp. 182ﬀ. On the development of defamation law in the German states, see also:
Helmut Rannacher, Der Ehrenschutz in der Geschichte des deutschen Strafrechts
(Breslau-Neukirch, 1938); C. Reinhold Köstlin, Abhandlungen aus dem Strafrechte
(Tübingen, 1858).

26

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

oﬀenses because of their “everydayness” and their triviality as purely
personal oﬀenses deemed lacking relevancy to the public interest.26
Although not a source of controversy in 1851, the Privatklage would
become so just a decade later when liberal jurists spearheaded a
movement to massively expand that institution in order to limit state
power. Criticism of the state’s prosecutorial monopoly in the public
prosecutor’s oﬃce, mounting in the 1850s, came to a head at the ﬁrst
two all-German conferences of lawyers and jurists (Juristentag) in
1860 and 1861. The meetings saw extensive debate and an aﬃrmative
vote on a resolution supporting, with a very extensive Privatklage
right, the end of the state’s prosecutorial monopoly. This resolution,
although entirely unbinding on governments,27 reverberated in legal
and political circles,28 making an immediate appearance in legislative
discussions within the Prussian Landtag in 1861, and leaving its imprint
on subsequent statutory law – on Prussia’s 1867 Criminal Code, which
increased the kinds of oﬀenses that could be tried as Privatklage, and,
most importantly, on the 1877 Reich Code of Criminal Procedure.29
From the beginning, the drive for an expanded Privatklage right was
tied in reformers’ minds to the goals of ending abuses of state power
and promoting civil rights. At the ﬁrst Juristentag in 1860, Lewald, the
Berlin lawyer who introduced the Privatklage resolution, gave a speech
about the “Privatanklage question” as a right of citizenship, equivalent
to the burning matters of “censorship and press freedom.”30 His
proposal, based on the work of the legal scholar Julius Glaser,31 was
not about eliminating the public prosecutor’s ability to pursue an
oﬀender “who has harmed another in his honor or liberty,” he assured
26

Hahn, Gesammten Materialien zur Strafprozessordnung vol. 1, pp. 277, 422ﬀ.
The aim of the conference participants was to set out general legal principles, which
members would then seek to implement in the diﬀerent German states.
28
For example, the 1861 debates of the Prussian Diet.
29
This law of February 1, 1877 went into eﬀect in October, 1879.
30
Verhandlungen des ersten deutschen Juristentages, p. 147.
31
Glaser was a Viennese professor and author, among many other works, of “Das
Princip der Strafverfolgung” in his Gesammelte kleinere Schriften über das Strafrecht
(Vienna, 1868), pp. 429–67. Glaser was, according to Rüdiger Koewius, Die
Rechtswirklichkeit der Privatklage (Berlin, 1974), p. 22, the intellectual “originator”
of the subsidiary Privatklage.
27

The development of the law

27

his colleagues in the audience. Rather, this was about giving “every
harmed individual the ability to protect himself” within a modern
Rechtsstaat. No one, argued another Privatklage advocate, wanted to
go back to the days before a public prosecutor, let alone revive the
ancient Privatklage when the harmed individual alone was responsible
for pursuing the prosecution of an oﬀense.32 Such a direct (“principal”)
Privatklage right should only be allowed for a very limited number of
oﬀenses – namely, insult and Körperverletzung – “where the overwhelming interest is not that of the Gesammtheit [the community as a
whole], but directly [and alone] that of the harmed individual.”33
There was in fact wide consensus, both at the conference and in the
society at large, that such oﬀenses (insult and minor bodily harm),
precisely because of their ubiquity and their personal nature, were
best left to the responsibility of the injured party to pursue directly as
a Privatklage. Indeed, this “principal” Privatklage right, in which the
harmed individual, without any involvement of a state prosecutor,
presented his/her case in court, already existed, as noted, within civil
law in Prussia, as well as in many other German states. The aspect of
the Juristentag’s resolution, on the other hand, that would prove
controversial in subsequent years, was its call for a very broad
“subsidiary” Privatklage right. Here, the ability of the harmed individual to pursue justice would only kick in if and when the district
attorney declined to take up his or her case. The person would then
have the right to a court hearing, and if the court agreed with the
merits of the case, the accuser could proceed in pressing charges with
the use of a court-appointed lawyer functioning as an ersatz state
prosecutor. Although less immediate and direct than the principal
Privatklage, the subsidiary Privatklage was potentially much more
radical because, according to the resolution adopted by the Juristentag,
it would be allowed in all civil and criminal cases.34 As such, the
32

Speech by Schwarze at the second meeting, Verhandlungen des zweiten deutschen
Juristentages, pp. 660–61.
33
Ibid., p. 661.
34
Verhandlungen des ersten deutschen Juristentages (Berlin, 1860), p. 71 provides
Lewald’s original proposal, which was debated at length and partially amended.
See, also, Verhandlungen des zweiten deutschen Juristentages, p. 363 and passim.

28

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

subsidiary Privatklage right would, as envisioned, function as a kind of
watchdog or Überwachung of the district attorney’s oﬃce.35
Almost immediately following the Juristentag resolution, the
Privatklage issue moved into the legislative realm, surfacing in the
Prussian lower house of parliament (Abgeordnetenhaus) within
the context of liberal attempts to impose controls on arbitrary state
power. What was most on the minds of left liberals were the recent laws
(above) protecting oﬃcials from citizen lawsuits. These laws more
than anything drove sentiment in the 1850s and early 1860s for the
Privatklage right and the view that the state’s prosecutorial monopoly
was not serving justice. As liberal deputies in the Prussian parliament
debated dissolving the 1854 law and the special legal protections of
oﬃcials, they began calling for even more radical measures. Invoking
the Juristentag’s resolution, they demanded the empowerment of citizens with a subsidary Privatklage right for all misdemeanor and criminal
oﬀenses.36 Freiherr von Vincke opined that any progress through
abolishing the 1854 law would prove “illusory” without the simultaneous end to the state’s prosecutorial monopoly: oﬃcal misconduct
could still evade justice, since the Justice Ministry would retain the right
to direct district attorneys not to proceed with indictments of certain
oﬃcials. He cited the case of a Berlin police chief, a request for whose
prosecution had been sent to the Minister of Interior by the governing
police authority, but was never acted upon by the district attorney.37
Yielding to such sentiment, the Prussian government was forced
in 1862 to bring before the parliament a draft resolution for a
Privatklage law, one, however, that fell far short of liberal demands.
Vincke, Waldeck, and other left liberals did succeed at this time in
ending the 1854 law, but were unable to prevail with their version of
the Privatklage. Prussia’s 1867 Criminal Code, which was extended
to all of Germany in 1872, expanded the Privatklage for minor
oﬀenses, but did no more.38 In the mid-1870s, thus, the Privatklage
35

Koewius, Rechtswirklichkeit, p. 22. 36 Ibid., p. 962.
SBPA (1861), pp 904–05.
38
S. Mayer, Zur Reform des Strafprozesses (Frankfurt a.M., 1871), pp. 1–2; Hahn,
Materialien, p. 424ﬀ.
37

The development of the law

29

issue resurfaced in Reichstag legislative debates during the drafting
of a uniﬁed Imperial Code of Criminal Procedure (StPO).
The concerns driving reformers had shifted in the dramatically
altered political landscape of the 1870s. To be sure, they continued
to call for an extensive (subsidiary) Privatklage right to counter
arbitrary state power. But now what was foremost in their minds was
Bismarck’s ruthless persecution of dissident (or perceived enemy)
political and religious organizations, most notably, the Kulturkampf
against the Catholic Church and the repression of a rapidly growing
socialist and labor movement. Arguments for the subsidiary
Privatklage thus now revolved around the need for legal protections
of whole groups and political parties, not merely of individuals. Left
liberal Friedrich Arthur Eysoldt, from the Progressive Party, argued
for putting into the hands of citizens and organizations a legal tool (the
Privatklage) to mitigate the “unequal treatment of parties in politically
agitated times,” a situation in which “police measures are applied
against one association but not against another that has the favor of
the government.”39 Windthorst, leader of the Catholic Center Party,
wondered if, under the proposed Privatklage provisions of the StPO,
individual members of a “corporation” would have the right to sue
when they believed themselves to be “encumbered” (beschwert) by
actions taken against a corporation to which they belonged, say, in the
case of the “slandering of a religious society” (a reference to the abuse
being heaped on Catholics during the ongoing Kulturkampf ).40 Von
Schwarze, whose advocacy of the Privatklage went back ﬁfteen years to
his work on the Juristentag resolution,41 did not know the answer, but
he was sure that “if an association is shut down, every member would
be considered the harmed party” and allowed to take legal action.42
39

“… der der Regierung bequem ist.” SBR, vol. 47, December 21, 1876, p. 983.
Ibid., p. 982. This was a paraphrase of Windthorst’s thoughts by deputy von Schwarze.
41
He was an active participant and advocate of a broad Privatklage right in the
conferences’ discussions. See, Verhandlungen des zweiten deutschen Juristentages
(Berlin, 1861), pp. 657ﬀ. He continued to ﬁght for this in the mid-1870s as
Reichstag deputy and Berichterstatter of the Reichstag committee preparing draft
legislation for the new StPO.
42
Ibid.
40

30

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

This was the majority sentiment of the justice committee drafting
the legislation, and, as a result, the Reichstag’s initial draft proposals
included provisions aﬀording an extensive subsidiary Privatklage
right, one moreover that broadly deﬁned the harmed party to allow
for the kinds of group lawsuits made urgent by the aforementioned
political developments and debates.43 Liberals were to be disappointed. Their version of the Privatklage, originating in the 1861
Juristentag resolution, never became law, being rejected by the
government as an unacceptable incursion by private citizens into
the jurisdiction of the state attorney’s oﬃce.44 But liberals did
succeed on one fateful front, putting into the hands of private citizens
an extraordinary legal tool. For by the time of the ﬁnal passage of the
1877 StPO, defamation, including simple insult (as well as minor
bodily injury), had become criminal oﬀenses to be pursued by private
citizens wielding the principal Privatklage right.45
The possibility of the Reich criminalizing insult law was greeted
with jubilation by the Magdeburgische Zeitung, a voice of the educated liberal middle class. When, in 1876, von Schwarze, as
Berichterstatter of the Reichtag’s Justice Committee, proposed this
move, the newspaper enthusiastically endorsed it.46 In its article, one
ﬁnds articulated at length the hybrid legal culture – a mixture of
democracy and corporatism – that was both cause and product of the
historical forces shaping Germany’s honor culture and laws. There
were, in the article’s analysis, two troubling inequities in present
defamation law. First, with reference to Prussia, was the unequal
43

It gave citizens a substantial subsidiary Privatklage in the form of the right of
appeal in decisions by state prosecutors to suspend or stay charges. The relevant
documents, including the various Reichstag drafts and committee reports, can be
found in SBR, 2. Legislatur-Periode, IV Session 1876. Vol. 3, Anlagen (Berlin,
1876).
44
“Bericht der Kommission zur Vorberathung der Entwürfe … einer Strafprozessordnung über den Entwurf einer Strafprozessordnung …,” ibid., pp. 382–83.
45
This move built upon and incorporated into national law the existence already in
some German states of a Privatklage right in the criminal courts. James Whitman,
“Enforcing Civility and Respect: Three Societies,” Yale Law Journal 109 (2000)
1324, fn.131.
46
Magdeburgische Zeitung 119 (1876).

The development of the law

31

treatment of defamatory oﬀenses, on the one hand, against state
oﬃcials which (together with grievous physical defamations) were
prosecuted as criminal oﬀenses by the state attorney, and, on the
other hand, those against regular citizens and for minor (verbal)
defamation oﬀenses. Since the latter were treated as civil oﬀenses,
citizens seeking justice for honor damages were at a grave disadvantage because, unlike criminal trials, where the district attorney was
able to call the plaintiﬀ as a witness to the crime, civil proceedings
did not allow plaintiﬀs to testify as their own witnesses. Yet verbal
insult cases required just that when, as often was the case, at issue
were insulting statements exchanged between two people without
the witness of a third party. This made it all the more galling
that decisions about whether a citizen’s dishonor qualiﬁed as “grievous” (criminal) or “minor” (civil) were left to the whims of the
public prosecutor’s oﬃce. Moreover (secondly), insult had very
diﬀerent ramiﬁcations for the citizen depending upon his “level of
education”:
the educated, sensitive [feinfühlende] person feels just as deeply insulted by a
stray remark as does an uncouth, uneducated person by a grievous, violent
insult.47

And, it added, the resulting feeling of “lack of rights” (Rechtlosigkeit)
on the part of the sensitive, who often lacked the ability to achieve
satisfaction (Genugtuung) through the civil courts, was forcing them
to resort to self-help (Selbsthilfe, i.e. dueling), as well as personal acts
of revenge. The article’s position, in other words, thought in the
language of “rights” and “equality” while calling for honor laws to,
in eﬀect, police the boundaries of the social hierarchy and the reﬁned
sensibilities of the privileged. Such sentiment, which was helping
to drive forward the liberalization of defamation law, suggests how
that process occurred not despite (outdated) honor notions, but
because of them and the need, therefore, to modernize institutions
to expand access to new groups (i.e. the middle classes) claiming that
honor.
47

Ibid.

32

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

As it turned out, the ﬁnal version of the StPO, while failing to
achieve the newspaper’s desire for a vast expansion of state prosecutions of defamation, did end by criminalizing insult law, turning
the Privatklage for insult and bodily injury oﬀenses into matters
linked to the criminal courts.48 The Kaiserreich’s defamation laws
thus managed to preserve and extend traditional honor notions
within the modern constitutional state (Rechtsstaat). It was possible
to ﬁle a civil defamation suit, but, unlike in Britain, individuals rarely
used this option because there was no possibility of receiving a
monetary award to make the eﬀort worthwhile.49 Indeed, “hostility
to money damages” was later purposefully built into the German
Civil Code (coming into eﬀect in 1900).50
Honor and punishment, not money, were the point of German
insult and defamation lawsuits, a fact made clear in the penalty for
public and/or published libels (§200), which required that the convicted libeler publish at his or her expense a notice of the court
judgment – an updated form of the Ehrenerklärung, whose purpose
was the public restoration of the plaintiﬀ’s reputation.51 Indeed, so
tainted was monetary pursuit in the honor codes of many members of
48

As for the subsidiary Privatklage, the StPO (§§169–175) provided a very weak
substitute for what liberals had sought: in cases where the state prosecutor failed to
pursue the case of an injured party, that person was given the right to lodge a
complaint with the prosecutor’s superiors and to appeal in court the latter’s
decision. For a decent overview of the Privatklage, see Glaser, “Privatanklage,”
Encyklopädie der Rechtswissenschaft, 2. Theil, vol. 3 (Leipzig, 1881), pp. 175–85.
49
Prussian State Ministry report, November 30, 1908. GStPK, Rep. 90a, vol. 157.
§823 of the Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, BG). According to a 1913
Reichsgericht ruling, §249 could in certain circumstances provide the plaintiﬀ
with the basis for demanding other remedies beyond money in the restitution of
his/her honor, namely, an Ehrenerklärung. The high court also interpreted the
Unterlassungsklage [action for an injunction] (§§12, 864, 1004 of the BG) to allow
in civil suits the broader ability of the plaintiﬀ to sue for an injunction to stop the
defamatory statements of his/her opponent. In depth on this issue: “Der Schutz der
Ehre,” Berliner Tageblatt, April 9, 1914.
50
Whitman, “Enforcing Civility,” p. 1318, who makes much of this point as part of a
broader argument about the central and continuing role played by aristocratic
honor values.
51
Only in the 1950s did it become possible for plaintiﬀs to receive monetary awards in
insult cases: ibid., p. 1302.

The development of the law

33

the middle and upper classes that statements to this eﬀect were
themselves considered cause for libel actions.
Those actions were overwhelmingly pursued as criminal oﬀenses
under §§94–104 (honor oﬀenses against the Kaiser, princes, and
foreign ambassadors and heads of state) and §§185–200 of the
Criminal Code (StGB). Simple insult (Beleidigung) under §185 was
punishable with a ﬁne of up to 600m or incarceration of up to one
year; punishments substantially increased when the libel involved
physical violence.52 The majority of actual sentences meted out,
however, seemingly involved fairly small ﬁnes. Notably, §185 was
extremely broad: it did not even attempt to deﬁne insult, leaving this
diﬃcult task entirely to the courts; nor did it require proof of
intention to harm or that the insult be untrue.53 §§186–187 dealt
with the more serious charges of defamation proper: respectively,
calumny and calumny with malicious intent, the latter deﬁned as
intentionally spreading a false statement that could potentially make
a person “scorned” (verächtlich machen) in public opinion or harm
his/her credit; §187 was punishable with up to two years jail or, when
the statement was “public” (i.e. known beyond a limited circle of
people) or spread in print, with no less than one month’s incarceration. §189 made it a crime to intentionally defame the “memory of a
dead person.” The Code of Criminal Procedure (StPO), which came
into eﬀect in 1879, allowed the Privatklage in defamation actions
brought under §§185–87 and 189; for bodily harm oﬀenses; and,
beginning in 1896, for unfair competition. Corporations, associations,
and certain groups were also entitled to bring Privatklage lawsuits.
Two other sections of the law played important roles in the story of
defamation politics. §193, probably the most politically contested issue
of all (chapter 4), formally protected defamatory speech in certain
circumstances: scholarly, artistic, and professional critiques for the
purpose of “defending rights or legitimate interests”;54 the reprimands
against subordinates by their superiors; and, oﬃcial denunciations of
52

A maximum ﬁne of 1,000m or prison up to two years.
By contrast, §539 of the ALR had required intent.
54
My emphasis added.
53

34

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

and judgments about state oﬃcials where such statements were not
libelously phrased. On Beamtenbeleidigung (the oﬀense of libeling an
oﬃcial), liberals had won an important victory: its formal abolition.
What remained was merely §196, which gave the superiors of a libeled
oﬃcial the right to bring defamation charges in his name. Yet, as we
will see, Beamtenbeleidigung managed to live on in the practices of the
courts and the state attorneys, with controversial eﬀect.
Given the importance of the Privatklage in German insult law, it is
worthwhile considering this legal feature in comparative context. There
were European countries – Austria-Hungary, Denmark, Finland, some
Swiss Cantons, Norway, Sweden, Spain, and Russia – that had some
version of a Privatklage right for a variety of minor oﬀenses, although it
is not clear how these laws impacted the practices of honor disputes.55
The British had in principle a kind of Privatklage right, but in practice,
by the late nineteenth century, this right was exercised not by private
individuals, but by corporations, communities, and associations. Unlike
Germany, British defamation law, moreover, was oriented toward civil
proceedings and the issue of material harm (as opposed to honor per
se). Anglo-American law, unlike its continental European counterparts,
distinguished between written (libel) and spoken (slander) defamation.
Libel was treated as a criminal felony but cases where the victims were
private citizens tended to be prosecuted not as honor insults but as
oﬀenses endangering the public peace.56 Slander, by contrast, was a
civil not a criminal oﬀense, and the laws governing it were not directed
at protecting an individual’s honor so much as his or her professional
and ﬁnancial existence. Hence, convictions in slander cases usually
required evidence of material harm (that the plaintiﬀ had been harmed
in “his oﬃce, profession or employment”)57 – a much higher level of
proof than in Germany.
55

On comparative Privatklage laws, see Gerland, Systematische Stellung des
Privatklageverfahrens im Strafproceß (Stuttgart, 1901), pp. 12–13 and, especially,
Carl Kade, Die Privatklage.
56
Lilienthal, “Üble Nachrede und Verleumdung,” in Mittermaier et al. (eds.),
Vergleichende Darstellung des deutschen und ausländischen Strafrechts: Besonderer
Teil vol. 4 (Berlin, 1906), p. 440.
57
Liepmann, “Die Beleidigung,” ibid., p. 307.

The development of the law

35

In France, the Criminal Code of 1808 (and the law codes elsewhere in Europe, e.g. Italy, modeled after it) provided a private
person no right to bring a criminal lawsuit; it granted the injured
party only the right to bring a civil lawsuit for monetary damages.
On defamation, French law diﬀerentiated between defamation
proper (diﬀamation) and insult (injure). Both were actionable in
criminal law if the oﬀending statement was public (widely diﬀused
in print or in a speech). But such suits, unlike in Germany, required
the intervention of the state attorney, who, however, was unlikely to
take legal action in cases involving private citizens and everyday
insults. The only path open for those defamed by non-public insults –
i.e., the kinds of disrespectful conduct and cursings that drove
seemingly the majority of Privatklagen in Germany – was to bring
the dispute before a very low-level police court, which treated such
oﬀenses as minor infractions, akin to a parking ticket today and
punishable by a maximum ﬁne of 5 francs.58
Germany’s Privatklage was an anomalous institution that blended
criminal and civil-law features. Cases were brought and tried under
criminal law before local magistrates by private-citizen plaintiﬀs with
no involvement of the state attorney. At the same time, following
civil law, plaintiﬀs did not have the right to testify as witnesses on
their own behalf. A state prosecutor had the right to take over and
litigate a pre-existing Privatklage if it deemed the case important to
the public interest.59 In such cases, the original plaintiﬀ could choose
to remain as co-plaintiﬀ.60 In reality, the state almost never intervened in the Privatklage of private citizens.61 They did so, however,
on a routine basis when the libeled party was a state oﬃcial. Finally,
there were safeguards built into the system that attempted to prevent
58

Ibid., pp. 279–84.
Karl Binding, Die Wirkungen des Eintrittes der Staatsanwaltschaft in das
Privatklageverfahren (Leipzig, 1908), pp. 4–5.
60
The oﬃcial aims of the co-plaintiﬀs, however, would be diﬀerent, the state’s being
‘punishment’, while the Privatkläger’s was, via the punishment, “Genugtuung”:
ibid., p. 11.
61
It was estimated this happened in one out of 2–3,000 cases: Rudolf Beinert, Die
Ausdehnung der Privatklage (Halle, 1906), p. 35, fn.2.
59

36

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

citizens from abusing the Privatklage right with trivial disputes and
personal vendettas. Litigants living in the same city district were
required to submit to pretrial mediation before an oﬃcially appointed
mediator (Schiedsmann), one of hundreds of laymen presiding over
an extensive system of lay courts established for settling minor daily
conﬂicts.62 Only when and if mediation failed to produce a resolution
could the case proceed to trial;63 plaintiﬀs could be required to appear
in person in court, they had to pay a hefty deposit to cover initial
court costs and were responsible for all of the court costs if they lost
the case.
The liberalization of German law re-anchored honor along lines
consistent with a modern constitutional state, preserving, indeed
strengthening, defamation law in accord with the democratizing
tendencies of the era. Honor and defamation had been a part of but
not central to the political discussions on legal reform. With the
reconstituted Privatklage, however, they emerged with a new force in
the Reich’s legal system, providing citizens with ready access to the
criminal courts. The institutions were in place for a vast expansion
of honor lawsuits as the conﬂicts of modern life moved into the
courts.
62

These mediation courts were originally established in Prussia in 1827: “Entwurf
eines Justiz-Verfassungs-Gesetzes für das deutsche Reich: Reform des
Schiedsmanns-Instituts,” I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 625, GStPK, p. 3.
63
Pretrial mediation was speciﬁcally not required for charges brought under §196,
i.e., those related to defamation of a state oﬃcial.

CHAPTER 2

Honor disputes and everyday life

“It is not only a right but a duty for anyone with claims to a
respectable position in society to defend his honor when it is in any
way attacked or called into question.”1
“Don’t be so sensitive!”2

Judges in the Kaiserreich were driven to distraction by the landslide of
defamation suits, most of which were the Privatklage of private citizens.
Those with ﬁrsthand experience wrote in disgust about their daily
encounters with insult suits that “stem from gossip and revolve around
[legally] invalid issues,” most of these being “petty suits” dealing with
“ludicrous tongue lashings … pettiness … [and] squabbling without any
deeper meaning.”3 Overburdening the courts, these suits were “poisoning” social relations in whole communities:
The worst aspect of defamation suits is … that they poison the social climate of
small towns more than all other lawsuits. Thus witnesses are hauled in for
whom the whole matter, for personal reasons, is highly embarrassing; thus, old
friendships are destroyed, old long forgotten matters are dug up and hostilities
are provoked which otherwise would never have broken out.4
1

Emil Schulze, Ein militär-ehrengerichtlicher Prozess (Würzburg, 1879), p. 3. “Es ist
nicht blos ein Recht, sondern eine Pﬂicht für jeden, der Anspruch darauf macht, in
der Gesellschaft eine geachtete Stellung einzunehmen, seine Ehre zu vertheidigen,
wenn dieselbe von irgend einer Seite angegriﬀen oder in Frage gestellt wird.”
2
“Die Beleidigungsklage: Nicht so empﬁndlich!” Berliner Abendpost, August 24, 1913.
3
“Beleidigungsprozesse im Kriege,” Berliner Tageblatt, February 5, 1915. This was
also the view of Kade, Privatklage, who, as member of a Berlin appellate court for
Privatklage cases, had extensive ﬁrsthand experience.
4
“Die Beleidigungsklage,” Berliner Abendpost, August 24, 1913.
37

38

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

Commentators in the press and the parliaments likewise bemoaned
German “sensitivity” (Empﬁndlichkeit), the hypersensitivity to the
tiniest slights, and the readiness to turn those feelings into lawsuits:
“every swear-word uttered in back courtyards or on the street leads …
to a solemn oﬃcial proceeding,” complained the right-wing writer
Richard Nordhausen.5 They speculated about quarrels intensifying in
the modern “struggle for existence,”6 and commented on the deleterious eﬀects of the era’s “nervousness” and of a population wasting
away its “energy” (Energieverschleuderung) in the courtroom.7
Still, the tide of lawsuits kept rising. This was happening, moreover,
despite the considerable personal risks and social consequences
involved in bringing such a suit. Filing a lawsuit was not cheap, and
it was even more expensive to lose. The accuser was required to post in
advance a bail (Sicherheit) of 10m to cover the initial court costs.8 There
were lawyers’ fees, a service which, though not required (and some
litigants did without this to save money),9 was strongly advisable, not
only for the expertise, but because only lawyers had access to certain
legal documents (Akteneinsicht).10 By the eve of World War One,
lawyers were charging 50–100m in such cases.11 If, furthermore, one
lost the case, one faced the punishment of a ﬁne or jail time, as well as
paying for the very steep court costs (including the legal fees of the
defendant),12 which could amount to ﬁve times the penalty ﬁne.13 On
top of all of this, one faced numerous hassles: ﬁling the court papers,
5

“Die Beleidigungsklage,” Der Tag, February 19, 1914. 6 Ibid.
“Energieverschleuderung,” Berliner Morgenpost, February 28, 1914. This was a
term used in a Reichstag speech by Eugen Schiﬀer; its aﬃnity with Monism struck
the author of the article.
8
Carl Kade, Die Privatklage in den Strafprozessordnungen der Jetztzeit (Berlin, 1900),
p. 14.
9
“Beleidigungsprozesse im Kriege,” Berliner Tageblatt, February 5, 1915.
10
Julius Glaser, “Privatanklage,” in Holtzendorﬀ (ed.), Encyklopädie der
Rechtswissenschaft (Leipzig, 1881), p. 182.
11
The view of Nordhausen, “Die Beleidigungsklage,” Der Tag, February 19, 1914.
12
Sammlung der Entscheidungen bayerischen Landesgerichten 1 (1902), p. 11.
13
§419 of the StPO. Special provisions applied to the indigent, whose court fees were
paid out of Armenfonds, as set out in the Zivilprozessordnung, §§114–127 and §119.
Berliner Zeitung, June 24, 1885.
7

Honor disputes and everyday life

39

the time and income lost from work to appear at a mediation hearing,
and subsequently, if the case failed to be settled, at court. Even so, there
was always the distinct possibility that the accused simply failed to
show up at scheduled hearings, which could force indeﬁnite postponements. Or, not uncommonly, countersuits.
Defamation suits were increasing because of people like Cologne
Generalsekretär “St.” In 1910, St. wrote to the Kölner Tagesblatt to
complain about the outrageous obstacles a “good citizen” like himself
faced in trying to redeem his honor through the courts. In the process
of telling his story, he revealed to posterity not only his legal diﬃculties, but the extraordinary mindset of a man who turned a tiny slight
into a months-long legal crusade. It all began in February, 1910, when
St., arriving home from a business trip, found a letter waiting for him
from the baker “H.,” a renter in St.’s house, whose wife had been a
maid there.14 The letter contained an unspeciﬁed “insulting expression.” St. demanded a written apology, and when this was not forthcoming, he took what in his culture was the next obvious step: he went
to the law, applying for a mediation hearing (Sühnetermin) with the
local mediator (Schiedsmann). Striking is not only St.’s willingness to
take this step, given the circumstances, but his dogged persistence.
Three times the hearing was scheduled, and three times H. failed to
show up.15 Postponements, reschedulings, headaches, and lost time
ensued, including an added round of phone calls and complications
when H. moved to another Schiedsmann’s district. Still St. persisted.
The dispute, beginning with an oﬀensive word choice in a private
letter, was taking on its own dynamic and snowballing. St. disbelieved
an excuse H. gave for cancelling one of the scheduled hearings, so he
wrote a letter to a high justice oﬃcial, the Landgerichtspräsident,
denouncing H. for “contempt of court.” Six months later, the conﬂict
between St. and H., having failed to be settled at the mediation level,
14

The use of initials instead of full names is original to the source: “Wie es um den
Rechtschutz des Staatsbürgers als Beleidigten in Preussen und im Reiche steht,”
Kölner Tageblatt, August 20, 1910.
15
Such cancellations on the part of the defendant were legal and, it seems, a common
ploy. Complainants, by contrast, were required to show up at such hearings or
forfeit their case, a fact St. bitterly complained about.

40

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

had moved into the courts. Once again, H. tried to postpone, arguing a
new (and, to St., pathetic) excuse in a pretrial hearing. When the judge
sided with H., St. lodged another formal complaint with the
Landgerichtspräsident, this time against the trial judge himself for
“bias toward the defendant and inappropriate stance toward me.” St.
also requested the judge’s replacement, which took him oﬀ into a
whole new set of legal maneuvers. When his article went to press in
August of that year, he was still at it, not having gotten his trial.16
Not every insult was litigable. To be sure, the criminal statute on
simple insult (Beleidigung, §185) was extremely murky and ripe for
popular exploitation since it left “insult” entirely undeﬁned. The
commentary for an 1877 edition of the Criminal Code did not help
much when it deﬁned Beleidigung very broadly as “the expression of
disdain [Geringschätzung] toward another person or oﬃcial.”17 Yet,
legal opinion seems to have been in agreement that a prosecutable
insult required in addition, if not actual premeditation, then at least
that the insulter was aware of the defamatory nature of his statement
and its “unlawfulness.”18 The statutes on libel and calumny, which
dealt with insults of a public nature, were clearer about the parameters, requiring that the oﬀending statement make the victim appear
“contemptible [verächtlich] or degrade” him in public opinion (§186)
and to do so with malicious intent (§187). More speciﬁcally, according to Karl von Lilienthal, Heidelberg law professor and a leading
authority on libel law, a person’s honor could be judged debased in
public opinion (the person’s peer group) by a libel only if the libel had
the eﬀect of interfering with the “fulﬁllment of [his or her] life’s
work [Lebensaufgaben].”19 Simply calling someone “dumb” was not
16

H. had failed again to appear in court. St. went on to appeal to the highest judicial
authority, the Reich Ministry of Justice.
17
Strafgesetzbuch für das deutsche Reich (Berlin, 1877), p. 370, fn. 1.
18
Ibid., p. 375, fn. 24ﬀ.
19
Lilienthal, “Üble Nachrede und Verleumdung,” in Mittermaier et al. (eds.),
Vergleichende Darstellung des deutschen und ausländischen Strafrechts: Besonderer
Teil vol. 4 (Berlin, 1906), p. 397. This study was commissioned by the government
as part of a multi-volume comparative study of law for the purpose of preparing a
new criminal code.

Honor disputes and everyday life

41

litigable, in other words; it became so only when and if the epithet
was taken seriously as true by the victim’s peers, thus damaging the
insultee’s reputation and, in turn, his or her ability, say, to function in
professional life. Likewise, in many circumstances, curse words, as in
“robber” and “murderer” uttered during an angry interchange, did
not qualify as criminal slanders since in this context they were not
meant to be taken literally as objectively true.
Given the limited number of surviving trial records, it is impossible
to generalize about the extent to which judges actually followed such
principles in practice. But there are indications that some did not,
applying instead a rather looser deﬁnition of insult that failed to consider
the subtleties of context and that thus allowed many simple curse-word
insults to go forward as litigation. Moreover, judging both by the
kinds of petty lawsuits (many about curse words) that the population
sought to ﬁle and by the views of legal scholars, it is clear that there was
a signiﬁcant gap between popular and learned legal opinion.20 Still,
many of these Privatklagen were by deﬁnition ruled out of court,
irrespective of the judges’ inclinations, by the regulation that plaintiﬀs
in Privatklage suits were not allowed to testify on their own behalf
as witnesses. The result was to substantially limit the volume of private
slander cases involving two individuals and no third-party witnesses.
Jurist-critics tended to blame the out-of-control litigiousness on
uneducated, lower-class rural and small-town folly. But, as St.’s case
suggests, the Privatklage was far from conﬁned to the “scoldings of
market women.”21 These lawsuits spanned the entire social spectrum.
They included even the satisfaktionsfähig (those upper- and uppermiddle-class men qualiﬁed to give satisfaction in a duel). To be sure,
these men of the elite, particularly military oﬃcers, favored the more
manly duel and had a certain contempt for the Privatklage precisely
because it was available to all classes.22 Still, elite men were not
infrequently plaintiﬀs in libel litigation. In such cases, one can see the
transference into the courtroom of the thinking and practices of the duel.
20

See, e.g., Aschrott and Liszt (eds.), Die Reform des Reichsstrafgesetzbuchs (Berlin,
1910), pp. 309ﬀ.
21
Kade, Privatklage, p. 49. 22 Ibid., p. 50.

42

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

A good example comes from the life of Max Weber, whose
theoretical writings on honor seem to have been deeply grounded
in his own life in imperial Germany. Weber’s student-day dueling is
well known, but not his libel litigation. In 1911, Weber was enraged
by a newspaper story that, quoting an anonymous source, claimed he
had refused a duel with a Heidelberg colleague, the philosopher,
antisemite, and antifeminist Arnold Ruge, whose honor dispute with
Weber had begun with Ruge publicly insulting Weber’s wife
Marianne, the feminist activist.23 In Weber’s world, to let the duel
rumour stand would have been to surrender to the dishonorable
charge of cowardice. Weber’s face-saving maneuver, however, was
not to challenge the anonymous source – whose identity had since
surfaced as the Heidelberg historian Adolf Koch – to a duel. Perhaps
because of Koch’s marginal status (as an Extraordinarius he had failed
to achieve full-professor status), but more likely because of Weber’s
distaste at this point in his life for dueling, the latter chose to issue a
diﬀerent sort of honor challenge: he wrote an inﬂammatorily insulting letter to Koch and sent copies to a newspaper editor and to Koch’s
department at Heidelberg University. An act intentionally calibrated
to force a courtroom confrontation (there was no way Koch could
avoid suing for libel and hope to maintain a respectable reputation
according to the honor logic of the day), Weber’s letter was the legal
equivalent of a dueling challenge. At the subsequent trial, Weber
pressed his “battle of annihilation”24 against Koch so hard that the
latter, turned into the de facto defendant standing accused of being a
libeler and coward, not only lost his trial but, stripped of his ability to
teach at the university, was ﬁnancially and professionally ruined.25
23

Joachim Radkau, Max Weber: die Leidenschaft des Denkens (Munich, 2005),
pp. 633–39. The primary sources, which deserve their own article-length analysis,
can be found in “Anhang: Dokumente zu den gerichtlichen Auseinandersetzungen
Max Webers 1911–1912,” in M. Rainer Lepsius et al. (eds.), Max Weber
Gesamtausgabe 2 (Tübingen, 1998), pp. 816ﬀ. Many thanks to Guenther Roth for
bringing this material to my attention.
24
Radkau’s term (Max Weber, p. 633).
25
Radkau, ibid., p. 638, rightly suggests the presence of latent antisemitism in
Weber’s pitiless attacks on the already marginal Koch.

Honor disputes and everyday life

43

Views varied among contemporary commentators on the strategic
thinking of plaintiﬀs in Privatklage suits. There were those like the
Munich Oberamtsrichter Meikel, for whom “often the issue for
the insulted party was less the punishment of the defamer than the
restoration of [the former’s] honor.”26 Other commentators emphasized the revenge aspect of the Privatklage, the purpose of which was
to force the insulter to pay a “ﬁtting” cost.27 Still other commentators
made the opposite point: the indiﬀerence of many plaintiﬀs to the
insult itself. Such people took legal action only because they felt
compelled to by the widespread public belief that “if one doesn’t ﬁle
suit then one admits in a way that the insulter is in the right.”28 Half a
century later, the anthropologist Pitt-Rivers articulated this social
compulsion in more general terms: “To leave an aﬀront unavenged is
to leave one’s honour in a state of desecration and this is therefore
equivalent to cowardice.”29 One journalist noted that a majority of
complainants in the 1910 statistics were between the ages of 30 and
40, an age preoccupied with the “struggle” to establish oneself
ﬁnancially and professionally; in these circumstances, he argued,
such a person had no choice but to take legal action against an insult
since failure to defend oneself “endangered” both one’s honor and
one’s material existence.30
Either way – whether from belief or compulsion, revenge or
anxiety over impugned honor – these disputants acted within the
parameters of Germany’s litigious honor culture, a culture in which
personal disputes were regularly fought out in the courts and in
which, whatever one’s personal feelings, social pressure and the
laws themselves dictated the turning of these conﬂicts into questions
of honor. The relationship between honor and the law was one
of mutual reinforcement and inﬂuence. It was not simply that the
26

“Der Schutz der Ehre,” Berliner Tageblatt, April 9, 1914.
“Die Beleidigungsklage,” Der Tag, February 19, 1914.
28
“Die Beleidigungsklage,” Berliner Abendpost, August 24, 1913.
29
Julian Pitt-Rivers, “Honour and Social Status,” in J. G. Peristiany (ed.), Honour
and Shame: The Values of Mediterranean Society (Chicago, 1966), p. 26.
30
“Die Beleidigungsklage: Nicht so empﬁndlich!” Berliner Abendpost, August 24,
1913.
27

44

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

laws – e.g., the easy access to the Privatklage – gave people an
accessible legal remedy for insult and violated honor.31 The laws
themselves helped shape the experience of being dishonored, both
encouraging and sometimes requiring the transformation of slights
and quarrels into legally actionable honor disputes.
That honor language was permeated with the ﬁne gradations of
status and class. The adjudication of libel disputes in the courts was
always contextualized and individual since, as the legal experts
agreed, standards of honor (and hence the kind of respectful treatment a person could legally claim) varied by class, profession,
gender, age, and a host of idiosyncratic factors like the litigants’
relationship and the circumstances of the insult. There did exist a
“universal human honor” (allgemeine Menschenehre) that was inherent and inalienable in all people, even in the insane or the convicted
felon who, by virtue of his conviction, had lost his civil rights
(literally, “honor rights”: Ehrenrechte) to vote or hold oﬃce.32
Legal and other learned opinion, however, diﬀerentiated that universal honor from the social honor, derived from status and the
fulﬁllment of one’s social functions and duties, at issue in most
defamation proceedings.33 Thus, judges, according to one expert,
were always forced to be mindful of the “individuality and position of
the particular honor that has been attacked.”34 Addressing a person
with the personal “Du,” for example, was libelous only under
“certain conditions”35 (read: only in relation to people in the middle
and upper classes). Needless to say, the eﬀect of all of this was to
make the libel courts in many cases mechanisms for the reproduction
and enforcement of Germany’s stratiﬁed social order. At the
31

This is the approach taken, for example, by Nancy Shields Kollmann, By Honor
Bound: State and Society in Early Modern Russia (Cornell, 1999).
32
Hans Lemme, Der Verlust der bürgerlichen Ehrenrechte (Halle, 1910).
33
A lengthy discussion of the jurisprudential and philosophical issues, together with
an extensive bibliography, can be found in Hans Joachim Hirsch, Ehre und
Beleidigung: Grundfragen des strafrechtlichen Ehrenschutzes (Karlsruhe, 1967).
34
Strafgesetzbuch für das deutsche Reich, p. 370, fn. 1. See also Lilienthal, “Üble
Nachrede,” p. 396.
35
Ibid., p. 371, fn. 2.

Honor disputes and everyday life

45

individual level, of course, this was precisely the point: to reclaim
a level of respect consistent with the individual’s status and thus
re-establish a status quo brought into disequilibrium by the aﬀront.
How, in turn, Germans thought about their honor was, as contemporaries noted, extremely “ﬂuid,”36 diﬀering by social milieu; it could
even change within a single individual depending upon circumstance.
Class constituted perhaps the most important social factor determining
a person’s sense of his/her honor. Over the centuries certain distinct
cultures of honor had developed in the estates: an aristocracy with its
titles and lineages, its ﬁne manners, military ethos, and disdain for
commerce and manual labor; guild members and a newer bourgeoisie
with their ethic of work, thrift, honesty, moderation, and sexual
chastity; a peasantry, by contrast, that allowed premarital sex within
deﬁned parameters and that, by the eighteenth century, put a premium
on the honor of the free landowner.37 The imprint of these diﬀerences
persisted and were reﬁned into diﬀerent cultures of honor in the
Kaiserreich. This was most clearly the case in the continuing social
chasm between a satisfaktionsfähig dueling elite and everyone else. The
manly honor values of the oﬃcer corps – “bravery, loyalty and
knightly conduct”38 – diﬀered from the prized qualities of an honorable businessman, qualities centered around “promptly fulﬁlling one’s
obligations” and living an upright, “solid” life. State oﬃcials diﬀered in
turn, emphasizing “incorruptibility, punctuality und ‘strict scholarly
seriousness in the understanding of his oﬃcial duties.’”39
36

Aschrott and Liszt, Reform, p. 311.
Zunkel, “Ehre, Reputation,” in Otto Brunner et al. (eds.) Geschichtliche Grundbegriﬀe
vol. 2 (Stuttgart, 1975). In general, for early-modern popular honor, see Eileen Crosby,
“Claiming Honor: Injury, Honor, and the Legal Process in Saxony, 1650–1730” (PhD
diss., Cornell University, 2004); Kathy Stuart, Deﬁled Trades and Social Outcasts:
Honor and Ritual Pollution in Early Modern Germany (Cambridge, 1999); Richard van
Dülmen, Der ehrlose Mensch (Cologne, 1999); David M. Luebke, “Serfdom and
Honour in Eighteenth-Century Germany,” Social History 18/2 (1993): 143–61; Ann
Goldberg, Sex, Religion, and the Making of Modern Madness (New York, 1999), on the
norms of gender and sexuality in nineteenth-century peasant society.
38
A nineteenth-century source cited in Ute Frevert, “Ehre – männlich/weiblich. Zu
einem Identitätsbegriﬀ des 19. Jahrhunderts,” Tel Aviver Jahrbuch für deutsche
Geschichte 21 (1992), 25.
39
Ibid.
37

46

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

At the same time, a certain cultural amalgamation and homogenization was taking place. One sees it in the spread downward of the
duel to the educated middle classes. More importantly, this amalgamation involved the dissemination of an honor ethic attached to state
service, an ethic of obedience and loyalty, disinterested impartiality
and devotion to the public good, which reached from the aristocracy
through the professions and far down into the petit bourgeoisie. One
also sees the spread into the middle classes of a contempt for business
and proﬁt, pursuits that were dishonorable, a view, originating from
both aristocratic snobbery and anti-free-market craft guilds, reinforced by decades of Romantic thought and increasingly attached in
the Kaiserreich to antisemitic sentiment.
There was also a certain sameness across classes in the continuing
power of externalist, social deﬁnitions of honor. To be sure, the
Enlightenment, as explained above (see the Introduction), had
evolved an internalized, rationalist deﬁnition of honor – a notion
of personal virtue divorced from rank and birth – and that new kind
of honor was critical in the practices of Germans discussed below.40
But the idea of a new rationalized honor has to be kept in perspective.
The dichotomies on which it was based – inner vs. external honor,
virtue vs. rank – were more ideological constructs than positive
truths. Arising in the eighteenth century, this construction of the
honor issue was a powerful polemical tool of a new bourgeoisie in
battles against aristocratic privilege and the inequities of the corporatist order.41 It became a pervasive trope of German literature. From
Lessing’s Minna von Barnhelm (1767) and Schiller’s “Verbrecher aus
Infamie” (1786) to Fontane’s Eﬃ Briest (1894), German writers
critical of the corporatist order thematized “the loss and the assertion
of corporate honor in conﬂict with ‘internal honor’ and ultimately the
redemption of corporate honor by bourgeois honor.”42 One ﬁnds a
40

The actual legal distinction between external and internal honor predated the
Enlightenment by several centuries. Hans-Heinrich Dressler, Das deutsche
Beleidigungsrecht des 16. und 17. Jahrhunderts (Frankfurt am Main, 1967).
41
Zunkel, “Ehre, Reputation,” pp. 25–27.
42
Wolfgang Frühwald, “Die Ehre der Geringen: Ein Versuch zur Sozialgeschichte
literarischer Texte im 19. Jahrhundert,” Geschichte und Gesellschaft 9 (1983), 71–72.

Honor disputes and everyday life

47

similar trope in nineteenth- and early twentieth-century legal scholarship, among jurists devising theories to reconcile internal honor
with the continuing practice of the defamation lawsuit. Complex
formulations were theorized in order to explain why, if honor was
an internal, personal quality, an insulted person was still justiﬁed in
defending his honor in court vis-à-vis the external world. A leading
expert on insult law, Moritz Liepmann, devised the distinction
between “objectiﬁed” (reputation) and “subjectiﬁed” (internal feeling) honor, arguing that both comprised individual honor and
needed legal protection.43
Further, the actual honor practices of Germans tended to blur
any distinctions between internal and external, corporate and bourgeois honor. Honor litigation had its own logic that transcended
individual feelings and ideas. In an honor culture like Germany’s, “to
leave an aﬀront unavenged is to leave one’s honour in a state of
desecration … and jeopardy … [the insult] requires ‘satisfaction’ if
[the oﬀended person’s honor] is to return to its normal condition.”44
Within this logic, an insult left unchallenged, moreover, risked
appearing true, and while the upper classes – military oﬃcers and
university students especially – generally settled their honor disputes
43

A good discussion of this can be found in Stewart, Honor, p. 15ﬀ. Hans Joachim
Hirsch, Ehre und Beleidigung: Grundfragen des strafrechtlichen Ehrenschutzes
(Karlsruhe, 1967). One contemporary example of the contradictions within the
thought about honor: a 1914 Berliner Morgenpost article making a liberal argument
for Germans to cease with their (mostly trivial) honor obsessions and, at the
political level, for the state to tolerate free speech. It oﬀered an internalized
deﬁnition of honor as one argument against German litigiousness: “Die
persönliche Ehre ist ein so wertvolles und so hochstehendes Rechtsgut, dass wir
überzeugt sein sollten, dass sie durch ein unvorsichtiges Versehen eines anderen …
gar nicht verletzt werden kann …” In other words, it asserted that a person’s sense
of honor should be anchored in the self and not subject to harm by the whims of an
external world. But the author went on in the very same sentence to use a quite
diﬀerent notion of honor that focused on a person’s reputation and its need to be
defended from external attack: “und wir sollten nur dann nach Rache oder
Vergeltung [e.g. ﬁling a Privatklage] rufen, wenn positive Beweise dafür vorliegen,
dass der andere, der vermeindliche Beleidiger, unseren Charakter wider besseres
Wissen verdächtigen gewollt hat”: “Energieverschleuderung,” Berliner Morgenpost,
Feb. 28, 1914.
44
Pitt-Rivers, “Honour and Social Status,” p. 26.

48

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

with the duel, for most Germans the courtroom was the forum for
resolving personal disputes. And, given a world in which a tainted
reputation spelled social disaster, the logic of honor pushed even the
most progressive and most hostile to corporate honor – e.g.,
Socialists – into libel litigation.
Thus, whatever the philosophers and moralists said about the
integrity of inner honor (virtue), everyone knew what really counted:
one’s reputation and standing in the eyes of society, a type of honor,
conferred and denied by the outside world, that was thus always deeply
vulnerable and easily lost. Going to court was often an inadequate
solution at best. Even for those in the non-dueling population who did
not view honor litigation as a form of cowardice, going to court, as in
St.’s case, potentially opened one up to further humiliations through
court delays, thus “advertis[ing]” the vulnerability of one’s honor.45
Moreover, losing the case and long months and years of countersuits
and appeals were always possibilities.
This being so, the next step, while often shocking, was somehow
logical: the humiliated and desperate, their honor lost or in jeopardy,
their social standing plunging, not infrequently took their cases
directly to the public. Sometimes, as in St., they published newspaper
articles. More often, the medium of choice was a pamphlet laying out
the TRUE FACTS of their stories. Hence the birth of a new popular
pamphlet literature that developed around German litigiousness –
what could be called the legal defense memoir-sourcebook. Their
authors’ contribution to a modern mass reading public was in forging
around honor a personalized politics of complaint. The pamphlets
were hybrids, borrowing from a range of literary genres (the epistolary novel, pulp crime stories, memoir, legal brief, political polemic,
the philosophical tract) and coming in an inﬁnite variety of personalized combinations (more on the form and function of these
pamphlets in chapter 5). They were self-revelatory narratives of the
most extraordinary kind. Trying to set the record straight, they
ended up narrating in often painstaking (and painful) detail the
most private details of the authors’ personal lives – stories of divorce,
45

Ibid., p. 30.

Honor disputes and everyday life

49

sexual molestation, loss of employment, insane asylum incarcerations, bankruptcy – and doing so with a great passion for documentary proof in the form of court verdicts, letters, petitions, and other
primary sources.
An army doctor (Emil Schulze) was ﬁred from his post and stripped
of his oﬃcer’s uniform in 1878 after a military honor court determined
that he had “made a false statement” (later, he learned the real reason
was his refusal of a dueling challenge). Jobless, utterly dishonored, a
social outcast (“contact with [someone stripped of his uniform] is
avoided”), “without prospect of any other way of rehabilitating myself
with my acquaintances and friends,” Schulze set out to tell the world
the “unbiased … truth” of a chain of events that had begun with a
jealous best friend and the deterioration of their friendship.46
Elise Hessels, allegedly molested by Berlin’s police chief, went
public after years of fruitless litigation, including a conviction against
her for defaming her attacker.47 Alfred Schulze, a former law student
and tutor at the Berlin home of Dresdner Bank director Gutmann,
wrote his bitter confessional pamphlet in the wake of a conviction for
attempted blackmail of the Gutmann family and other personal
disasters related to the case.48
A sense of violated rights and outsized entitlement permeated
these acts of press folly. “St.,” the man oﬀended by a private letter,
went public to proclaim his outrage over a “legal situation in which
an insulted citizen is faced with unbelievable vexations” and ﬁnds
himself “defencelessly facing the rudest improprieties from the
defendant.”49 Schulze, the ﬁred army doctor, was sure that it was a
man’s “duty,” not just his “right,” to “defend his honor when it is
attacked or placed in question.”50
46

Schulze, Ein militär-ehrengerichtlicher Prozess, pp. 20–21, 24. In Schulze’s convincing narrative, the “false report” was a word-of-honor assurance to a superior oﬃcer
that he had not used curse words in a quarrel with a fellow oﬃcer; a third oﬃcer –
an ex-best friend turned enemy – contradicted Schulze’s statement and the court
believed the former.
47
Elise Hessels, Frauenloos in Preussen (Bern, 1882).
48
Alfred Schultze, Für Ehre und Recht (Zurich, 1903). 49 Ibid.
50
Schulze, Ein militär-ehrengerichtlicher Prozess, p. 3.

50

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

There was also a crusading mentality to these works, a tendency of
their authors to turn personal woes into broader narratives of injustice. The clearest example is in the writings of “lunatics” battling the
psychiatric system and articulating their plights within stories about
nation-wide social injustice (chapter 5). Clara Hahn’s confessional
about her messy divorce was written not merely as an “indictment
against” her husband, but against a society, “whose lack of feeling for
the law, of rationality, [and] chivalry allowed these events to come
into being.”51 A. Collmann, a Protestant minister removed from his
position, wrote not merely to defend the honor of a “simple village
pastor” (himself), but to enlighten the public about a widespread
“sickness” of bureaucracy and authoritarianism in the Protestant
church and public life.52
The following discussion gives a sense of the great variety of
circumstances narrated in the pamphlets and in the other sources
available on defamation litigation. It is neither a deﬁnitive nor an allencompassing analysis. Rather, its purpose is to suggest the widespread
role played by and the social dynamics surrounding honor in German
everyday life. Those dynamics were in large part about the many ﬁne
permutations of status anxiety – class, gender, professional – in a
modernizing society whose structural tendencies (industrial capitalism,
urbanization, democratization) were undermining ﬁxed social roles. The
social dynamics of honor were at the same time about the incorporation
of hierarchical, corporate values into modern institutions: the state,
business, labor and gender relations, politics, and the professions.
BUREAUCRATS: SOCIAL STATUS AND CLASS ANXIETY

In a sense, honor was a method of governing. It inﬂuenced the state’s
treatment of its opponents (chapter 3). It was also a tool of selfdisciplining within the governing class itself. It is the latter aspect
that concerns me here. Nowhere was the strict conformity of honor
values more apparent than in the Prussian bureaucracy. The rigid,
51
52

Clara Hahn, Mein Ehescheidungsprozess (Vienna, 1895), p. 1.
A. Collmann, Mein Disciplinarprozess (Cleve, 1873).

Honor disputes and everyday life

51

punctilious, rule-obsessed Prussian bureaucrat is a familiar ﬁgure in
German literature.53 His mentality came out of the longstanding
interpenetration of the military and civil bureaucracies,54 as well as
the peculiar mixture of modern and corporate thought that characterized state service. Germany’s civil and military bureaucracies
were, on the one hand, highly eﬃcient modern institutions organized
along functional lines of authority and run by a cadre of specialized,
professional, tenured experts. These institutions were also, however,
classic Stände. To be an oﬃcial in the Kaiserreich was to belong to an
exclusive, privileged status group whose honor claims were central to
state power and the legitimation of its authority.
The lives of oﬃcials were governed, accordingly, by elaborate
codes of etiquette – titles, address, dress, comportment, the proper
social circles – involving an endless discipline of lifestyle and protocol, whose underlying values of status and honor were thoroughly
internalized. The particularity of their honor values can be traced to
the functional requirements of state service, the inherently hierarchical and authoritarian nature of bureaucracy, and a Hegelian view of
the state as an impartial, transcendent authority acting in the interests
of the common good. Most familiar is the military’s honor code –
manifested in oﬃcer duels and the judgments of military honor
courts – of physical courage, loyalty, obedience, self-sacriﬁce, and
comradeship.55 In the civil administration, the service ethic translated
into an honor code that equally reiﬁed an obsessive observance of
regulations and rank, honesty, sobriety, respectability in private and
social relations, and, above all, impartiality and disinterestedness.56
53

A classic portrayal can be found in Henrich Mann, Der Untertan (1918).
Hans Rosenberg, Bureaucracy, Aristocracy, and Autocracy: The Prussian Experience
1660–1815 (Boston, 1958).
55
Ute Frevert, Men of Honor: A Social and Cultural History of the Duel (Cambridge,
MA, 1995); Kevin McAleer, Dueling: The Cult of Honor in ﬁn-de-siècle Germany
(Princeton, 1994).
56
The sociologist Max Weber, living and writing in imperial Germany, wrote the
classic work on the characteristics of modern bureaucracy. Though formulated as
an “ideal type” applicable to all modern societies, Weber’s modern bureaucrat
possesses characteristics that closely resemble the German type with which he was
most familiar. See, From Max Weber, pp. 196ﬀ.
54

52

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

There was no more dishonoring charge against a German bureaucrat
than that of self-interested corruption, such as favoritism, bribery,
and graft.
A stark example of this can be seen in the 1897 disciplinary hearing
against the explorer Karl Peters, the imperialist who helped found
German East Africa. As a Reichskommissar in German East Africa in
the early 1890s, Peters’s brutality against the native community was
notorious, provoking uprisings, military intervention, and ultimately
a government investigation that led to his ﬁring. Yet, the disciplinary
court was most disturbed not with his cruelty against the natives:
beatings and executions could be justiﬁed by the need to maintain
order under dangerous conditions. What was inexcusable was the
“self-interest” behind Peters’s actions, namely, that his cruelty
involved acts of personal revenge related to his relationship with
a native woman whom he had taken as his concubine. Peters’s
“mistakes” made it impossible for him to continue as a state oﬃcial,
the judgment proclaimed:
Someone who, like the accused, has used the power of his oﬃcial position to
advance his own personal interests and who disavows the foremost principles
of administration, justice, decency and truthfulness, and who has proved
himself unable to exercise self-control – this oﬃcial may not remain in oﬃce
regardless of his successes.57

A more typical case shows the way honor codes infused the
bureaucracy in its everyday workings, functioning as a form of
intra-institutional self-disciplining. Here status anxieties manifested
themselves in a fetishized attachment to bureaucratic forms and
protocols. The case involved breaches of bureaucratic protocol in
the Prussian district of Spremberg, an event that led in 1893 to the
libel convictions of two of the district’s most important notables.58
The scandal revolved around the word “ergebenst” (most loyally) –
when to write it and when not to. The ﬁrst breach occurred when the
57

My emphasis. N.a. Die Urteile der Disziplinargerichte gegen Dr. Karl Peters (Munich,
1907), pp. 60–61.
58
Many of the documents have been preserved in I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 58199, GStPK,
from which the following discussion is taken.

Honor disputes and everyday life

53

word failed to appear on a letter sent to Spremberg’s magistrate’s
court (Amtsgericht). The court had written to an oﬃcial in a nearby
town requesting information about a pending trial. The oﬃcial,
Amtsvorsteher General-Major von Hagen, wrote back answering
the question but signing the letter simply “Der Amtsvorsteher von
Hagen.” For reasons unknown – his own excuse does not merit
mention – von Hagen had left out from his signature the properly
respectful ergebenst. The recipient of von Hagen’s soon-to-be notorious letter, magistrate Oscar Müller, testily replied with a polite
admonishment to observe the oﬃcial writing “style.” Hagen was
insulted – being lectured to like that by a (low-level) magistrate –
and sent copies of the correspondence to the district’s highest oﬃcial,
Landrat Ernst Falkenthal. Falkenthal, in turn, forwarded Hagen’s
complaint to Müller’s boss, the president of the county court
(Landgericht) in Cottbus, who, after back-and-forths about the proper
jurisdiction, asked Falkenthal to reprove Hagen for not following
the “required style” and for seeking “satisfaction” with the wrong
authorities. Falkenthal, already manifesting that less-than-reverent
attitude that would later cause him legal grief, refused to do so,
saying that Hagen’s writing style was entirely correct. Cottbus let the
matter drop, but one month later saw another of Spremberg’s magistrates, a Dr. Schneider, consulting with the Landrat at his oﬃce
about the complaint against von Hagen. A friend of the Landrat,
Robert Freytag (Standesbeamte, Rittergutsbesitzer and reserve oﬃcer),
was also present at the meeting. At some point, while ﬁlling out an
oﬃcial form, Freytag wrote down ergebenst followed by the place and
date. It was an allusion to the original complaint, a joke, the two
explained later in their interrogation. But Schneider did not think it
was funny; he saw it as “mocking” him and his oﬃce’s complaint, in
other words, as an insult and aﬀront to his honor. He denounced
Falkenthal and Freytag, and the authorities agreed, trying and convicting them of criminal libel and meting out the huge ﬁnes of 400m
and 300m, respectively.
This absurd story of a signature’s reverberations oﬀers a window
onto the internecine battles over status that took place around the
baroque intricacies of bureaucratic forms. If bureaucratic honor codes

54

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

were critical to the outward assertion of state power, they were, at the
individual level, essential to an oﬃcial’s place and authority within
the state. Honor was a deeply serious matter in a world obsessed by
the ﬁne gradations of rank and authority – hence the worshipping of
protocol and “correctness” and the symbolically devastating aﬀect on
Schneider of Falkenthal’s and Freytag’s playful disparagement of
these rules.
Heinrich Mann immortalized the mentality in his scathingly satirical novel Der Untertan (1918). At university, Diederich Hessling, the
novel’s tyrannical, jingoistic protagonist, is swept up by the wonders
of membership in a student fraternity, the Neo-Teutons. No longer
small and alone – one of the anonymous “herd” – he is now part of a
select elite and thrilled to defend its “honor.” The fraternity teaches
him to live like a man of honor: besides drinking and fencing, he
learns the importance of precise “observance of prescribed forms and
mutual deference”:
A fellow student, with whom Diederich had hitherto had only oﬃcial relations,
once bumped into him at the door of the lavatory, and although both of them
were in a great hurry, neither would take precedence over the other. For a long
time they stood bowing and scraping – until suddenly, overcome by the same
need at the same moment, they burst through the door, charging like two wild
boars … knock[ing] their shoulders together.59

As in Hessling and his fellow fraternity members, honor was
critical to those seeking entrance into the governing classes. An
honorable reputation ranked with a university (usually law) degree
and the right social contacts as part of the entrance ticket to a secure,
mid-level civil service job and membership in privileged social
circles. Alfred Schulze, a 23-year-old law student from modest
circumstances, was one such social striver in turn-of-the-century
Berlin. Except Schulze played his cards spectacularly poorly, ending
up a fugitive felon banished from Berlin society and his country. As a
poor law student, Schulze had had the extraordinary fortune of
landing a job in one of the great households of Berlin high society,
59

English translation: Heinrich Mann, Man of Straw (London, 1984), p. 25.

Honor disputes and everyday life

55

that of Dresdner Bank director Eugen Gutmann, whose elder sons
Schulze tutored. But, in events that unfolded like a pulp novel,
Schulze got himself involved in a disastrous love aﬀair with
Gutmann’s 35-year-old wife. Pregnant with his child and fearing,
one presumes, the severely compromising position she was in, she at
some point broke oﬀ relations with Schulze and ordered him to leave
Berlin. A catastrophe for Schulze on many levels (personal, social,
professional, and ﬁnancial), it was here that his life plans began to fall
apart and that he began the schemes that would lead several years
later to a felony conviction for blackmail. He attempted to extort
money from the Gutmanns by threatening to go public with Frau
Gutmann’s love letters, was sent oﬀ to the “orient” to work for the
railway with a promise of a payoﬀ that never arrived, and returned to
Berlin years later, embittered and impoverished, to once again take
up his blackmail scheme for hush money. He sued Herr Gutmann,
who countered with a defamation Privatklage and a criminal suit for
blackmail. Tried and convicted, Schulze ﬂed to Switzerland before
his jail sentence began.60
Schulze’s notions of honor were key both to how he lived and how
he self-destructed. Honor framed his story in the most literal sense:
the narrative of his published pamphlet – a poisonous mix of self-pity,
misogyny, and class resentment – was constructed as a revenge piece
and as an entreaty to the public in defense of his reputation. His life
and thinking entirely conﬂated honor and social status. As his
troubles mounted, facing dismissal from his job, mounting debts,
withdrawal from law school, and exclusion from whatever contacts
he had made in high society, he began to feel “dishonored.” That
feeling must have been acutely reinforced when Herr Gutmann,
although deeply insulted by Schulze’s actions, refused to challenge
him to a duel because, in his eyes, Schulze was no longer
satisfaktionsfähig (i.e., honorable enough to duel).61 Other people’s
60
61

Schulze, Für Ehre und Recht.
Ibid., pp. 37–39. Following Schulze’s narrative strategy (revenge and defending his
honor), he sought to turn this fact into a stain on Gutmann’s honor, arguing that the
latter actually did not possess the courage and manliness to duel.

56

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

reactions to Schulze were likewise mediated by honor ideas: implicitly understanding the psychology of a man with honor pretensions
riven by rage and insecurities, they began avoiding him for fear of
becoming the target of an insult lawsuit.62 Schulze’s litigiousness,
so bound up with class resentment and slighted honor, was what
ultimately did him in. When Herr Gutmann oﬀered him a sum of
money to, essentially, go away and drop a lawsuit Schulze had ﬁled
regarding an earlier unfulﬁlled money oﬀer, he refused because
“I wanted justice!” (Recht) and was above accepting “a gratuity.”63
There ensued Gutmann’s lawsuits that destroyed him.

BUSINESS

Honor was integrated into German capitalism in complex and sometimes contradictory ways, being at once integral to the economy and
disruptive of it. On the one hand, honor was an essential part of
doing business. Merchants, entrepreneurs, and bankers worked diligently to maintain honorable reputations of probity and trustworthiness. They did so not only through staying solvent and maintaining
honest business dealings but by displaying markers of bourgeois
respectability, cultivating the proper (Weberian) “lifestyle” in their
social and personal relations. Hence, the porousness of the personal
and the professional, the private and public aspects of a businessman’s
life. Perhaps the most important structural reason for this situation was
the persistence of personalized credit institutions within Germany’s
modernizing economy. Sperber’s study of the Palatinate shows how
most loans in the nineteenth century were taken not from ﬁnancial
institutions like banks but within a “face-to-face relationship, in
which the creditor could assess both the personality and the property of the debtor.”64 Whether it was running up a tab at the local
store or borrowing from a family member, credit relations were
“ubiquitous,” forming “a dense network running from individual
62
64

Ibid., p. 33. At least this was Schulze’s impression. 63 Ibid., p. 47.
Jonathan Sperber, Property and Civil Society in South-Western Germany, 1820–1914
(Oxford, 2005), p. 107.

Honor disputes and everyday life

57

to individual [and] family to family.”65 As such, credit involved
trust and reputation – in short, honor.
Potentially, then, businessmen with besmirched reputations
were in deep trouble. This is why Schulze, the aggrieved tutor at
the home of Gutmann, Dresdner Bank director, felt he had a
chance of getting away with blackmailing the Gutmann family,
and why a man of Gutmann’s stature, in turn, worked so hard to
silence his lowly, outcast opponent (above, p. 55). It is also why the
pro-business Ostsee Zeitung was so upset over a 1912 court ruling
that acquitted an employee of a Saxon ﬁrm who, after being ﬁred,
had slandered his former boss in a job interview with another
ﬁrm, claiming he had left his earlier job because his boss had tried
to get him to falsify the ﬁrm’s books (falsche Buchung). The boss,
having learned second-hand about this claim, promptly took his
former employee to court for slander, since, as the article explained,
such an accusation, “is one of the worst things that can be done
to a businessman,” having the ability to make him “forever, in
all honorable business circles, unacceptable and unworthy of his
social position [standesunwürdig].”66 The court, however, saw
things diﬀferently, brushing aside such concerns and granting the
employee-defendant’s speech the protection of §193. Outraged, the
article cited this case as one more example of how out of touch
“legal circles” were with “business aﬀairs,” a sentiment helping to
fuel widespread discontent with the laws and eﬀorts to reform them
(chapter 4).
The signiﬁcance of honor and reputation for the credit market is
also reﬂected in the enormous amount of contemporary writing
devoted to the topic, and to the fact that unlike the otherwise
vague libel statutes, defamation threatening a person’s credit was
speciﬁcally referenced in the law (§187) and treated as a serious
oﬀense. In at least one instance, a businessman deliberately used the
link between credit and reputation to coerce the repayment of a loan,
65
66

Ibid., p. 106.
“Weltfremdheit der Richter und kaufmännisches Ehrgefühl,” Ostsee Zeitung,
August 17, 1912.

58

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

orchestrating a public shaming of his debtor with a newspaper ad.
(The debtor sued for insult.)67
But honor also disrupted business. First, because the expansion of
trade and the modernization of the economy were increasing economic
transactions between people who did not necessarily share the same
honor codes. On the one hand, the structural trend in industrial
capitalism was toward the depersonalization of business and the relaxation accordingly of a social etiquette born in an earlier, face-to-face,
corporatist world; on the other hand, there were plenty of people who
remained deeply attached to that etiquette and its attendant markers of
rank and status. The result was bruised egos and lawsuits. One can see
the underlying clash between a ständisch-military and a capitalist ethos
that, for example, poisoned the business relations between Y and X. As
reported in Reichsfreund, X, a military oﬃcer, sent Y insuﬃcient
funds in a transaction over the transport of some furniture. Y, angry
but wanting to avoid further trouble, responded with a curt letter:
“Since we have no desire to go on about our legitimate claim in court,
we are giving you the six marks [money Y owed] and request the
remittance of the residual amount.” 68 Granted, the letter was impolite by contemporary standards; perhaps it even merited a Privatklage.
But what followed startled even the authors of the article: X denounced
Y to the state prosecutor, who, sharing X’s military ethic, ﬁled formal
defamation charges against Y for the insult of oﬀering a soldier a
present, a violation of X’s “corporate honor.”69
Another reason for the economic disruptiveness of honor was its
tendency to clash with the free ﬂow of information and goods on
which capitalism depended. One sees this in, for example, a 1914
Frankfurter Zeitung article condemning a recent defamation ruling of
the Frankfurter Oberlandesgericht against the newspaper.70 In 1911
the newspaper reprinted an article from the Münchner Neueste
67

“Darf man eine ausgeklagte Forderung durch Annonce zum Kauf ausbieten?”
Schlesswiger Nachrichten August 26, 1902. The businessman was convicted and
ﬁned 5m; this ruling was reversed on appeal, the court citing §193.
68
“Staatsanwalts-Anklagen,” Reichsfreund, August 23, 1890.
69
Y was eventually acquitted, see chapter 3.
70
“Die Freiheit der Finanzkritik,” Frankfurter Zeitung, March 7, 1914.

Honor disputes and everyday life

59

Nachrichten that had accused the banker Max Ansbacher of unethical
behavior, namely, of withdrawing the dividends of Bayerische
Bodenkreditanstalt stock, a bank in which he was the leading inﬂuence, shortly before a company meeting. Ansbacher sued the
Frankfurter Zeitung for defamation. The court’s ruling supported, in
principle, the legitimacy of a §193 defense by the ﬁnancial press,
which, the newspaper’s commentary pointed out, was more than
could be said for the justice system’s treatment of the political
press. But the court ruled against the Frankfurter Zeitung in this
case, denying it §193 protection, because the paper had failed to
check the facts of the case before reprinting them. This principle,
the Frankfurter Zeitung argued, placed an undue burden on newspapers, which was bad for business. The freedom of the press to
inform its business public is essential for the capitalist economy: a
critical and conscientious ﬁnancial press “is essential both in the
interests of the individual capitalist, whose investments need to be
protected, and in the general interest keeping the national economy
clean of unstable and socially harmful enterprises.” And it felt
compelled to point out that, far from serving some “irrelevant private
curiosity” (i.e. illegitimate critical speech), such articles played a very
important “public function.”
LABOR RELATIONS

Libel lawsuits were endemic to the unionized sectors of the economy.
Employers fought labor battles with defamation litigation, suing prolabor newspapers,71 organizations, and, probably, unruly workers. In
one case, a group of Alsatian quarry owners sued a local priest after
the latter wrote a series of articles claiming that the owners were
undermining the health and ﬁnances of their workers by plying them
with copious amounts of schnapps and beer.72 Workers, in turn, used
71

For example, the libel lawsuit of a Hanauer mill owner against the Frankfurt
Volksstimme. ”Hanauer Justiz,” Vorwärts, April 14, 1911.
72
“Beleidigung oder Ausübung seelsorgerlicher Pﬂichten durch die Presse?”
Tägliche Rundschau, December 31, 1913. The quarry owners argued in their suit

60

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

the libel lawsuit in intra-labor struggles. Christian and independentSocialist unions (their oﬃcials, newspapers, and political representatives) sued one another.73 Strikes sparked animosities between strikers and strikebreakers that produced libel lawsuits. After a successful
factory strike of piano makers, a strikebreaker, Möller, cursed one of
the workers, Ralikowski, who had participated in the strike, with:
“you scoundrel, you blackguard … you should have your skull
smashed.” Ralikowski sued for insult; Möller countersued, saying
that, as a strikebreaker, he had been insulted by Ralikowski during
the strike.74 A dockyard worker was given the extraordinarily harsh
three-month jail sentence for yelling “strikebreaker, Heidelberger,
scoundrel.”75
Workers also sued their employers. The cases I have found
reported in the press, however, were from non-industrial sectors of
the economy, where, as in servants and masters, relations between
employer and worker were close and personalized. If it is true (and it
is not yet clear if this was the case) that industrial workers were less
likely to bring libel suits against their employers,76 then it should be
attributed both to the more depersonalized relationship of industrial
labor relations and to the fact that industrial workers were likely to be
unionized and thus have at their disposal collective means of complaint and resistance like the strike.
There is a long history in Germany of subordinates bringing
lawsuits against their superiors, as in peasant-lord legal disputes.
But, in a world where honor was distributed hierarchically by estate,
that matters outside of the church were none of the priest’s legitimate business. The
priest’s initial conviction was overturned on appeal. The appellate court accepted
the church’s argument (higher church oﬃcials intervened in defense of the priest)
that the well-being of his parishioners was indeed a church concern.
73
One example is a series of defamation suits between the right-wing Reichstag
deputy Franz Behrens (1872–1943), who was a leader in the Christian workers
movement, and the SPD. Tägliche Rundschau, November 22, 1912.
74
Möller was convicted and ﬁned 10M. “Gerichts-Zeitung: Gleiches Recht,”
Vorwärts, March 12, 1911.
75
On appeal, the sentence was reduced to two weeks. “Gerichts-Zeitung:
Abgemilderte Klassenjustiz,” Vorwärts, March 9, 1911.
76
My conclusion is based primarily on a scanning of the court section of Vorwärts for
the years 1902 and 1911, an admittedly unscientiﬁc sample.

Honor disputes and everyday life

61

a libel suit by a worker against his master was neither legal nor
cognitively intelligible.77 It took the liberalization of libel law and the
democratization of German society in the nineteenth century to make
such lawsuits possible.
But, while workers now had the means and motivation to bring
honor suits against their employers, both the law – e.g. §193 which
protected certain harsh and insulting employer/master speech – and
the corporate notions of honor rife in the courts made it diﬃcult for
worker plaintiﬀs to succeed. When, in a rural area of Bavaria, a
master chastised his two female laborers for being late to work,
saying to them: “Aren’t you at all ashamed of yourselves? First
you go to confession and then you commit sacrilege [begeht einen
Gotessraub],” they sued for libel. The court, however, sided with the
employer, citing §193 and other sections of the law codes protecting
employer reprimands and requiring servant obedience.78 A maid
sued her mistress after the latter, responding to the maid’s attempt
to share her meal with a dog, contemptuously declared her a “dumb
broad.” The court found the utterance both insulting and done with
said intent, but it acquitted, citing the employer’s low “educational
level” (and, implicitly, the plaintiﬀ’s low social and educational
status) and arguing that an “invective does not in all circumstances
involve a punishable insult.”79

THE PROFESSIONS

Medicine, law, and other areas of knowledge were being radically
retooled in this era as they became modern professions. Fields of
knowledge were more strictly delineated and monopolized by specialists whose expertise rested on formalized university training and
degrees. State-sanctioned independent professional organizations, as
well as specialized journals and conferences, were founded for the
77

Crosby, “Claiming Honor,” p. 129 and passim.
Ferdinand Kurz (ed.), §193: Beleidigung und berechtigte Interessen (Nuremberg,
1909), p. 13.
79
Ibid., pp. 14–15.
78

62

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

exchange of ideas and the promotion and regulation of the professions. As in the modernization of the state bureaucracy, this “professionalization” took place by incorporating, not undermining, the
values of honor. The promotion of a profession’s status and its
monopolistic claims of expertise, as the sociologists tell us, required
not only the regulation of academic qualiﬁcations of practitioners.80
It also required systems of internal policing by professional associations of its membership to ensure adherence to appropriate standards
of conduct. In imperial Germany, this self-policing was accomplished
largely within the language and practices of honor. The result was
that the professions were at once modernizing and functioning as
classic Weberian corporate status groups.
The regulations and disciplinary courts set up by the professions,
which were partially modeled upon the earlier military courts,81
aimed above all at protecting the corporate honor of the group.
The bylaws of Germany’s ﬁrst professional writers’ organization,
the Leipziger Literaturverein, founded in 1842, stated the goal of “a
collective observation, investigation, consultation, and resolution
with respect to all circumstances relating to honor and the interests
of the literary class.”82 A similar bylaw decades later in the Verband
Deutscher Journalisten- und Schriftstellervereine (VDJS), founded
in 1895, as an umbrella organization of nineteen writers’ associations,
placed the protection of journalist and writer “professional honor and
general professional questions” third in its declared goals, after
copyright law (number 1) and press rights (2).83
Disciplinary courts established for lawyers in 1878, which spread
later to doctors and other professions, were called literally “honor
80

For the medicial profession, see, e.g., Eliot Freidson, Profession of Medicine: A
Study of the Sociology of Applied Knowledge (New York, 1970); Jeﬀrey Lionel
Berlant, Profession and Monopoly (Berkeley, 1975). For an historical study of the
German medical profession that uses the professionalization model, see Claudia
Huerkamp, Der Aufstieg der Aerzte im 19. Jahrhundert (Göttingen, 1985).
81
Erik Nils Voigt, Die Gesetzgebungsgeschichte der militärischen Ehrenstrafen und der
Oﬃzierehrengerichtsbarkeit im preussischen und deutschen Heer von 1806 bis 1918
(Frankfurt, 2004).
82
Friedhelm Kron, Schriftsteller und Schriftstellerverbände (Stuttgart, 1976), p. 32.
83
Ibid., p. 38.

Honor disputes and everyday life

63

courts” (Ehrengerichten).84 These courts were not holdovers from the
past; they were direct products of the professionalization process.
Their self-regulating functions were an essential tool enabling the
professions to assert autonomy from the state (before 1869, for
example, doctors were little more than civil servants),85 the status
of the profession, and the trust of the public. Enforcing honor codes
was a key aspect of what these courts did.
It involved policing of member behavior in ways that dissolved the
boundaries of professional and private life. The responsibility of each
VDJS member to uphold an honorable reputation was a prerequisite
of membership. “Loss of civil rights [Ehrenrechte],” the result of a
criminal conviction, or engaging in “insulting” (ehrenrührig) behavior was cause for expulsion from the Deutscher SchriftstellerVerband.86 Attorney honor courts had the right to discipline both
their members’ professional behavior and their actions as private
citizens. Doctors in Prussia, by contrast, fearing “political control,”
managed to insert a clause that excluded from the disciplinary purview of their honor courts members’ “political, scientiﬁc, and religious views.”87 But much of members’ private lives did remain subject
to disciplinary action, given that, according to professional regulations, every member was required to “show himself worthy of the
respect that his profession demanded, in his conduct both during and
outside medical practice.”88
84

Andreas-Holger Maehle, “Professional Ethics and Discipline: The Prussian
Medical Courts of Honour, 1899–1920,” Medizinhistorisches Journal 34 (1999), 314
ﬀ. The Rechtsanwaltsordnung empowered panels of judges and lawyers with the
right to reprimand and even expel members for infractions, and established an
appeals court (Ehrengerichtshof) in Leipzig at Germany’s Supreme Court.
Likewise, medical honor courts at the state level, many modeled after the
Rechtsanwaltsordnung, were forming in the latter part of the century: e.g.,
Braunschweig in 1865; Baden, 1883; Bavaria 1895; Prussia, 1899 (idem, p. 321).
Both Maehle and Barbara Rabi, Aerztliche Ethik – Eine Frage der Ehre? (Frankfurt,
2002), make similar arguments about the role of honor in the professionalization of
German medicine.
85
Maehle, “Professional Ethics,” p. 313.
86
Karl Thiess, Der Verband deutscher Journalisten- und Schriftstellervereine und die
Beschlüsse seiner Delegiertentage, 1895 bis 1904 (Hamburg, 1905).
87
Ibid., p. 319. 88 Ibid., p. 320.

64

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

The regulation of both professional and personal conduct was
meant to enforce a corporate “lifestyle” in the Weberian sense of the
term. Its behavioral code and ethics, those of the bourgeois gentleman, were not unique to Germany. Nye discusses in his study the
honorable characteristics of nineteenth-century French physicians:
courtesy, generosity, honesty, loyalty, discretion, disinterestedness,
“chivalrous sentiment” – values, he argues, that were an adopted mix
of “aristocratic chivalry” and traditions and practices from the bourgeois social “circle.”89 Something very similar was occurring in
Germany, where bourgeois honor norms, having assimilated elements of both aristocratic court culture and guild traditions, undergirded professional identity. Accordingly, the model of gentlemanly
professional behavior involved intense eﬀorts to distance the professions from anything smacking of business and money-making.90 In
Prussia, the regulations and honor-court rulings of physicians after
1899 (when the courts were established) enforced strong taboos
against doctors advertising their practices or engaging in any behavior that hinted of the pollution of capitalist enterprise. Acting like a
“businessman,” as one verdict scoﬀed in announcing the punishment
of a doctor who had too liberally distributed his calling card to
potential patients, was “unworthy of the medical profession.”91
Notwithstanding, corporate honor was deeply linked to material
interests. No better example of the intertwining of the two is that of
the “border disputes” between university-trained physicians and
advocates of natural healing (Naturheilkunde), a popular alternative
medicine movement. Here, oﬀended honor and the Privatklage were
tools doctors transparently employed to police the borders of their
profession against outsiders and “quacks.” At a meeting of Berlin’s
Magnetism Society, to give one instance, Reinhold Gerling, a
89

Robert Nye, “Honor Codes and Medical Ethics in Modern France,” Bulletin of the
History of Medicine 69 (1995), 92, 108, and 99ﬀ.
90
More broadly, on the “discomfort with the ﬁnancial sphere in German political
culture” (p. 186), see E. J. Carter, “Breaking the Bank: Gambling Casinos, Finance
Capitalism, and German Uniﬁcation,” Central European History 39 (2006), 185–213.
91
October 12, 1903 decision. Entscheidungen des preussischen Ehrengerichtshofes für
Aerzte, 1 (Berlin, 1908), p. 4.

Honor disputes and everyday life

65

natural-healing leader, gave a speech in which he attacked academic
physicians with: “the majority of doctors is so gone to the dogs …
that it no longer has any morals,” and “I have come to know them,
the doctors, and for my part I believe the majority of them capable of
every crime, every perjury, every misdeed.” Several of those physicians happened to be in the audience that night, and one sued for
insult. The court agreed with him, ﬁnding a clear instance of words
uttered by Gerling that were “inconsistent [unvereinbar] with the
professional honor” of the physicians present that evening, and a
collective insult against all doctors – a “disrespect of the personality
of the majority of physicians.” It declared Gerling guilty, sentencing
him to one month in jail.92
Professional honor concerns, in turn, could translate into collective political actions. Journalists, for example, fought restrictive press
laws in the name of free speech and civil rights while closely attending to the defense of their corporate honor. One sees this in their
reaction at the turn of the century to recent court rulings in the
Austrian Empire against the press’s ability to ﬁle defamation lawsuits,
a legal situation, as the Berlin Delegiertentag of 1902 resolved, that
left the Austrian press vulnerable to “frivolous defamation lawsuits”
and unable to protect its reputation and honor (with implications as
well for non-Austrian, German-language authors publishing in the
Empire):
The honor of the press is the honor of all those involved in the determination
and maintenance of trends [Tendenz] and spirit … Insults, libels, inciting
contempt of the press strikes at its spiritual creators, and the judicial system
must enable them to protect themselves.93

92

1903 court verdict of Berlin’s Strafkammer, Landgericht I. GStPK, Rep. 85a, no.
58201. To be sure, as the court acknowledged, the physician plaintiﬀ and prosecution witnesses had intentionally attended the meeting to collect incriminating
material against their natural-healing enemies. But, it argued, the meeting had been
advertised as free and open to the public, hence any legally-deﬁned insulting
statements made therein were actionable as public libel.
93
Thiess, Verband deutscher Journalisten- und Schriftstellervereine, p. 36.

66

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany
GENDER

While most public and especially overtly political libel trials were
about male honor, a substantial portion of honor litigants were
women. In the Reich statistics, which lumped together all forms of
defamation actions, women generally appear as one-third of convicted defendants.94 If one were able to break down by gender the
ﬁgures for only simple insult tried as Privatklage, the ratio of women
to men would probably be higher. One contemporary estimated that
at least two-thirds of honor cases involved women.95
The norms of male and female honor diﬀered substantially, and
these manifested themselves in important ways in honor disputes.
Notions of male and female honor were largely determined by the
diﬀerent social roles ascribed to the sexes, namely, that of male breadwinner in the public sphere and female caregiver in the private sphere of
the home. Thus, as one legal expert put it, men’s honor related to their
orientation toward the “outside world” of work and public life, making
of paramount importance the characteristics of “courage” and “reliability.” To be sure, these qualities diﬀered by class and profession: a
judge’s honor, for example, meant that he displayed reliability in his
adherence to the law and his independence from outside inﬂuences; a
merchant’s reliability manifested itself in his honest and fair business
relations. By contrast, women’s honor consisted of their “purity in an
interior life” – their kindheartedness and charity.96 Above all, a woman’s honor was composed of her sexual chastity and modesty.
94

In 1899, for example, the ratio of women and men convicted of Beleidigung was
36:100: Aschaﬀenburg, Das Verbrechen und seine Bekämpfung (Heidelberg, 1903),
p. 128. In 1909, the ﬁgure was 16,403 women to 43,270 men: Statistisches Jahrbuch
für das deutsche Reich (Berlin, 1911), p. 341.
95
Rudolf Beinert, Die Ausdehnung der Privatklage (Halle, 1906), p. 35, fn. 1, citing
Kroeneker. The high number of female litigants continued for decades into the
post-WWII era. Koewius’s study of Bielefeld-area Privatklagen in the late 1960s
gives the ﬁgure of 43.8% female to 56.2% male litigants: Die Rechtswirklichkeit der
Privatklage (Berlin, 1974), p. 84.
96
Liepmann, “Die Beleidigung,” in Mittermaier et al. (eds.), Vergleichende Darstellung
des deutschen und ausländischen Strafrechts: Besonderer Teil vol. 4 (Berlin, 1906), p. 13.
For a recent historical study of the topic, see Frevert, “Ehre – männlich/weiblich.”

Honor disputes and everyday life

67

Honor, deﬁned as chastity, was a double-edged sword for women.
On the one hand, it presupposed and helped maintain the subordination of women in the family. For centuries, patriarchy had been
upheld through the control of women’s sexuality, both for practical
purposes related to the transmission of inherited property through
the male line, and for ideological reasons (religion, science) related to
notions of woman’s weakness and her need of male protection. On
the other hand, chastity was an exalted state, equated in the Christian
tradition with purity, a notion, by the nineteenth century, still very
much alive but secularized and inscribed in bourgeois culture. One
spoke of women’s spirituality, morality, and their special capacity for
love and nurturance. Women in turn seized on these female virtues to
claim social roles outside the home – in social welfare and reform
movements – and, by the late nineteenth century, to demand equal or
special rights in education, work, the family, and the political
sphere.97
Both aspects of the chastity issue can be seen in the Kaiserreich’s
honor laws and litigation. On the one hand, legally women were
second-class citizens. Married women were the legal dependants of
their husbands (and before this, of their fathers). This gave husbands
rights over their wives in many areas of life, including that of bringing
lawsuits.98 Technically, when a married woman ﬁled a Privatklage, the
person who controlled events and pursued the case was her legal
guardian, the husband. She could testify in court but she was not
formally the “plaintiﬀ”; this designation belonged to her husband.
And his control over the litigation was such that §195 of the StGB
gave him the right to ﬁle a defamation suit in her (or his children’s)
name. There were no provisions denying him this right even when the
wife was ignorant of the lawsuit or actively opposed it. Even after a
divorce, the husband could pursue an honor lawsuit in his wife’s name if
it had been ﬁled before the breakup. Thus, it was possible to imagine, as
Vorwärts did, the bizarre situation where a husband ﬁles suit against a
man for defaming his wife, subsequently the couple divorces and the
97
98

For a general overview, see Ute Frevert, Women in German History (New York, 1993).
On libel litigation, the key section of the Criminal Code was §195.

68

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

ex-wife marries the defendant in her husband’s original honor suit.
“The ex-husband then peacefully continues his suit ‘for his wife’ against
her second husband.”99 Husbands had claims of their own to their
wives’ honor, and thus it was still possible in the early twentieth century
for a cuckolded husband to bring a criminal libel suit against his wife’s
lover and have the man imprisoned. This happened in a 1911 Berlin
court, which sentenced the male lover to one month’s incarceration,
because the love aﬀair defamed the husband. Yet, by this time, such
judgments were controversial indeed. The Berliner Tageblatt called it a
reactionary throwback to “feudal” relations and “oriental” patriarchy,
where the “wife is the property of the man.”100
Yet, the norm of female chastity could also be empowering.
Interestingly enough, anecdotal evidence suggests that women pursued sexual harassment oﬀenses through libel actions. When her
laundryman made advances to a young pregnant wife of a businessman (Kaufmann), she pushed him away, called out for help, and later,
in consultation with her husband, ﬁled a defamation lawsuit, the
court meting out the very harsh sentence of two months’ jail time
because the victim was a “respectable” woman.101 The couple’s
response – not charging the perpetrator with sexual harassment,
which did not exist, or assault, but with defamation – ﬂowed naturally from the historically speciﬁc concept of female sexual honor,
i.e. that chastity was the essence of her honor, which made sexual
violations a form of defamation to be prosecuted under the Empire’s
defamation statutes. This was empowering, in its own way. When, in
1911, a Hanover factory owner sexually molested his family servant,
she sued for defamation and won (he received a ﬁne of 1500m), a suit
that inverted the prevailing power dynamics of both gender and
class.102
99

“Aus der Frauenbewegung,” Vorwärts, April 16, 1911.
“Gattenbeleidigung,” Berliner Tageblatt, March 9, 1911.
101
“Beleidigung einer Kundin,” Vorwärts, March 18, 1911.
102
“Beleidigung eines Dienstmädchens,” Vorwärts, February 22, 1911. Granted, this
was an unusual case. As the article said, if only “in all of Germany, defamations of
servants by their employers would be pursued in similar manner, that would soon
have an educational eﬀect on employers.”
100

Honor disputes and everyday life

69

One sexually abused woman, Elise Hessels, went on to publish a
pamphlet about her nightmarish quest for justice after Berlin’s police
chief, she alleged, sexually assaulted her and then tried to silence her
with a defamation suit.103 Her pamphlet is eloquent testimony to the
way honor ideas mediated her experience and actions. In 1870/71,
Hessels, a middle-class woman from a Westphalian civil servant
home, was working in Paris as a governess for an aristocratic family
when the Franco-Prussian war forced her ﬂight. Back in Germany,
she sought help for her dire economic circumstances from the
“Comité zum Schutze der aus Paris Vertriebenen,” whose chairman
was Police President (later Regierungspräsident) von Wurmb.
According to Hessels, at their meeting in his oﬃce, he ﬁrst tried to
seduce her and, when she rejected him, tried to rape her – unsuccessfully because of her chastity belt. The assault was only the beginning
of her problems. A determined ﬁghter,104 she denounced Wurmb to
the state prosecutor’s oﬃce, and, when it refused to press charges,
appealed to the Prussian Landtag. But instead of seeing her perpetrator punished, the opposite occurred: to shut her up, Wurmb ﬁled
charges of “false accusation” and “calumny.” She was tried and
convicted. Hessels, the victim, thus found herself incarcerated in
prison while her perpetrator – a sexual predator responsible, if the
testimony cited in her pamphlet was true, for numerous rapes – stood
vindicated. At this point, Hessels became a driven women, waging a
decade-long public campaign for her own justice and for legal reform
in general, ﬁling court motions, appealing to the authorities, sending
petitions to parliamentary bodies (the Prussian Landtag and the
Reichstag), and facing stonewalling, rejection, humiliation, and a
court diagnosis of mental unﬁtness.
What drove this astounding woman were her religious faith, her
sense of justice,105 and her feelings about female honor and dignity. It is
the close links between the latter two that are most striking. Rape is both
103

Elise Hessels, Frauenloos in Preussen.
She also, to use psychological parlance, internalized the experience, falling ill and
taking to bed for a long time.
105
The front page of Frauenloos declared “Gott und mein Recht.”
104

70

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

a physical event and, as scholars have shown, a historically contingent
experience, shaped (in both victims and perpetrators) by the surrounding society and culture.106 In Elise Hessels’ case – a pious, respectable
woman of the nineteenth-century bourgeoisie – rape meant, above all,
dishonor, an existential and social violation as much as a physical one.
The value she placed on female honor (as sexual chastity) profoundly
colored both her experience (she literally called the attack an attempt at
“dishonoring” her [entehren])107 and her subsequent actions. It drove
her anger and “outrage,” just as it made her do things that seem very
strange today, like returning to the scene of the crime (Wurmb’s oﬃce)
to demand an apology from her would-be rapist (!), believing that “a
man of honor and feeling” would do so if confronted with “the results
of his indecent behavior [unziemendes Betragen].”108 (Instead, he allegedly assaulted her again.) Her later petition to the parliamentary
authorities, she said, was not about revenge; it was about protecting
other “honorable ladies from insults and abuse.”109
In other cases, the legal defense of female honor merged with and
reinforced repressive moral purity campaigns.110 The wife of a
Kaufmann, responding to an advertisement oﬀering part-time work
for young women, received in the mail an explanation from her
would-be employer, a small business owner manufacturing women’s
underwear (“hygenic articles”), that, because he was unmarried, he
needed to hire a lady to model articles of clothing, that the work was
for women under thirty who were “not prudes,” that ﬁttings would
take place either in his home or factory and would be paid tenfold
what other “light work” paid. The Kaufmann’s wife, oﬀended by the
letter’s “impudences,” denounced him, and since the case had
106

For a nuanced recent analysis of rape in Germany by Soviet soldiers during and
after World War Two, see Atina Grossmann, Jews, Germans, and Allies: Close
Encounters in Occupied Germany (Princeton, NJ, 2007).
107
She also wanted her readers to know that a medical doctor had examined her and
declared her “still in the possession of my female honor”: ibid., p. 44.
108
Ibid., p. 45. 109 Ibid., pp. 56–57.
110
On these campaigns, see, e.g. John Fout, “Sexual Politics in Wilhelmine
Germany: The Male Gender Crisis, Moral Purity, and Homophobia,” Journal of
the History of Sexuality 2/3 (1992), 388–421.

Honor disputes and everyday life

71

implications for public morality, it was tried as a state lawsuit. The
benighted businessman was convicted and ﬁned 30m.111
Women turned the idea of female honor to their advantage in court.112
Frau von Gerlach, the wife of the leader of the “Demokratische
Vereinigung,” did so when she was put on trial in 1911 for insulting a
police oﬃcial. The case stemmed from an angry confrontation on a
Berlin street after Gerlach, on leaving a political meeting with husband
and friends, was forcibly blocked from passing through a police street
barricade and, during the ensuing scuﬄe with a police lieutenant, let
forth with: “How can you be so shameless! You think you’re an oﬃcer?
This is impudence!” and, later, “Why do you involve yourself in such a
dirty trade? Don’t touch me, you make me dirty!”113 At her trial (for
insulting a civil servant, resistance, and gross misconduct), Frau Gerlach,
who made sure the court understood that she suﬀered from an ongoing
“medical condition,” played to perfection the outraged lady, declaring
that “Still to this day, I experience as the greatest disgrace [Schmach] of
my life that I was dragged about by policemen as if I were a drunkard.”
The court did convict her – there were simply too many witnesses
testifying to the truth of the police’s version of events – but reduced her
sentence (a ﬁne), taking into account her probable upset from the
“disgrace” and weighing this fact against the appalling nature of insults
against the police coming from an “educated woman.”
The historian Laura Gowing writes of a female culture of insult in
seventeenth-century London, where women, shut out of formal institutions and avenues of complaint, used instead a language and practice of
slander in daily conﬂicts.114 This was a language, moreover, that was
highly gendered, sexualizing abuse of women, but not of men, and doing
111

“Gerichts-Zeitung: Scheineinserate,” Vorwärts, 4. Beilage, March 12, 1911.
For a striking example of this in France, see Edward Berenson, The Trial of
Madame Caillaux (Berkeley, 1992).
113
“Polizeibeleidigung durch Frau v. Gerlach,” Vorwärts, February 18, 1911.
114
Laura Gowing, Domestic Dangers: Women, Words, and Sex in Early Modern
London (Oxford, 1996). Gowing’s work is among the best of a particularly rich
scholarship on late-medieval and early-modern gender, honor, and slander in
Europe and America. Other examples include Pieter Spierenburg (ed.), Men and
Violence: Gender, Honor, and Rituals in Early Modern Europe and America (1998);
Susanna Burghartz, Leib, Ehre, Gut: Delinquenz in Zürich Ende des 14. Jahrhunderts
112

72

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

so because the culture as a whole “perceived women’s virtue, honour,
and reputation through their sexuality, men’s through a much wider
range of values.”115 One senses a similar, sexualized rhetoric of abuse in
daily life among the small-town and city working-class and petit bourgeois women who made up the bulk of women’s honor suits in the
Kaiserreich. Epithets like “whore” were perhaps just as common in turnof-the century Germany as they were in early-modern London or
Saxony. Yet, most of their suits probably had little or nothing to do
with the defense of sexual honor per se.116 The typical trigger of such
lawsuits was gossip or direct slander in the female spaces and relations of
daily life: among neighbors and housemates, in the worker barracks of
factory towns, at stores, and on the streets. Whereas bourgeois and
upper-class women were more sheltered in the home and subject to
norms of propriety that frowned upon verbal aggression (and the airing
of female private matters in the courts), working-class women yelled,
gossiped, reviled, and sued their opponents over the disputes of daily life.
This pattern of female litigiousness in Germany goes back at least to the
seventeenth century, when, as Eileen Crosby’s study of Saxon defamation lawsuits shows, large numbers of women “from every level of the
social hierarchy”117 who brought honor suits, did so “independently of
male claims,”118 and for a range of reasons not conﬁned to sexual matters.
Even sexual epithets – “whore” being perhaps the most typical slander
employed against and by working-class women – did not necessarily
refer to sexual conduct. Rather, such words need to be seen as “provocative verbal shorthand for dishonorable behavior” in women.119
(Zurich, 1990); Lyndal Roper, “Will and Honor: Sex, Words, and Power in
Augsburg Criminal Trials,” in idem (ed.), Oedipus and the Devil: Witchcraft,
Sexuality, and Religion in Early Modern Europe (London and New York, 1994),
pp. 53–78; Rainer Walz, “Schimpfende Weiber: Frauen in lippischen
Beleidigungsprozessen des 17. Jahrhunderts,” in Heide Wunder and Christina
Vanja (eds.), Weiber, Menscher, Frauenzimmer: Frauen in der ländlichen
Gesellschaft, 1500–1800 (Göttingen, 1996).
115
Gowing, Domestic Dangers, p. 2.
116
This I base on anecdotal evidence from surviving court records, Schiedsmann
books, and the statements of judges with experience adjudicating Privatklagen.
117
Crosby, “Claiming Honor,” p. 132. 118 Ibid., p. 130.
119
Ibid., p. 131. Indeed, Gowing, Domestic Dangers, also shows that “whore” and other
sexual expletives had a range of meanings and functions beyond the strictly sexual.

Honor disputes and everyday life

73

Men could be the plaintiﬀs in insult suits against women. Like the
suit against Frau Schäfer, the wife of a smallholding peasant, these
suits typically stemmed from the gossip of a woman. Schäfer told a
joiner’s wife that she should not let her son go to the farmer Bauer’s
house because bad things happened there: a local boy (Monz), she
knew, engaged in lecherous behavior there with the wife and a maid;
he also did it with his own sister. The boy’s father (unsuccessfully)
ﬁled suit.120 Similarly, the wife of a railway worker was sued by a
master shoemaker for gossiping at a store about his alleged adultery.
She was convicted and ﬁned 10m.121 In a further case, a schoolteacher
ﬁled suit against a grandmother, after being insulted by her critical
remarks about his teaching methods.122 Even some “respectable”
educated women were hauled to court to answer for their foul
mouths. The bookkeeper Martha Blume was tried and convicted
for her behavior in an angry exchange with a male stranger on a
Berlin streetcar. While she was disembarking at Friedrichstrasse, the
long pins in her hat accidentally brushed against the face of one Karl
Ladewig, master butcher. He cursed her, she called him an “old fart”
(Griesekel). He sued and won.123 Among the bourgeoisie, one also
ﬁnds women in the courts implicitly defending a non-sexual view of
their honor. In one case that reached the Reichsgericht, a wife sued
her own husband for libel after he placed ads in the local (Alsace)
newspapers warning shopowners that he would no longer cover her
debts.124 The wife’s suit (a civil case brought under §823 of the BGB)
demanded a public retraction of the ads.125

120

Kurz, §193, p. 5
Court judgment of February 18, 1914. Rep. 5E, Nr. 257, Brandenburgisches
Landeshauptarchiv (BLA), pp. 84–86.
122
At a public meeting, she criticized the way the teacher called her grandchildren and
their classmates by “ugly animal names.” “Wegen Lehrerbeleidigung,” Vorwärts,
September 12, 1902. She was convicted and ﬁned 30m.
123
She was ﬁned the enormous sum, given the charge, of 75m. “Die langen
Hutnadeln,” Vorwärts, February 18, 1911.
124
Richard Schmidt, Der Anspruch auf Widerruf einer Beleidigung (Göttingen, 1913).
125
The court rejected her argument.
121

74

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany
POLITICS

Minor business usually topped the day’s agenda at the Reichstag, and
Wednesday, March 31, 1909 was no diﬀerent. Before the budget
debate resumed from the previous session, members were asked to
consider the request of two deputies, Mugdan and Kopsch, who were
in the middle of a Privatklage with the writer Franz Mehring (the latter,
having been sued by them because of one of his articles, was now
countersuing). Mugdan and Kopsch wanted permission – a requirement for deputies under the imperial constitution (Reichsverfassung) –
to pursue their countersuit, a request that was dispatched with a quick,
assenting vote.126 This was the kind of moment – the pausing for
consideration of a libel lawsuit – that typically punctuated parliamentary
sessions of the era because so many deputies were involved in these suits.
Just how common such litigation was among Germany’s legislators is
suggested by the fact that political careers without libel actions, like those
of Eugen Richter and August Bebel,127 were considered anomalous
curiosities.
Libel lawsuits pervaded Germany’s politics to such a degree that it
may be time to place the courtroom alongside the parliament, the
political meeting, the street demonstration, and the press, as a site of
political action. It was not only the incessant way the government
used defamation law to prosecute campaigns against its political
opponents (chapter 3). The citizenry and its politicians were perpetually prone to ﬁghting out political diﬀerences around symbolic
contests over honor, battles that frequently ended in the courtroom.
And they happened everywhere – in elections, the legislatures,
around a wide spectrum of issues from religious to ethnic to labor
politics (the latter discussed above). It is not merely the ubiquity of
these lawsuits that make them so interesting. It is also that they
suggest a method of doing politics, one cleverly adapted to the legal,
political, and cultural environment of the Kaiserreich. This section
126

Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des deutschen Reichstags [SBR]
vol. 236 (Berlin, 1909), p. 7884.
127
They were each known for never having ﬁled a defamation suit, a well-known fact
remarked upon in “Die Beleidgungsklage,” Der Tag, February 19, 1914.

Honor disputes and everyday life

75

begins with a survey of the general ways that honor and libel
litigation interacted with politics; it ends with a closer look at the
libel lawsuit as a mode of politics.
Electoral politics was to an extraordinary degree conducted
through the courts in the Kaiserreich. Political animosities played
out as personal invective that ended in honor scandals and libel suits.
Antisemitic writers and politicians were particularly prone to such
lawsuits (see also chapter 5). In 1911 alone, the antisemite Wilhelm
Bruhn was engaged simultaneously in no less than three Privatklagen
with newspapers he accused of attacking his moral character.128
Electoral campaigns in general were rife with libel lawsuits. One
example taken from the Kaiserreich’s religious politics is the bitter
1882 campaign between Protestant National Liberals and the
Catholic Center party for the Prussian Diet’s seat in Krefeld.
Deputy Seyﬀardt, a liberal Kulturkämpfer and factory owner, had
recently lost his seat to a Center politician, and Krefeld’s liberals
badly wanted it back. To this end, Seyﬀardt gave a rousing
kulturkämpferisch speech against the Catholics, which was repaid in
kind a couple of days later when, at a Catholic meeting, two Center
activists (Titz and Urfey) called Seyﬀardt a “scoundrel” (Bubenstück)
and declared that “it is a lesser sin to spit in one’s mother’s face than
to vote for Herr Seyﬀardt.” Liberals responded with, according to
one Catholic account, a campaign of “defamation” against Catholics
in the local National Liberal newspaper. The conﬂict then moved
into the courts, Titz ﬁling a defamation Privatklage against the
newspaper and the National Liberal electoral committee, and
Seyﬀardt countering with a suit against Titz and Urfey for “public
persecution.”129
Honor conﬂicts both reﬂected and exasperated conﬂicts between the
parties. This was the case, for example, in Mecklenburg in 1914.
Conservative party secretary Jordan published a pamphlet lampooning
the progressive Reichstag deputy Hugo Wendorﬀ, who had won his
seat in 1912. Immediately afterwards, Jordan published a pamphlet,
128
129

“Einige Bruhn-Prozesse,” Vorwärts, April 7, 1911.
N.a., Process gegen die Herren Caplan Titz und Dr. Urfey (Crefeld, 1883).

76

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

“Die Ursachen der Teuerung,” in which he attacked Wendorﬀ for
acting not out of conviction but in the interests of speculators and big
business to the ruin of the local agricultural economy. Wendorﬀ sued
for defamation. The district attorney initially rejected the case, arguing
that the comment constituted legitimate political speech and attacked
Wendorﬀ not personally but as representative of a political party. It
took the intervention of the state attorney’s boss, the Oberstaatsanwalt,
for the case to be prosecuted. Jordan was convicted, ﬁned 500m and
ordered to cease publication and distribution of his pamphlet. He
ignored this order, continuing to distribute it in Wendorﬀ’s voting
district, with the state attorney (who had initially refused to prosecute
Jordan) suspiciously unwilling for months to intervene.
The lawsuit, in turn, turned into a wider ranging debate about the
nature of politics and the legal system. The conservative
Mecklenburger Warte weighed in with the charge that the state had
no business prosecuting the case because the insult of Wendorﬀ did
not rise to the level of “public interest” (the criterion for state
defamation prosecutions). Only “men and circles of people” who
act in the “spirit of the organic forward development of state life”
deserved such treatment, not politicians like Wendorﬀ who ally
themselves with the Social Democrats. The state’s motives in prosecuting the case, the article implied, were political, since the prosecutor’s oﬃce is inherently a “political organ.” The left-liberal Halle
paper Saale-Zeitung countered with a critique that analyzed the conservative position in terms of a broader troubling trend in German
conservatism: its rejection of a state based on the rule of law
(Rechtsstaat). The district attorney, it argued, is not a “political
authority”; it is charged with applying the law equally, irrespective
of the person’s position or politics. The conservative position on
Jordan–Wendorﬀ, however, is typical. For conservatives, “whoever
is conservative has the right to the full protection of the authorities,
liberal men, to the contrary, are outlawed. That is nothing but the
direct negation of the Rechtsstaat,” and a disturbing development in an
increasingly “demagogic” party.130
130

“Staatsanwalt und konservativer Parteisekretär,” Saale-Zeitung, March 6, 1914.

Honor disputes and everyday life

77

Honor disputes in the parliaments were likewise stand-ins for
deeper political rifts and partisan passions. In 1908, such a conﬂict
erupted in the Prussian Landtag when the Conservative deputy and
reserve oﬃcer Hahn called the Progressive Party a patsy of “stockmarket” men “on the Riviera.” The statement was galling because it
lumped the Progressives together with the rich at a time when that
party was gearing up for an election on a platform of democratizing
the Prussian franchise. But it was also distressing (and eﬀective)
because of the implicit xenophobia, antisemitism, and social snobbery
of its imagery, the stock market, Riviera men standing in for a
Jewish, French-loving nouveau riche. Angered, the Progressive
deputy and Jew Goldschmidt called out: “that is a piece of impudence! [Frechheit],” choosing a phrase that, apparently, was beyond
the pale of appropriate parliamentary speech. Conservatives immediately demanded an apology and retraction, but Goldschmidt refused,
saying he would take back his comment only if Hahn retracted his
own derogatory comment about the Progressives.131 The argument
now moved into the press, where commentary on both sides revealed
its underlying class politics. The Progressive Freisinnige Zeitung
related deputy Hahn’s touchiness, with his reserve oﬃcer status and
its accompanying military dueling ethos, accusing him of “ﬂaunting
his rank as ﬁrst lieutenant of the reserves,” and bemoaning how, as a
result, parliamentary “diﬀerences that arise in debate are settled with
the sabre or the whip.”132 The Conservative Ostpreussische Zeitung
responded with a lecture on social etiquette, mocking Goldschmidt’s
lack of “understanding … for the essence of honor aﬀronts.” Any
person of the right social class, it said in so many words, knows that a
personal insult [Goldschmidt’s “Frechheit”] that is not a critique of a
political party [Hahn’s stock-market Progressives] is defamatory
and requires satisfaction. Furthermore, Hahn responded as he did,
not because he was an oﬃcer (in fact Hahn was against dueling),
but because anyone in “respectable society” (gute Gesellschaft) would
do so.133
131
132

“Besseren Schutz der Ehre!” Ostpreussische Zeitung, March 19, 1908.
Quoted ibid. 133 Ibid.

78

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

Honor could be a cudgel used against social inferiors (e.g. upstart
Jews like Goldschmidt) and the politically weaker (see chapter 3), but
it could also function in the reverse way, directed from below at the
powerful. One sees this in a lawsuit touching on the “Polish question” – clashes over Prussia’s Germanization of its eastern provinces
and its discriminatory policies against the Polish inhabitants. In 1904,
one element of German-Polish tension was the attempt by some
Polish-speaking doctors to have their German counterparts excluded
from Posen’s medical board. Prussia’s Interior Minister, von
Hammerstein, responded in a speech before the Prussian Landtag
that ended with: “Gentlemen! I believe the word cannot be said
enough: it is an impudence [Unverschämtheit] of Polish physicians to
go to the medical board with such a proposal.”134 One of those
(unnamed) Polish doctors, a Dr. Jerzykowski, promptly sued the
minister for defamation. The lawsuit focused on a seeming triviality:
the dishonoring slur “impudence.” But behind the rhetoric of honor
and the technicalities of the legal proceeding lay the bitter politics of
German-Polish relations. Von Hammerstein’s remark had come in
defense of a bill before the House to extend German settlements
in the east. The bill, strenuously opposed by Polish and Center
representatives, was excoriated by representative Roeren for “its
unbelievable harshness” and discriminatory policies that would alienate and economically devastate the Polish population.135 It was at
this point that von Hammerstein had risen to defend Germanhood
against the Poles. Jerzykowski did, however, lose the case. Two
courts ruled that, while “impudence” was indeed seriously insulting,
the minister’s statement, made in an oﬃcial capacity and in defense of
a government policy, came under §193 protection. It was, in other
words, legitimate dishonoring speech.
The politicized libel lawsuit was not merely a question of honorobsessed men acting out their emotions in politics by personalizing
134

My emphasis. The statement was reproduced in a subsequent legal proceeding.
I.HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 139, GStPK pp. 152–53.
135
The quote and paraphrase of Roeren is taken from the appellate court judgment.
Ibid., pp. 153ﬀ.

Honor disputes and everyday life

79

their diﬀerences. The libel lawsuit was a method of doing politics –
calculated, adaptive, and highly eﬀective. It was a method that used
the lawsuit as a form of political discourse to pursue goals we
associate with politics: exposing opponents and public wrongdoing,
educating the public, advocating for a cause. Its mechanics involved
intentionally provoking an opponent to bring a libel lawsuit against
oneself, thus creating a forum at trial to publicize and elaborate on
one’s agenda. The original libel thereby functioned as a pretext for a
defense strategy of introducing into the court record with the
Wahrheitsbeweis device reams of testimony and evidence about
one’s broader cause, which in turn, was aimed at catapulting it into
the press and public debate.
A perfect example of this method comes from one of the higherproﬁle libel trials of the Kaiserreich: the Bochumer Steuerprozess, a
legal proceeding in 1890/91 that rocked the public with its implications of large-scale public graft and its overtones of religious and
class politics.136 The main defendant, Johannes Fusangel, a Catholic
newsman and editor of the Westfälische Volkszeitung, was no stranger
to the political libel; since the Kulturkampf battles of the 1870s, he
had twenty libel convictions and at least eleven months in jail under
his belt. But “Bochum” was his masterpiece. In an unrelenting series
of exposés written by his reporter co-defendant in 1890, the
Westfälische Volkszeitung charged that, for religiously and politically
partisan reasons, members of Bochum’s tax commission knowingly
and intentionally undervalued the taxes of their Protestant and
National Liberal brethren among the city’s elite. This was muckraking
journalism and more, in the German context, since Fusangel knew very
well that he was heading straight to court. At a certain point, in fact,
exposing wrongdoing and goading the wrongdoers into a libel lawsuit
probably merged in his intentions. And indeed, after six months, the
result was a mammoth lawsuit ﬁled by about thirty plaintiﬀs from
Bochum’s Protestant power elite: members of the tax commission,
magistrates, mayors, councilmen, a legislator, an industrialist, an
136

I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 49799, GStPK, contains the court judgment and other
documents, including press articles, on the case.

80

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

engineer. Surely, these men did so with reluctance – suggested, among
other things, by how long they waited to sue – dreading that a trial,
while required for their honor, would simply give their Catholic
enemies greater ammunition and a public platform to air their charges.
This was exactly what happened: at trial, Fusangel invoked his right to
present evidence supporting the truth of his libels (the Wahrheitsbeweis)
with devastating eﬀect on both plaintiﬀs and defense witnesses forced
to testify. In the outraged description of the National Liberal Kölnische
Zeitung,
More than 150 citizens of the city, including a number of the most highly
regarded men who held all manner of honorable positions, in wartime as
oﬃcers and soldiers, in peacetime as civil servants and honorary oﬃcials … a
court hearing in which they were forced without mercy not only to publicly
reveal the most intimate matters regarding their ﬁnances and family aﬀairs, but
also stand by and watch while a personality like the defendant brings the
credibility of innocent witnesses into question through all kinds of outrageous
methods of interrogation evidence motions – this is intolerable!137

Fusangel was eventually convicted and sentenced to one month in
jail, but not before inﬂicting serious damage on his opponents. His
strategy, which he shared with perhaps thousands of other libel
defendants in the Kaiserreich, was perfectly calibrated to the conditions of culture, law, and politics prevailing in Germany, ones that
set the parameters of speech, both limiting and channeling it into the
courts. It assumed and used the collective knowledge that individuals
with wounded reputations respond with lawsuits, and it worked a
system stacked against eﬀective challenges to power elites by turning
legal limitations on speech (via defamation law) against those elites in
the courtroom. Massive censorship of the press and of disrespectful
attitudes toward the state, to which the following chapter turns, was a
critical context for this kind of political action and, more generally,
for the history of honor and libel in the Kaiserreich.
137

“Ein Rückblick auf den Bochumer Steuerprocess,” Kölnische Zeitung, June 20,
1891.

CHAPTER 3

The state

“Whether he is in a private oﬃce or a public bureau, the modern
oﬃcial always strives and usually enjoys a distinct social esteem as
compared with the governed. His social position is guaranteed by
the prescriptive rules of rank order and, for the political oﬃcial, by
special deﬁnitions of the criminal code against ‘insults of oﬃcials’ and
‘contempt’ of state and church authorities.”1

That censorship in the Kaiserreich operated through defamation law
is vaguely known but massively underappreciated and underresearched.2 Honor and its defense through libel actions were fundamental to state power. This was true at every level, from the Kaiser,
who was not above suing an erstwhile ﬂower girl and “prostitute,”3
down to the lowest village clerk and nightwatchman. The state
1

My emphasis. Max Weber, from Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, in Gerth and Mills
(eds.), From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology (New York, 1981), p. 199.
2
One typical and detailed example of the literature: Wolfram Siemann, “Verbote,
Normierungen und Normierungsversuche,” in Georg Jäger (ed.), Geschichte des
deutschen Buchhandels im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert: Bd. I Das Kaiserreich (Frankfurt
am Main, 2001), p. 95 and passim, which examines censorship in terms of the direct
banning of certain printed material and oﬀers only a passing mention of libel actions.
Irene Fischer-Frauendienst, Bismarcks Pressepolitik (Münster, 1963), p. 17, mentions
Bismarck’s frequent use of the libel lawsuit against opponents, whose heyday, she
argues, began in 1874 against Catholics during the Kulturkampf, and subsequently
during the persecution of Socialists (Sozialistenverfolgung). Kurt Koszyk, Deutsche
Presse im 19. Jahrhundert: Geschichte der deutschen Presse Teil II (Berlin, 1966),
pp. 231–32. For an overview of the censorship of literary works, see Dieter Breuer,
Geschichte der literarischen Zensur in Deutschland (Heidelberg, 1982); on the laws, see
Konrad Dussel, Deutsche Tagespresse im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert (Münster, 2004),
pp. 51ﬀ. and passim.
3
Now married into aristocracy, she claimed he had fathered her children as a result of
an aﬀair. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 49812, GStPK, pp. 27ﬀ.
81

82

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

wielded the defamation lawsuit unremittingly, harassing, disciplining, and silencing written and spoken, public and private speech.
Its most important tools were the Beamtenbeleidigung, §193, and
the lèse-majesté clauses of the penal code. Formally, as we have seen,
Beamtenbeleidigung no longer existed in the Criminal Code.4 In
practice, it was ubiquitous. There was, it seems, a short period around
the years of the Reich’s founding when some courts had taken the
new egalitarian direction in defamation law literally, refusing to grant
libeled oﬃcials special treatment in the courts. Thus, in one controversial Saxon case, a Leipzig lower court in 1872 had denied a state
prosecution of a newspaper (Volksstaat) that had allegedly libeled a
district court and state attorney, treating the plaintiﬀs instead like
regular citizens and directing them to the Privatklage and the (pre1877) civil courts. Outrage ensued at the top levels of government
with the Saxon justice minister moving to reaﬃrm the superior honor
status of oﬃcials in a directive ordering state criminal prosecutions
for libeled state oﬃcials (Beamten).5 As a result of this kind of
pressure from on high, as early as the beginning of the 1870s special
protection of oﬃcialdom’s honor was being reinstated by the courts
through rulings that came to treat all libels against oﬃcials (when the
defamation dealt with actions or statements done in their oﬃcial
capacities) as matters of “public interest” meriting state prosecutions.6 Such an interpretation of the law also encouraged the superiors of lower-level libeled oﬃcials to ﬁle criminal charges in the
latter’s name (§196), irrespective of the libeled oﬃcial’s own wishes
or actions, since, as one Prussian court put it, what was at stake was
not just his own “integrity,” but the “safeguarding of the honor of the
oﬃce.”7

4

For an excellent discussion of state repression and the law of lèse-majesté, see Alex
Hall, “The Kaiser, the Wilhelmine State and Lèse-Majesté,” German Life and Letters
27 (1974), 101–15.
5
I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8138, GStPK, pp. 33ﬀ.
6
See the documents in I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8138, GStPK, pp. 21ﬀ.
7
Verdict of the Königliches Ober-Tribunal, January 4, 1875. Justiz-Ministerial-Blatt
für die preussische Gesetzgebung und Rechtspﬂege, 37. Jg., Nr. 12 (March 19, 1875).

The state

83

Moreover, while §193 formally protected defamatory speech
against oﬃcials and others if made for the purpose of “defending
legitimate interests,” the courts, led by a series of Reichsgericht
(Supreme Court) decisions, came to deﬁne “legitimate interests” so
narrowly as to essentially eliminate the protection of newspapers that
criticized oﬃcial actions.8 Third were the lèse-majesté laws and their
interpretation by the courts that equated insulting (or even critical)
statements against the Kaiser, ruling royalty/princes, and their families as akin to acts of treason against the state itself, and that,
accordingly, formed the basis for thousands of prosecutions.9
With the rise of a mass press and the democratization of politics, a
kind of panic in government circles took hold about real and perceived attacks, and about the political and symbolic import of honor
injuries against the state. This chapter begins at the top with meetings
of the Prussian Ministry of State, whose minutes illuminate the
government’s strategic thinking about defamation prosecutions.
They also oﬀer insight into how the upper reaches of government,
in thinking through the defamation problem, were grappling more
broadly with the institutional exigencies of a constitutional state
anchored by an independent judiciary and a vibrant, nominally free
mass press. The chapter moves out from there to the daily honor
encounters and lawsuits between the population and oﬃcialdom,
with emphasis on the campaign of repression against the Left. It
concludes with the courts – their role in the suppression of speech,
most evident in the crippling anti-free press rulings of the high court,
as well as divisions within the courts themselves.
Government policy in Prussia on prosecuting defamations against the
top echelon of oﬃcialdom – the German Chancellor and members of
the Ministry of State – shifted over the years. For Bismarck, the
8

A good discussion of the issues for the 1870s can be found in the commentary on
§193 in Strafgesetzbuch für das deutsche Reich, pp. 392ﬀ.
9
For an overview of German lèse-majesté laws in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries,
see Andrea Hartmann, Majestätsbeleidigung und Verunglimpfung des Staatsoberhauptes
(§§94ﬀ. RStGB, 90 StGB): Reformdiskussion und Gesetzgebung seit dem 19. Jahrhundert
(Berlin, 2006).

84

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

defamation lawsuit was a critical tool of rulership. During his three
decades in power, he used it relentlessly and systematically against his
enemies and against critics of the state in general. In the early 1860s,
during the Prussian constitutional conﬂict, he directed it against liberal
deputies in the Prussian Landtag, as in the notorious case against Karl
Twesten (chapter 1). By the later 1860s, such suits were focusing on
Welﬁsch critics of Prussia’s annexation of Hanover. By the 1870s,
Bismarck was suing everybody – Catholics, Poles,10 leftists, and ultrarightists. Among the latter were a series of libel trials (resulting in
years-long jail sentences) against editors of the far-right Reichsglocke
for articles condemning the famous treason trial of Bismarck’s archconservative rival, the former diplomat Harry von Arnim, and for
charging Bismarck and Bleichröder with corruption (part of a more
general right-wing backlash against Bismarck’s break with traditional
Prussian conservatism).11
But it was the Social Democrats who would become the chief objects
of Bismarck’s litigious ire. After 1878, during the era of the anti-Socialist
laws and Bismarck’s war against social democracy, the SPD press was
bombarded with libel lawsuits. Bismarck pressed for prosecutions of the
Left at every opportunity, even against obscure socialist writers and
newspapers. It was not uncommon for Reichstag sessions, for example,
to begin with a vote on one of his motions to approve prosecution of a
(usually leftist) critic of the Reichstag. He did so, it seems, not for
sentimental personal reasons of honor, but as a matter of principle to
block challenges to himself and the state in general.
Even the most trivial reproaches by anonymous, insigniﬁcant citizens
were not below Bismarck’s radar. In one documented case that ended up
before the country’s high court, a man in a pub in 1879 was heard
disparaging a Reichstag speech of Bismarck’s as no better than what
a “chimney-sweep” could do. Convicted of defaming the Chancellor,
the defendant appealed the decision, which was overruled at the
10

Bismarck’s enemies during the anti-Catholic Kulturkampf and as a result of repressive anti-Polish policies in Prussia’s eastern territories.
11
For a contemporary account, see Gustav Meyer, Prozess und Vertheidigungsrede des
Legationsrathe a.d. Grafen Hermann von Arnim (Berlin, 1878). See also Barnet
Hartston, Sensationalizing the Jewish Question (Leiden, 2005), pp. 14–15.

The state

85

second instance, not in the name of free speech but because, in the court’s
august opinion, a chimney-sweep was an honorable profession and thus
comparisons between that profession and a man’s oratorical abilities did
not have the power to dishonor the latter. The Reichsgericht, agreeing
with the court of ﬁrst instance, overturned the ruling.12 Two years later,
Bismarck had drawn back a bit, refusing to press charges against an
oﬃce clerk because, he explained, “that he only presses charges against a
simple verbal insult directed against himself when, either because of the
place, time or other circumstances, it has a political character.”13
When he was not bringing lawsuits himself or encouraging government organs (e.g., the Reichstag) to do so, Bismarck could be found
behind the scenes putting pressure on the courts. In 1883 he had the
foreign oﬃce communicate to Friedberg, the Minister of Justice, his
displeasure with the leniency of a lawsuit brought against a reporter at
the Berliner Tageblatt for defaming the Russian Interior Minister,
Count Tolstoy. Bismarck was irritated that the state attorney had
requested only a ﬁne of 150m, an insultingly low sum, in his judgment,
given Tolstoy’s high status. He feared the case could have legal and
political repercussions, including defamatory reprisals against German
oﬃcials in “foreign papers.”14 Friedberg promptly ordered an appeal of
the case (which ultimately was rejected by the Reichsgericht), and
made it known to his underlings, the oﬀending state attorney and his
boss, that “mild” punishments were unacceptable.15
Prosecutions for defamations of top Prussian oﬃcials fell oﬀ dramatically under Bismarck’s successors, although they far from disappeared. Generally, after 1890, the policy was one of cautious avoidance
of such actions except in the most egregious (and winnable) cases.
12

“Beleidigung des Reichskanzlers Fürsten Bismarck,” Annalen des Reichsgerichts
(Leipzig, 1880), pp. 29–30.
13
I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139, GStPK, p. 61. It could be that this had always been
Bismarck’s policy and that he had considered the earlier “chimney-sweep” comment
“political.”
14
Busch to Friedberg, Berlin, October 11, 1883. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139, GStPK,
pp. 75–77.
15
Friedberg to Foreign Minister Hatzfeldt-Wildenburg, March 14, 1884. I. HA Rep. 84a,
Nr. 8139, GStPK, pp. 77–78.

86

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

Caprivi brought no libel suits in the ﬁrst years of his rule, only to
partially reverse course in 1893 in the case of anti-government statements made at antisemitic political gatherings.16 Both HohenloheSchillingsfürst and Bülow were “averse” to such lawsuits, resorting
to them only in a few extreme cases.17 Bethmann Hollweg continued
this pattern, even against his own impulses (see below). In 1907 Bülow
ordered all police oﬃcials not to immediately pursue defamation
charges for statements or images against the chancellor, that is, to
generally abstain from suing.18
Bülow’s order coincided with a decree issued earlier that year by the
Kaiser himself aimed at limiting and moderating prosecutions of lèsemajesté. Henceforth, according to the Kaiser, only those insults against
the royal house done with “premeditation and malicious intent” would
be subject to legal action, a move that, though not uncontroversial
(the SPD was deeply disturbed by the language of “malicious intent”
that was adopted into later draft legislation – see chapter 4), had the
potential of signiﬁcantly limiting prosecutions.19 Equally encouraging,
the decree, seeking to weed out the many bogus denunciations from
the public stemming from private ﬁghts and animosities, decreased
from ﬁve years to six months the statute of limitations within which
charges for the oﬀense could be brought. Much of the press greeted this
with enthusiasim and hope. “The era of lèse-majesté trials is happily
16

Documents for another set of defamation charges against antisemitic publicists
under Caprivi can be found in I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 55747, GStPK.
17
This is a summary of Bethmann Hollweg’s summary of the history in a December 28,
1911 letter to the Justice Minister, I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139, GStPK, pp. 240–41. One
example of Bülow refusing to prosecute: in 1907, a Socialist engineer and writer, Max
Grempe, gave a series of public talks, illustrated with lantern slides, on the 1905
Russian revolution. A police spy reported that Grempe was showing caricatures of the
chancellor accompanied by “insulting” commentary. A criminal investigation got
under way, only to be halted by the chancellor. Bülow to Interior Minister, June 30,
1907. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139, GStPK, p. 163.
18
“Beleidigungen des Reichskanzlers,” Deutsche Tageszeitung, August 1, 1907; “Ein
kleiner Fortschritt,” Breslauer Zeitung, August 6, 1907.
19
Decree of January 27, 1907. Gerichtssaal 70 (1907), 115. For an example of the kind
of defamation cases the royal house was inclined to pursue in an earlier frame of
mind (i.e. in 1900), see the report of a Berlin district attorney to the Justice
Minister, January 31, 1900, in I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 49820, GStPK, pp. 23ﬀ.

The state

87

over,” proclaimed (prematurely) the Breslauer Zeitung. Bülow’s order, in
particular, while “small,” was, according to the author, a step forward.20
Prosecutorial restraint in all but the worst cases came to be the
default policy not because Bismarck’s successors were more openminded toward their critics. It was a question, rather, of pure tactics –
the least bad choice in an increasingly out-of-control situation caused
by the growth of an unruly press and the rising electoral fortunes of
the SPD. In this situation, draconian prosecutions, as in the days of
Bismarck, were a declining option: they easily backﬁred, potentially
strengthening the hands of the enemy (i.e. government critics). Legal
actions taken against insigniﬁcant newspapers and authors brought
them inadvertent publicity.21 Equally, if not more, troubling was the
Wahrheitsbeweis – the right of defense counsel to introduce into a
defamation trial evidence from the life and actions of the plaintiﬀ (in
this case, a high state oﬃcial) in order to prove the truth of the
defendant’s alleged defamation. Trials were forms of unscripted
public theatre. They gave government critics a public podium.
They allowed undesirable new facts and assertions to come to light
and the replaying of controversial events and government actions.
Consequently, the ministry feared, they could potentially inﬂuence
the outcome of elections, increasing support for the Left. But maintaining a hands-oﬀ position posed its own set of problems. Failing to
prosecute serious defamations could undermine the state’s authority.
There was the constant worry about how state inaction appeared in
the eyes of the people, about “legal confusion” and “misunderstanding”22 aroused by the government’s seeming tolerance of attacks
against itself.
There was, moreover, the problem of the duel, a growing controversy the government faced and one closely bound up with
20

“Ein kleiner Fortschritt,” Breslauer Zeitung, August 6, 1907.
State Ministry meeting, April 27, 1901. I. HA Rep. 90a, vol. 142, GStPK, pp. 164–65.
As von Bülow put it: the State Ministry has no “set practice with respect to the
question of the prosecution of insults … but generally speaking, seldom ﬁnds occasion
for pressing charges, especially when it is a question of minor newspapers, for whom a
criminal investigation would only serve as publicity …”
22
State Ministry meeting, January 6, 1911. I. HA Rep. 90a, vol. 160, GStPK, p. 21.
21

88

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

defamation law. By the 1890s, public outrage was increasing over the
fatal spread of dueling and the extremely lenient sentences and
pardons meted out by the courts to duelists. The alarm over dueling
in bourgeois and rightist circles was fed, in addition, by the political
capital that Socialists were making of the issue as they waged “a
campaign against duelling on the grounds that it was an illegal class
privilege and which condemned the kid-gloved attitude of the state
towards the phenomenon as a ﬂagrant example of class justice.”23
The Ministry of State shared the belief with growing numbers in the
center and right of the political spectrum that minimizing the duel
required giving elite men (those capable of giving satisfaction) an
appealing legal alternative and that this should be accomplished by
strengthening defamation law in the form of stepped-up prosecutions, higher sentences, and the better protection of plaintiﬀs’ privacy
with a crackdown on the Wahrheitsbeweis. But a Reichstag deal to
sharpen defamation laws, even one placating the Left with sharpened
dueling penalities (a losing Reichstag proposition in the 1890s), was
bound to falter on the opposition of the Socialists. Led by Bebel,
Socialists were convinced that defamation law reform along these
lines would only strengthen the government’s prosecutorial hand
against the leftist press (see chapter 4).24
The Ministry of State was caught in a bind. Hence, the about-face
reversal of course by chancellors such as Caprivi in 1893 after he had
initially wanted to steer clear of the libel lawsuit.25 Hence, also, that
decisions by the Ministry about whether or not to pursue defamation
charges tended to be ad hoc and made on a case-by-case basis
involving the careful weighing of such factors as the severity of the
oﬀense, the importance of the defamer, the chances of winning in
court, and the potential for damaging information against the state
23

Ute Frevert, Men of Honour: A Social and Cultural History of the Duel (Cambridge,
MA, 1995); Kevin McAleer, Dueling: The Cult of Honor in ﬁn-de-siècle Germany
(Princeton, 1994), p. 193.
24
State Ministry meeting, October 6, 1897, I. HA Rep. 90a, vol. 131, GStPK, pp. 78
ﬀ.; Justizministerialblatt 43 (December 1897), 285–86; I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139,
GStPK, p. 141.
25
State Ministry meeting, April 10, 1893. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139, GStPK, p. 126.

The state

89

to arise in a trial. The Berliner Montags-Zeitung, edited by Max
Wittenberg, certainly insulted the Minister of the Interior in 1901,
but it was “only a paper of scant importance”; pressing charges would
simply bring it publicity.26 By contrast, legal action was needed in
the more egregious case of a Polish newspaper, Gazeta Grudziadzka,
whose 1906 article on the controversial language issue in Prussia’s
eastern territories threatened the government with resistance and a
“ﬂood of invective.”27 The same applied to a Social Democratic
writer and activist, a Dr. Pönsgen, who, despite an earlier criminal
charge, was repeatedly voicing the “crudest insults” against the
government at meetings in and around Berlin. Prosecute and “shut
his trap,” oﬀered the Justice Minister.28 Meanwhile (1897), the
Ministry was requesting that public prosecutors be instructed to
strengthen defamation punishments and, in light of the dueling
issue, make the process more palatable to plaintiﬀs by “not making
all of the hidden points from the past of the defamed person a subject
of the investigation.”29
By 1910, a sense of crisis had set in. Libels against government
oﬃcials appeared out of control and the terrible blast of the Eulenburg
scandal (chapter 4) was still reverberating. But the immediate cause in
1910 was public outrage over the repression of a worker uprising
in Moabit and its litigious aftermath. Moabit was an important event
in the history of labor politics,30 the name itself becoming synonymous
among contemporaries with class conﬂict.31 In the courts, Moabit was
26

Ibid., April 27, 1901, vol. 142, pp. 164–65.
Ibid., October 30, 1906, vol. 153, pp. 124–25. 28 Ibid., April 22, 1904, vol. 148.
29
Ibid., October 6, 1897, vol. 131, pp. 78ﬀ.
30
Helmut Bleiber, “Die Moabiter Unruhen 1910,” Zeitschrift für Geschichtswissenschaft
3(2) (1955), 173–211, provides a detailed, archivally based Marxist-Leninist analysis
of the uprising and its origins. A more recent work, Thomas Lindenberger,
Strassenpolitik: Zur Sozialgeschichte der öﬀentlichen Ordnung in Berlin, 1900 bis 1914
(Bonn, 1995), which rejects Bleiber’s interpretation, contextualizes the events
within the history of German street politics. Neither study explores Moabit’s
legal aspects and its spin-oﬀ libel litigation. For more general information on the
repression of workers and the Left, see Gerhard A. Ritter and Klaus Tenfelde,
Arbeiter im deutschen Kaiserreich, 1871 bis 1914 (Bonn, 1992), pp. 679 ﬀ.
31
Lindenberger, Strassenpolitik, p. 241.
27

90

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

a public relations disaster of the ﬁrst order for the government.
Resounding at the highest levels of government, the uprising and its
aftermath weighed heavily on the minds of ministers as they conferred
on the direction of libel policy. The event thus merits closer examination.
The unrest in Moabit, a working-class district of Berlin, began on
September 19, 1910, with the walkout of coal workers at the ﬁrm of
Kupfer & Co. after the breakdown of union negotiations over a pay
raise. By the next day, the strike had spread to other workers in the area
and had turned violent. The violence (at ﬁrst rock-throwing and other
attacks on strikebreakers) rapidly escalated when units of sabre-wielding
police moved in to restore order. What ensued was a week of violent
clashes between “the insurgent population of an extremely homogenous
worker’s neighborhood and police troops organized in military fashion,
whose command was to suppress the unrest.”32 The culmination was
three days of outright “street battles,”33 as in a war zone, at the end of
which hundreds lay wounded and one worker was dead.
Like so many events, both serious and trivial, in the Kaiserreich,
Moabit was soon playing itself out as honor litigation. This was the case,
ﬁrst of all, in the two mass criminal trials of sixty-six workers,34 whose
charges, along with breach of the peace and sedition, included libel (the
worker epithet of choice against the police during the unrest was
“bloodhounds” [Bluthunde]).35 The danger of criminal prosecutions –
the unpredictable way they were subverted by government opponents –
was on full display at the ﬁrst trial in the winter of 1910/11. Here, the
prosecution’s politicized agenda was not only punishing the workers
involved but proving the existence of a revolutionary Socialist conspiracy behind the uprising.36 As such, the trial was a disaster, oﬀering
32

Ibid., p. 291.
Jagow to Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg, September 29, 1910. I. HA Rep. 77,
Tit. 2515, Nr. 3 Fasz. 4, Bd. 1, GStPK, pp. 42–43.
34
One of the indicted committed suicide in prison before the trial.
35
Court judgment, January 11, 1911. Ibid., Bd. 2, pp. 84, 206 and passim. Other charges
included duress (Nötigung), violation of the commercial code, and vandalism.
36
The government, however, knew early on that the SPD leadership bore no responsiblity for the uprising. See, Jagow to Dallwitz, October 25, 1910. Ibid., Bd. 1,
pp. 156–59.
33

The state

91

instead a parade of defense witnesses whose testimony opened to the
public a disturbing window onto the behavior of an out-of-control
police force. This testimony turned the trial on its head, making, as
Berlin Police Chief von Jagow complained, “the Berlin police into the
de facto defendants.”37
December 6, 1910, typiﬁed the problems the government faced
during the trial. Among the two defendants on trial that day was one
Romanowski, who admitted to once, on the night of September 28,
“shouting [the libelous] ‘Bloodhounds’” as he stood with his neighbors at the entrance of an apartment building watching the events in
the streets.38 The subsequent witness testimony began well enough
for the prosecution: Police Sergeant Koch spoke of how a crowd at
the apartment building began shouting at (schimpfen) the police, and
how the people were ordered back into the apartment house. The
crowd threw stones at the police and shots were ﬁred; despite this, he
concluded, the police acted “peacefully and without the use of
weapons to try to disperse the crowd.” But when the defense subsequently called its witnesses, a quite diﬀerent picture emerged, one
of rampant police brutality. They described the police sabre beatings
of innocent bystanders, including an old man “peacefully walking
down the street.” According to the apartment house porter, “two
policemen [Schutzleute] went after him,” beating him “like a piece of
livestock.” The prosecution of a minor libel violation (“Bloodhound”)
was dangerously becoming an anti-police political forum. Months of
similar testimony turned the trial, in the eyes of a wary government,
into a “site of agitation” with the subversive aim, “as always,” of
“disparaging state authority … especially through the reviling of the
police.”39 The verdict in January, 1911, was a Pyrrhic victory for
the prosecution, bringing in convictions but only after months of
37

“Tatsächlich ist in diesem Prozesse die Berliner Schutzmannschaft in die Rolle des
Angeklagten hineingedrängt worden …” Jagow to Interior Minister, November 28,
1910. Ibid., p. 255.
38
“Die Moabiter Vorgänge vor Gericht,” Vorwärts, December 7, 1910. All quotes
from this trial day are taken from this article.
39
Jagow report, January 6, 1911. I. HA Rep. 77, Tit. 2515, Nr. 3, Fasz. 4, Bd. 1,
GStPK, p. 228.

92

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

testimony and reportage in the mass press had damaged the image of
the Berlin police in public opinion.40
Furious, Police Chief von Jagow, referring to the “over 100
instances of the most insulting expressions used [by witnesses] about
my [police] oﬃcials” at the trial, implored the minister of interior to
prevent a repetition in the next trial.41 Even before the ﬁrst trial,
Interior Minister Dallwitz was deeply worried about the way the
SPD was exploiting the situation in the press and in the organization
of mass demonstrations across Germany, by which the Socialists, in
short, were using the Moabit “tumult to systematically incite the
population of the entire country against oﬃcials of the police.”42
Both Jagow’s and Dallwitz’s views were symptomatic of a “secondary politicization”43 of Moabit, whose dynamic was spurring further
honor confrontations. The historian Thomas Lindenberger rightly
emphasizes that this politicization primarily pitted Police Chief
Jagow, defending the reputation of his police force and himself, against
the leadership of the SPD, who sought to exploit the events for
political gain (the aim was a breakthrough in the upcoming elections
to achieve a parliamentary majority) while, following their characteristically legalistic methods, distancing the party from any responsibility
or involvement in the uprising.44 This strategy on the part of the SPD,
shaped as it was by Germany’s political culture of honor litigation was,
however, more extensive than understood by Lindenberger.
By November, 1910, Dallwitz was searching for legal pretexts to crack
down on Socialist agitators, issuing a memo to all Regierungspräsidenten
about how “urgently necessary” it was to bring criminal lawsuits against
“the untrue representation of the [Moabit] events” and the “calumnies
40

The court verdict itself was explicitly critical of the police. Nineteen of the
convictions were for libel. Such statements as “Schmeisst doch die Bluthünde”
and “Hilft Genossen gegen die Räuber,” the verdict concluded, had a consciously,
in the minds of the accused, “ehrenkränkenden Character”: “Sie wollte die
Schutzleute [police] in ihrer Ehre verletzen …” Ibid., Bd. 2, p. 84.
41
Presumably, he had in mind the threat of libel lawsuits. Jagow to Dallwitz, January
12, 1911. Ibid., Bd. 1, p. 209.
42
Dallwitz to the Regierungspräsidenten, November 9, 1910. Ibid., 4, Bd. 1, p. 175.
43
Lindenberger, Strassenpolitik, p. 242. 44 Ibid., pp. 242, 294–97 and passim.

The state

93

against the police,” and explaining that all state prosecutors had been
instructed for this purpose to consider the potential criminal liability of
statements made in Socialist newspapers and meetings.45 Jagow, who
was in close contact with Dallwitz, was thinking along similar lines. He
soon found a promising case: a provocative front-page story in Vorwärts
that managed to accomplish in one thesis both sides of the SPD strategy:
agitation against Jagow and the police, on the one hand, and distancing
itself from Moabit, on the other. The story alleged (improbably) that
Moabit’s violent unrest had been the intentional work of undercover
police agents provocateurs acting behind the scenes to incite the crowds,
and doing so, with the implied involvement of the police chief, in the
interests of “reactionaries … lusting” for a “pretext” to reinstate antisocialist laws (Ausnahmengesetze).46 Jagow ﬁled suit the next day (against
the paper’s editor, Barth). Other spin-oﬀ libel suits followed in the next
weeks and months, several against Socialist papers that had repeated the
agent provocateur charge.47 As late as fall 1911, Jagow could be found
immersed in a libel suit against the Socialist Harburger Parteiblatt
for criticizing a speech he had given back in January in Berlin’s
Zoologischer Garten, where he had heaped praise on his police force:
“the badge of honor of the police force is pure, it held to irreproachable
manly discipline and fulﬁlled its duty [at Moabit].”48
Honor was the public language; political strategizing was the reality
behind the scenes. In a memo marked “secret!,” we discover that libel
litigation was being purposefully orchestrated in these trials to create a
public forum to refute the “agent provocateur” charges from the Left.49
45

Dallwitz was considering bringing charges under §§110, 130, 131. November 9,
1910. I. HA Rep. 77, Tit. 2515, Nr. 3, Fasz. 4, Bd. 1, GStPK, p. 175.
46
“Die geheimen Führer und Leiter der Moabiter Revolution,” Vorwärts, December 6,
1910.
47
State attorney report, March 3, 1911. I. HA Rep. 77, Tit. 2515, Nr. 3, Fasz. 4, Bd. 2,
GStPK, pp. 109 f.; Jagow report, September 9, 1911. Ibid., pp. 176–77. Vorwärts’s
chief editor was convicted in March, 1911, of libeling the Berlin criminal police in an
article using the term “Knüppelgardisten.” “Die beleidigte Polizei und der
abgeschnittene Wahrheitsbeweis,” Vorwärts, March 28, 1911.
48
“Gerichts-Zeitung,” Vorwärts, October 31, 1911.
49
Jagow, September 9, 1911. I. HA Rep. 77, Tit. 2515, Nr. 3, Fasz. 4, Bd. 2, GStPK,
pp. 176–77.

94

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

One hears strong echoes of Moabit in internal communications of
the State Ministry that strategized policy for bringing defamation
charges. The “steadily increasing calumny of the Social Democratic
press,” explained Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg in an internal memo,
had reached intolerable proportions.50 Most recently, there were
articles “grossly insult[ing]” himself for his public comments on
Moabit.51 It was time to reconsider the policy of restraint. He wanted
the opinions of all ministers on the matter. Their written responses and
the subsequent discussion at a 1911 State Ministry meeting did not
ultimately alter libel policy.52 But it is illuminating, providing a window
onto an ongoing debate at the top about the politics of libel and dissent.
The ministers were appalled by speech coming from the Left, and
all assumed that nothing less than the authority of the existing state
was at stake. They diﬀered, however, on tactics. There were those,
like Dallwitz, wanting stepped-up prosecutions. Defamations, he
wrote, “are becoming ever sharper, more shameless, and frequent,
thus contributing to … weakening the sense of respect for authority
in the population.”53 The Minister of Public Works warned that
Socialist libels went beyond the Minister-President to all top administrators; the intention was “thereby to disparage the authority of the
highest authorities in front of their numerous lower oﬃcials and
workers.” War Minister Von Heeringen wanted prosecutions of all
“odious” cases, even beyond the Socialist press, not so much in order
to punish particular oﬀenders, but as a symbolic statement to counteract “the confusion of public opinion” (Anschauungen) that arises
when the state’s highest oﬃcials are “insulted and made suspect.”54
Those ministers advocating greater caution were equally concerned with public opinion, but saw the matter somewhat diﬀerently.
50

President of the State Ministry, December 28, 1910. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139,
GStPK, pp. 240–41.
51
His explanation about Moabit came later at the Ministry’s meeting of January 6,
1911. I. HA Rep. 90a, vol. 160, GStPK, p. 250.
52
The discussion, below, where not indicated otherwise, is based on the report of that
meeting: State Ministry meeting of January 6, 1911, ibid., pp. 21–26.
53
Von Dallwitz memo, January 3, 1911. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139, GStPK, p. 246.
54
Von Heeringen memo, January 4, 1911. Ibid., p. 248.

The state

95

For them, the danger of a politicized defamation trial like Moabit
outweighed the necessity of warding oﬀ “confusion” and signaling
the limits of dissent through libel prosecutions. Bethmann feared the
defense’s ability at trial “to extend without limit the hearing of
evidence.” “At all costs” a repeat of Moabit must be avoided, he
warned. The Finance Minister spelled out in greater detail the danger
of libel trials and the Wahrheitsbeweis: the law provides insuﬃcient
protections against the plaintiﬀ being further libeled in court and the
ability of defense counsel to widen the issues raised at trial. Indeed,
there was no protection whatsover against the other side using
the trial for “political, party interests.”55 Justice Minister Beseler
concurred: yes, there were dangers in not prosecuting, but one had
to keep in mind the “big political picture” (die grossen politischen
Gesichtspunkte), and the fact that “unscrupulous” defense lawyers
were turning plaintiﬀs into defendants in the courtroom and before
the public. Von Tirpitz likewise recommended caution, reminding
everyone of the upcoming elections.
The debate boiled down to this: was action or inaction more
politically costly? Which was worse: trial revelations of an embarrassing, compromising, or incendiary nature, as in Moabit, or allowing the government to appear weak and vulnerable in the eyes of the
people? For it was the latter fear that seemed to underlie talk of the
public’s “legal confusion” or, as Dallwitz put it, the “weakening” of
their “sense of authority.”56 Naturally, there was solid political
theory on which this authoritarian position rested, namely (to put it
simply), the repression of dissent in the interest of order. But, given
the deeply entrenched honor culture of the men running Prussia and
Germany, the ministers’ reasoning clearly also derived from their
honor code. As discussed earlier, the failure to challenge an insult
(by dueling or litigation) in their world made one into a dishonorable
coward (in the case of the dueling upper classes) or implied that
55
56

Memo, January 3, 1911. Ibid., p. 245.
Delbrück, Minister for Trade and Commerce, argued for the opposite position –
i.e. to maintain the present government position on libels – because a rash of libel
lawsuits could be taken by the public as a sign of “government weakness.”
Delbrück memo, January 4, 1911. Ibid., p. 247.

96

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

the insult was true. This honor logic – by which a libel left unprosecuted by the government would signal its truth to the German
people and/or the weakness of the government – seems also to have
been at play in the political calculations of the State Ministry. In the
end, those calculations favored caution. Bethmann agreed to maintain his current approach of bringing suit only in the most serious
cases and only if “the public interest demands it … or if the libel is
such that one can count on a serious [empﬁndliche] punishment without the endless examination of evidence.” But it was left to the
individual ministers to proceed as they saw ﬁt.
When, during World War One, the Frankfurter Zeitung exhorted “the
German people to legal peace,” lamenting the continued deluge of
libel lawsuits, it focused on a particularly ubiquitous type of defamation suit: the kind where “people who hold any type of authoritative
position instantly sue [zum Kadi liefen] over trivial matters
[Bagatellsachen].”57 Landrichter Eberhard, writing in a legal journal,
ﬁlled out the picture: “mostly, it is a question of jostlings, abusive
language in a drunken or tipsy state or in agitation over some sort of
oﬃcial action.”58 Such cases were not unique to the war years. They
included a suit, some years before, against a tenant farmer (Pächter),
Ernst Glander, who rented on government land in the district of
Marienwerder run by the chief oﬃcial forester. In a dispute with that
oﬃcial, Glander appealed to the government, writing that the forester
had changed the land boundaries to favor the gamekeeper.
Unspeciﬁced language in his complaint prompted in return a lawsuit
by the forester. Glander was convicted and sentenced to two months
in jail for the phrasing in his letter.59 This case, on the face of it –
purely personal, occurring in an obscure area among obscure people –
was trivial by any standards. The authorities thought otherwise. It
could set a “dangerous” precedent, warned Marienwerder oﬃcials in
a report to Berlin that detailed Glander’s subsequent acquittal on
57

“Eine Mahnung zum Rechtsfrieden,” Frankfurter Zeitung, December 12, 1915.
Quoted ibid.
59
Government report of October 23, 1882. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139, GStPK, pp. 55ﬀ.
58

The state

97

appeal.60 The appellate court found Glander’s statement dishonoring
but granted him §193 protections because of the apparent lack of
malice (i.e., Glander did not intentionally seek to dishonor the
forester) and because of the “form” of his statements. In response,
Marienwerder oﬃcials worried that this verdict “implicitly recognized
the right to inﬂict gross honor injuries [against oﬃcials] with impunity.” Cases like this one placed the “honor of Prussian oﬃcialdom in
danger” and, the report implied, there could be “political motives”
lurking behind it.61
Notwithstanding the policies on high for top Prussian oﬃcials
(above), prosecutions of insolence and irreverence toward – not to
mention defamatory attacks against – state oﬃcials, as in the Glander
suit, remained a perpetual and ubiquitous aspect of everyday governance in the Kaiserreich. In villages and towns across Germany, the
pattern was of mundane clashes between citizens and mostly petty
oﬃcials exercising an autocratic power by invoking their special honor
status as incarnations of the state. The imperious oﬃcer, the small-town
bully, the autocratic policeman – these were types one encountered
everywhere in daily life. One gets a sense of the petty terror they spread
from a laconic newspaper notice on a verbal dispute over theatre seating
between a businessman, a man “with an esteemed position and the best
reputation,” and three military lieutenants, a dispute that ended in the
businessman sentenced to two weeks in jail. One evening, at the theatre,
The condemned [businessman Martin Lissner] … got into a verbal dispute
with [the] allegedly defamed oﬃcers when they erroneously claimed a seat
which correctly belonged to Lissner. The conduct of the oﬃcers understandably brought Lissner into such an excited state that he allegedly addressed the
oﬃcers with language which the court considered insulting to the oﬃcer corps
and speciﬁcally to the three oﬃcers involved in the dispute.62
60

A Landgericht acquitted him on appeal not because the judge found his statements
in order (the judge deemed them dishonoring) but because the judge found that
Glander did not intentionally mean to insult the forester.
61
Marienwerder, October 23, 1882. Ibid., pp. 55–57. A subsequent report from
Marienwerder’s attorney general categorically dismissed the notion of a politically
motivated verdict and downplayed the broader signiﬁcance of the case (pp. 62–66).
62
“Eine Nichtbegnadigung,” Königsberger Hartnungsche Zeitung, May 4, 1902.

98

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

One can imagine the scene: Lissner sitting peacefully, perhaps
with his wife, waiting for the performance to begin; the entrance of
the oﬃcers demanding their seats; Lissner’s chagrined refusal; the
oﬃcers’ bullying; ﬂaring tempers, public embarrassment, Lissner
holding onto his seat; the humiliated and angry oﬃcers retreating,
their feelings morphing into outrage over violated honor; the lawsuit
and the devastating jail sentence for an upright bourgeois citizen.
In this case, the oﬃcers themselves initiated the lawsuit and the state
prosecuted as a matter of public interest, since, as the court stated, it
was a question not only of the honor of the three lieutenants, but that of
the entire “oﬃcer estate.” In other cases, by contrast, formal state
charges were imposed from above by the superiors of libeled oﬃcals,
who themselves, for reasons (almost always obscure) seemingly linked
to their social existences and personal relations within communities,
wanted to avoid litigation. In still other cases, the lawsuits went
forward as Privatklage as a result of conﬂicts indistinguishable from
those producing the masses of Privatklagen in the Kaiserreich.
State oﬃcials and civil servants, as previously explained, were held to
high standards of professional conduct, standards that formed the core
of their sense of honor, rank, and status. An oﬃcial held in violation of
these standards faced dishonor, discipline, and the possible ruin of his
career. Accusations to this eﬀect made by brazen citizens were, moreover, typically considered by their victims to be impertinent aﬀronts to
the honor and authority of the state itself. They were thus vigorously
resisted by the oﬃcial in question and by his superiors in the libel courts.
The libels of favoritism and bribery, two of the most dishonorable
charges against a state oﬃcial, often ﬁgured in these suits. In a propertyline dispute between a prosperous farmer [Ökonom] and a baker, the
farmer sought out the judgment of the district’s oﬃcial geometer
(Bezirksgeometer), who concluded in favor of the baker. Angry, the
farmer’s wife wrote to the geometer’s superiors accusing him of having
been bought oﬀ (abgeschmiert) by the baker. The wife was subsequently
tried and convicted of “dishonoring” a state civil servant.63 A fruit
63

Ferdinand Kurz, §193: Beleidigung und berechtigte Interessen (Nuremberg, 1909),
p. 13.

The state

99

seller, who several times had been cited by a rural constable and
convicted of violating street regulations, wrote to the authorities
accusing the constable of preferential treatment, after a shopkeeper
over drinks at the pub told him that he (the shopkeeper) had not been
cited for a similar oﬀense because he had spoken politely to the
constable.64
Then there were the less subtle conﬂicts between state and citizen,
like the worker sued for biting a night watchman in the leg and
calling him a “shit head” (Dreckkopf ).65 Or, at the other end of the
social scale, the angry exchange on a Berlin street between Frau von
Gerlach and a police lieutenant forcefully blocking her way, which
prompted her yelling: “How can you be so shameless! … Why do
you involve yourself in such a dirty trade? Don’t touch me, you
make me dirty!”66
Many other kinds of speech as well were subject to Beamtenbeleidigung
prosecutions. The state regularly brought libel lawsuits for critical
statements uttered at public meetings (political, professional, trade),
for written petitions and complaints against oﬃcial abuse, in the workplace between workers,67 and even for attorney statements made in a
court of law. The latter included witness testimony and the statements
of lawyers when critical of the state. The lawyer Max Lichtenstein
found this out in 1912, when he was convicted and ﬁned 500m. for a
withering courtroom indictment of police abuse in Zabrze (Silesia):
It is unfortunately a fact that the police very often allows itself infringement [of
the law] and that there is no protection against most of it, rather the police
constitute a danger to the public … As a result, the injured person rather than
the oﬃcial becomes the defendant and the oﬃcial, protected by his oath of
oﬃce, testiﬁes [against the defendant].68
64

Ibid., p. 7. The oﬃcial won the lawsuit because, as the verdict explained, the honor
of state oﬃcials lay in their ‘impartiality,’ which had been challenged and damaged
by the defendant’s accusation.
65
Verdict, Potsdam, August 24, 1911. Rep. 5E, Baruth, No. 379, BLA.
66
“Polizeibeleidigung,” Vorwärts, February 18, 1911.
67
An example of this latter in a Supreme Court decision: Königsberger Allgemeine
Zeitung, August 20, 1913.
68
“Das Reichsgericht gegen die Rechte der Verteidigung,” Vorwärts, June 16, 1912.

100

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

The court rejected the notion that his speech served a “legitimate
interest” and was thus protected under §193. It did so because it
deemed Lichtenstein to have a “hostile” position toward the police
and to have intentionally used the courtroom to pursue this agenda.
The conviction was upheld by the Reichsgericht on appeal.69
Even the unpolitically motivated airing of complaints against
oﬃcials was subject to libel prosecution. The lack of a transparent,
regularized administrative complaint system within the state bureaucracy made such suits all the more likely.70 The case of Elise Hessels,
the woman who complained about attempted rape by Berlin’s police
chief and was slapped with a lawsuit for libel and “false accusation,” is
one example.71 Another is that of a low-level railway oﬃcial, one Karl
Friedrich Kräuse, ﬁred from his job, who, wanting it back, tried
appealing directly to Bismarck himself. Kräuse’s petition made the
case that he had been illegitimately ﬁred by the arbitrary and improper
actions of his superiors. Bismarck read this petition from within the
language of honor, seeing thus not a lowly civil servant desperate for
the return of his job, but a series of accusations that, if true, threatened
the reputations and careers of the railway oﬃcials in question. The
petition, in other words, was defamatory, and Bismarck referred it to
the top oﬃcial in the rail bureaucracy, the Labor Minister, who
promptly ﬁled a defamation lawsuit against Kräuse.72
Finally, there were the non-verbal forms of disrespect toward
oﬃcialdom meriting honor lawsuits. A local oﬃcial [Amtsvorsteher],
for example, felt egregiously dishonored when an information bureau
[Auskunftsbureau], writing to request some information from him,
voluntarily included in the letter a small sum of 30 pfennig as fee for
the information. The Amtsvorsteher saw the money as a bribe and
69

Ibid.
James Whitman, “Enforcing Civility and Respect: Three Societies,” Yale Law
Journal 109 (2000), 1297–398.
71
For commentary on the general problem, see, e.g. “Der Beweis der Wahrheit bei
Beschuldigung von Beamten,” National Zeitung, August 20, 1887.
72
I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139, GStPK, pp. 104–112. Kräuse, however, was acquitted on
the basis of §193. The case was then appealed to the Reichsgericht, which upheld
the lower court’s verdict in December, 1890.
70

The state

101

believed that even the mere implication that he would possibly be
open to such a bribe dishonored him. Here was a case of bureaucratic
probity taken to its mad but logical extreme. While similar lawsuits
over extremely trivial and benign actions can not have been common,73 it is telling that the district attorney took the case seriously
enough to ﬁle suit (the court, however, acquitted).
But, by far, the most controversial, visible, and politically signiﬁcant form of libel censorship was that directed at political opponents
of the government, particularly against their newspapers. This
included the far-right, antisemitic and left-liberal press, but overwhelmingly meant Socialist journalists and publishers, who could
receive outlandishly draconian sentences of six months’ incarceration.74 Moabit was only the most dramatic case in an unrelenting
campaign of libel litigation against the left, one that aﬀected everyone from the top echelons of the SPD to obscure provincial newspapers and other leftist critics. Vorwärts reported that a Socialist editor
was given a two-week jail sentence for an article calling an Aachen
Catholic relic exhibition a “piece of mischief ” (Unfug).75 The Essener
Arbeiterzeitung was sued, convicted, and ﬁned 500m in 1911 for criticizing
the behavior of police who arrested two youths at a Socialist public
lecture (the lecture allegedly contained “political” content, thus it
violated the associational law banning youths from political meetings).76
Lèse-majesté prosecutions were overwhelmingly directed against the
SPD. August Müller, editor of the Magdeburger Volkstimme, was sentenced to four years’ prison for lèse-majesté for an 1898 article – a “small
fable” – critical of the emperor and Prince “Eitel Fritz.” Reichstag
deputy Albert Schmidt, the actual editor responsible for the article and
feeling guilty and hoping to engineer Müller’s release, subsequently
gave up his parliamentary immunity and presented himself to the court
73

The extremity of the case comes through in the title of an article on it: “Wegen 30 Pf.
Eine kaum glaubliche Anklage,” Vorwärts, March 11, 1911.
74
For example, “Polizeiliches, Gerichtliches usw.,” Vorwärts, March 16, 1911. For an
excellent and pathbreaking study of Social Democracy, press censorship, and
politics in imperial Germany, see Alex Hall, Scandal, Sensation, and Social
Democracy (Cambridge, 1977).
75
Vorwärts, February 15, 1903. 76 “Was alles ‘politisch’ ist,” Vorwärts, March 7, 1911.

102

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

for prosecution. He was given three years and lost his Reichstag and city
council mandates. The disproportionately harsh sentences in the two
cases went too far even for the bourgeois parties.77
When lower-level oﬃcials abstained from ﬁling suit, their superiors, invoking §196, regularly intervened. Indeed, §196 had become
so routinized, so utterly integrated into the apparatus of state power,
that questions about whether or not, in a libel case, the oﬃcial in
question had actually been dishonored were often irrelevant. The
legal defense of oﬃcials in the name of upholding state honor had
become merely a euphemism for censorship. A particularly crass
instance of this can be seen in an 1892 Prussian Justice Ministry
directive that, in anticipation of press attacks against justice oﬃcials
in the wake of a controversial murder of a boy, ordered all attorneys
general to stand ready to “energetically counter” with “conﬁscations
[of publications] and the use of §196.”78 The linking of literary
conﬁscations and §196 prosecutions, and the routine readying of
these tools before any libel had even taken place, is what is so striking
in this document.
The situation for the lower-level oﬃcials in whose name §196
actions were brought could be complex. A small newspaper notice
on one such case suggests the diﬃcult position of these oﬃcials, some
of whom wanted only peaceful coexistence with the civilian population
but found themselves trapped in the crossﬁre of a larger battle. In 1911,
the state brought charges against Danzig’s Socialist Volkswacht for an
article accusing a chief communal administrator (Gemeindevorsteher) of
participating in a land-grant scheme to funnel free land parcels to
communal deputies (Gemeindevertreter), which the newspaper had discovered was taking place in a neighboring rural district. The oﬃcial,
who had received one of the land vouchers thinking that he needed to
be a landowner in order to run for local oﬃce, said he was “forced” by
his superiors to ﬁle suit. The court ﬁned the paper’s editor 100m.79
77

“Partei-Nachrichten: Der Majestätsbeleidiger,” Vorwärts, October 30, 1902.
Justice Minister Schelling to attorneys general, February 17, 1892. I. HA Rep. 84a,
Nr. 8139, GStPK, p. 121.
79
“Aus Westpreussens Geﬁlden,” Vorwärts, March 28, 1911.
78

The state

103

The Socialist activist Karl Liebknecht may not have been exaggerating when, in a speech on the ﬂoor of the Prussian Landtag, he
claimed that defamation prosecutions of Socialists, involving extraordinarily harsh sentences, are “a daily occurrence” and that the
Socialist and labor press were “systematically” denied §193 protection by the courts.80 He certainly knew this from personal experience,
being himself a constant target of such lawsuits. One case, for
Liebknecht’s alleged insults of the Russian Czar and the Prussian
and Saxon governments in a speech at an SPD party congress, shows
the lengths the government went to silence him: when three separate
state attorneys refused to prosecute the case, the government turned
to the civil honor court of Berlin’s lawyers’ guild (Anwaltskammer), of
which Liebknecht, a lawyer by profession, was a member. This body,
citing the fact that Liebknecht’s remarks were made in a political,
not a professional, capacity, in turn refused the case. In early 1911,
when Vorwärts wrote about these events, the government was still
refusing defeat.81
Reichsgerichtsrat Mittelstadt gave a sense of how out-of-control the
situation had become (not just for the left) when, in 1890, he compared
the present unfavorably with the (notoriously harsh) Vormärz (1815–
1848) censor, calling the latter “endlessly more comprehensible and
tolerant[!]”82 Just how incendiary Beamtenbeleidigung prosecutions
became under the Kaiserreich is reﬂected in a judge’s “warning” sent
to jurists and upper-level civil servants during World War One to
refrain from the practice in trivial cases in the interests of “social
peace”: one should try to avoid, he explained, inciting the wrath and
discontent of the masses, who are only provoked by the ﬂood of
petty insult lawsuits by low-level Beamten. 83
The widespread sense within public opinion that state prosecutors
were applying the law inconsistently to punish and silence government opponents had a solid basis in fact. An 1884 Justice Ministry
80

SBPA, February 22, 1912 (Berlin, 1912), p. 1451.
“Ein echtpreussisches Meisterstück,” Vorwärts, March 16, 1911.
82
“§193,” Rheinischer Kurier, July 20, 1894.
83
“Eine Mahnung zum Rechtsfrieden,” Frankfurter Zeitung, December 12, 1915.
81

104

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

directive to all state attorneys provides one piece of corroborating
evidence. It ordered internal reports on such defamations to include
not only facts about the case and the accused, which oﬃcials routinely
needed to decide whether to press charges. Those facts, the directive
instructed, must be available to defamed oﬃcials and should include
the “reputations” [Rufe] and “political” behavior of the accused.84
There was also a clear policy at the highest levels to target Socialist
writers and activists. An 1891 Justice Ministry directive instructed
state attorneys to accord special treatment to individuals defamed by
Socialists. Normally, as explained above, private individuals who felt
themselves defamed were left to their own devices, i.e. to the path of
the Privatklage, since such cases were not deemed relevant to the
“public interest.” Privatklage plaintiﬀs were as a result at a distinct
disadvantage, functioning as both plaintiﬀ and prosecutor but lacking, among other things, the resources of state prosecutions. The 1891
directive, in eﬀect, came to the rescue of plaintiﬀs defamed by
Socialists or, what it called “that part of the periodical press which
battles state and social institutions.” Increasingly, it argued with
alarm, assaults on the “established order” were taking the form of
“personal attacks” against private citizens associated with that order.
It followed that such defamations should be treated not as private
cases and referred to the Privatklage path of litigation. Instead,
prosecutors were ordered to treat such cases as attacks on the state
and public order, and prosecuted accordingly.85
State policy also involved proactively searching out plaintiﬀs,
inducing them to ﬁle suit against Socialists and labor activists.
This was not always easy. During a labor strike in the Ruhr in
1911, for example, a group of striking workers insultingly cussed
out a strikebreaker for being a “Rausreisserdienste.” The problem,
however, from the government’s point of view, was that the worker –
the supposed victim – did not himself feel insulted and thus had to
be brought in to the prosecutor’s oﬃce to be instructed about why
he had been defamed. (The term “strikebreaker” itself had been
84
85

Berlin, October 8, 1884. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139, GStPK, p. 83.
Justice Minister Schelling, Berlin, July 4, 1891, ibid., p. 118.

The state

105

ruled by Germany’s highest court as libelous and punishable by
incarceration.)86
A double standard of justice against Socialists, workers, and labor
activists can be seen in certain convoluted legal judgments and inconsistent applications of the law. The Socialist deputy Auer, for example,
was convicted in 1913 for a speech he made at a meeting of the South
German Railway Association where he accused the Munich railway
director of giving preferential treatment and funding to “clerical”
associations. The courts, Reichsgericht included, denied him the protection of §193 even though he was speaking in his capacity as a
parliamentary deputy.87 A legal double standard was also implicit in
the numbers and frequency of prosecutions against Socialists, in the
harsh sentences meted out, and in the pettiness of some of these cases,
suggesting the lengths to which the government and courts were
willing to go. One case had the Reichsgericht upholding the conviction
of a Social Democratic book peddlar (Kolporteur) for sending a police
sergeant a pamphlet urging Beamten to vote Socialist in the upcoming
(1913) Prussian elections.88 The courts considered this a legally prosecutable insult act because, since Beamten were forbidden to vote for
anti-government parties, it involved asking a Beamten to violate his
duty, a request, in this reasoning, that somehow inherently implied the
police sergeant would engage in dishonorable behavior. This was
justice as a form of harassment.
A double standard of justice carried over into the treatment of
Socialist plaintiﬀs (the injured party), where there is evidence of
reluctance and outright refusal on the part of the state to prosecute
some of these cases. In 1914, the state attorney’s oﬃce rejected an
SPD suit against a Prussian oﬃcer, Lieutenant General Wrochem
who, at the founding meeting of the Preussenbund, had made
strongly defamatory remarks against the Reichstag with allusions
86

“Die Ehre des Arbeitswilligen!” Vorwärts, March, 17, 1911.
“Reichsgericht und Abgeordnete,” Münchener Post, May 10, 1913, written with
outrage and sarcasm, provided the reasoning of the Reichsgericht.
88
“Beleidigung von Beamten durch die Zumutung, sozialdemokratisch zu wählen?”
Deutsche Tageszeitung, March 8, 1913. This anti-socialist newspaper found the
conviction, if not the precise reasoning of the court, ﬁtting.
87

106

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

to the SPD, calling the Reichstag a “mixed society” and “rabble.”
The state rejected the case, arguing that Wrochem, as a military
oﬃcial, was under the jurisdiction of the military court system, not of
the state attorney’s oﬃce, and that, moreover, the Reichstag itself, as
the defamed party, would have to inititate the lawsuit. Even
Germania, a Center newspaper and no friend of the Socialists, was
outraged by the decision. It pointed out that defamation cases were
normally never intitated by the Reichstag; rather the reverse was
standard practice, the state attorney requesting of the Reichstag an
“authorization” to prosecute defamations against the institution. As
to Wrochem’s military status, the prosecutor’s oﬃce could and
should have referred it to the military authorities rather than washing
its hands of such a serious defamation. Vorwärts commented with
sarcasm and disgust on the double standard of justice and the
violation of the basic principles of equality before the law in a
Rechtsstaat:
a conservative general may insult the Reichstag as much as he wants. But if an
opposition writer uses a hot-tempered word against the Crown Prince or the
undemocratically elected lower house of the Prussian parliament [Dreiklassenhaus],
then the state prosecutor is instantly ready to initiate a criminal proceeding.
Prussia, namely, is a state based on the rule of law [Rechsstaat] where all are
equal before the law.89

And yet, it must be said: if massive censorship of government critics
occurred under libel (and other) laws in the Kaiserreich, it was an odd
and ineﬀectual sort of censorship, one consistent with an evolved
Rechtsstaat, that sent newspaper editors to jail for a wrong word or
phrase but allowed those same editors to publish lengthy critiques of
their convictions and of the legal system in general. So, for example,
after Vorwärts’ chief editor was convicted in the Moabit case for
libeling the criminal police, the paper published a scathing commentary that began with: “the court proceeding is a gross violation of
89

“Der beleidigte Reichstag und der schwerhörige Staatsanwalt,” Vorwärts, March 9,
1914. How widespread such cases were is impossible to know. But troubling, in
light of later history, is the willingness of state oﬃcials even before WWI to
abandon (symbolic) protections of the Reichstag.

The state

107

the legal rules that form the most important guarantees for defendants.”90 Here, in the environment of mass politics and the modern
press, the antiquated honor codes underlying the censorship of
speech in such litigation seem no longer up to their task.
The courts, dominated by pro-government, conservative jurists, were
fundamental to government libel policies, but not entirely. Judges were
formally independent and perfectly capable of ruling against the
government. They acquitted defendants for lack of suﬃcient evidence;
granted §193 protection of speech; and made other rulings unfavorable
to the government and state prosecutors.91 Such was the case, for
example, when a lancer (Ulan) killed himself, and his mother
denounced to the military authorities the sergeant in charge of her
son’s military unit, whom she accused of abusive treatment, which, she
believed, had driven him to suicide. The sergeant turned around and
successfully sued her for Beamtenbeleidigung. But on appeal, her conviction was overturned when a court granted her slander the status of
“legitimate interest” (i.e. §193 protection).92 The case was not untypical. Prussia’s Minister of Justice complained in 1887 that fully 41.1
percent of government cases failed on appeal.93
The justice system, furthermore, was far from a monolith. There
were numerous diﬀerences of opinion and interpretation of the law
among the courts (see below). Yet, their role in the suppression of
speech during the Kaiserreich and beyond can not be overemphasized. Led by a stream of draconian Reichsgericht rulings, the courts
90

“Die beleidigte Polizei und der abgeschnittene Wahrheitsbeweis,” Vorwärts,
March 28, 1911.
91
This occurred, for example, in the case of a writer whom the government prosecuted for having sent a petition to Bismarck that included a denunciation of the
railway authorities, and who was acquitted by a Cologne court in 1890 (later upheld
by the Reichsgericht). GStPK, Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139, pp. 103–8. Another example is
that of a high court reversing on appeal the libel conviction of a Socialist defendant.
“Polizeiliches, Gerichtliches: Erfolgreiche Berufung,” Vorwärts, August 24, 1902.
92
“Der Beweis der Wahrheit bei Beschuldigung von Beamten,” National Zeitung,
August 20, 1887.
93
Justice Minister to all attorneys general, May 10, 1887. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8139,
GStPK, pp. 88–91.

108

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

were progressively tightening and broadening defamation laws in
favor of plaintiﬀs and in the name of defending honor, with especially
devastating consequences for press freedoms.94
The key Reichsgericht decision came in a ruling of December 16,
1881 in the case of an editor of a newspaper (Berliner Zeitung) convicted
by a lower court for an article about a political meeting of antisemites.95
Noting that the meeting, although very “agitated,” failed to be dispersed by the police, the article went on to criticize an apparent double
standard prevailing between police treatment of liberal and right-wing,
antisemitic meetings. The police lieutenant in charge sued and won for
defamation, claiming, with emphasis on his oﬃcial status, that the
“insulting charge” (kränkender Vorwurf ) of “corruption and violation
of his duties” harmed his “professional honor.”96 The court, in rejecting
the editor’s appeal, set out a broad and cripplingly limited view of press
rights:
There exists no general right for the daily press to publicly criticise putative
wrongdoing or to publicise every occurrence even when it harms the honor of
others.97

The court’s reasoning turned on a very narrow – and extremely
controversial – interpretation of §193 of the Criminal Code. That
clause set out what appeared to be wide protections for certain kinds
of public speech:
Critical opinions about scientiﬁc, artistic or commercial achievements, as well
as remarks that are made to realize or defend rights or legitimate interests, as
well as criticism or reprimands by superiors of their subordinates, oﬃcial
reports or judgments on the part of oﬃcials, and similar cases are punishable
94

This was happening in both criminal and civil law, in legal interpretations of both
the criminal and civil codes.
95
Entscheidungen des Reichsgerichts in Strafsachen 5 (1882), pp. 239–41. Like other
Reichsgericht decisions, the ruling, unlike those of the American Supreme Court,
established merely a guiding principle for the lower courts.
96
For a general overview of §193 and its interpretation by the Reichsgericht, see
Lilienthal, “Üble Nachrede und Verleumdung,” in Mittermaier et al. (eds.),
Vergleichende Darstellung des deutschen und ausländischen Strafrechts: Besonderer
Teil vol. 4 (Berlin, 1906), p. 408ﬀ.
97
Ibid., p. 240.

The state

109

only insofar as the presence of an insult proceeds from the kind of language
used or the circumstances under which it occured.98

The trouble was that berechtigte Interessen (legitimate interests), left
undeﬁned by the statute, was open to alternative interpretations, and
the one chosen by the Reichsgericht was extremely narrow indeed.
Rejecting the notion of a special protected status for defamatory speech
(of the press) in the public interest, the court argued that the statute
protected only the defamatory speech of private individuals (and some
professional groups). The press was therefore to be held to the same
standards as private individuals. To be sure, a journalist or editor had
speech rights and could successfully invoke §193 to defend himself
against defamation charges. But he could only do so as a private
citizen, in defense of his personal honor and reputation. The press, as
the high court argued in this and subsequent rulings,99 had, in other
words, neither greater nor lesser rights than private citizens.
98
99

My emphasis.
Another enormously controversial high court ruling on §193 sparking a lot of
commentary in the press came in 1894. See, e.g., “Die Parteipresse und der §193,”
Vorwärts, May 22, 1894. Two later examples in 1908 include rulings that limited the
deﬁnition of “ähnliche Fälle” (similar cases) in that part of §193 giving protection in
certain instances to defamations committed in the critique of “wissenschaftliche,
gewerbliche und künstlerische Leistungen … und ähnliche Fälle.” In the case of a
schoolteacher (Provinzialschulrat) who sued for a defamation regarding his profession, the Reichsgericht ruled against the defendant, denying that this was an
“ähnlicher Fall” case and arguing that “it is not in the general interest for the
free criticism of state oﬃcials to go so far as being able to harm their reputations
[Ansehen].” Another case involved an author-defendant who had used the words
“juridical child murder” to describe a one-year prison sentence given to a twelveand thirteen-year-old for endangering a train transport. The suit was brought on
behalf of the judges and prosecutors in the case, who were deemed to have been
defamed by the sentence. A lower court initially exonerated the defendant because
it judged the statement to be protected under §193 as a critique of “wissenschaftliche Leistung.” The Reichsgericht later reversed this decision. Court rulings, it
stated, are not “wissenschaftliche Leistungen”; they are, to paraphrase the
Vossische Zeitung’s description of the ruling, acts of state. But neither do they fall
in the protected category of “ähnliche Fälle” when the defamer’s critique is in a
form “mehr agitatorischer als sachlicher” and the defendant is in the role of an
“ironisierenden und politisierenden Agitator.” “Reichsgericht und Presse,”
Vossische Zeitung, March 23, 1908.

110

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

This logic had enormous implications, seriously undermining for
decades freedom of the press by removing the press’s ability to
function as a public watchdog, leaving it instead vulnerable to
prosecution for defamation when it sought to enlighten the citizenry
about government corruption and other abuses in public life.100
Bizarrely, as commented on in the deluge of newspaper coverage
accompanying the high court’s rulings on the issue, this interpretation of §193 eﬀectively protected the private interests of individuals at
the expense of the general interests of society (Gesammtheit). The
Vossische Zeitung gave the example of police abuse: “if a newspaper
censures police excess, according to present practice, it is only
guaranteed the protection of §193 if the editor himself is attacked.”101
The Reichsgericht’s personal interpretation of “legitimate interests”
did not even make sense on its own terms. Is it not strange, noted the
Kölnische Volkszeitung, that normally the “advocacy of naked selfinterest is seen as something inferior,” yet the high court has ruled
exactly the opposite case when it comes to the press and §193?102 To
reject the notion of a special protected status for defamatory speech in
the public interest “contradicts all other areas of accepted opinion.”
Even within the court’s own logic, there could have been ways to
grant the press greater speech rights. For it had ruled elsewhere that
certain small groups – those where each individual in the group was
“recognizable” – could constitute a legal person (Personenmehrheit)
with the individual’s accompanying §193 rights.103 In one case, the
court displayed remarkable ﬂexiblity in its deﬁnition of “small group,”
applying the concept to the entire Bavarian army (50,000 troops). Yet,
at the same time, it consistently denied this same right to newspaper
100

Later Reichsgericht decisions would restrict even further the conditions in which
the press could claim a §193 defense.
101
“Die Gefahren der Beschwerdeführung,” Vossische Zeitung, October 8, 1898.
102
“Presse und §193,” Kölnischer Volkszeitung, February 18, 1911. The original statement in the article was not phrased as a question.
103
Kronecker mentioned a Reichsgericht ruling that protected as a group under §193
the members of a Reichstag election committee that libeled certain state oﬃcials in
the course of “excercising its voting rights.” Aschrott and Liszt (eds.), Die Reform
des Reichstrafgesetzbuchs (Berlin, 1910), p. 321.

The state

111

editors and reporters, for whom “small group” would seem to have
more legitimately applied.104
There were other instances over the years where the high court
evinced a more lenient, pro-free speech attitude toward §193 rights.
In 1887, for example, a Breslau newspaper reported that, in violation of the professional code, a (civil-servant) telegraph operator
had communicated the contents of a telegraph message to a third
party. The telegraph operator sued the paper for libel. After a lower
court acquitted the newspaper, the district attorney appealed the
ruling to the Reichsgericht, arguing that the proper way to pursue a
public employee oﬀense was to lodge a complaint with the authorities, not to publicize it in a newspaper. The court dismissed this
argument, granting the newspaper §193 protection.105 It oﬀered a
similar interpretation of the law in an 1890s case of a building
contractor who, while running for local oﬃce, gave a speech at a
gathering of the Democratic Party in which he criticized the
municipal building administration for approving new building
projects on a partisan basis. Sued and convicted of defamation
(§186), the building contractor appealed his case all the way to
the Reichsgericht, which sided with him and chastised the lower
appellate court for having applied a “too narrow notion of legitimate interests in the sense of §193.”106
What distinguished these and other scattered cases of leniency on
the part of the Reichsgericht from its otherwise severe line against the
press? It would take a systematic study of all of the many high court’s
rulings on §193 (an endeavor beyond the scope of this book) to answer
this question with certainty and precision. But what one can say is that,
in addition to technical legal considerations, a certain extra-judicial
attitude toward honor, the state, and public order underpinned the
court’s rulings on §193. That attitude placed a premium on protecting
the integrity of the state and the class order. This made obedience to
104

“Büreaukratie und Presse,” Berliner Tageblatt, May 6, 1894.
“Oeﬀentliche Interessen,” Volks-Zeitung, April 27, 1894.
106
Ruling of May 23, 1892. Entscheidungen des Reichsgerichts in Strafsachen 23 (Berlin,
1893), p. 145.
105

112

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

oﬃcialdom, deference to superiors, and the integrity of honor – that
symbolic quality underpinning the social and political hierarchy – into
values that trumped freedom of speech. And the more important
(whether literally or symbolically) the ﬁgure of authority, the more
the tendency on the part of the court, it seems, to rule in favor of
protecting honor against free-speech values. As the court phrased it in
one 1892 ruling, “the more important the honor of [a particular]
individual is to state order, the more sensitive the appraisal of it must
be to what is permissible and impermissible [in speech toward that
individual].”107 The plaintiﬀs at issue in the above cases were, by
contrast, inconsequential in the schema of state power, both practically
and symbolically – the telegraph operator extremely so.
The Reichsgericht’s narrow interpretation of §193 was extraordinarily controversial, sharply dividing both the public (chapter 4)
and the courts. Some lower courts simply refused to heed its
rulings. In 1911, a Hamburg court used §193 to acquit a newspaper
that had been sued for exposing deplorable conditions in a bakery.
Directly contradicting the Reichsgericht, the Hamburg court
argued that “the press must point out abuses in order for the
authorities to have the chance to take action against them.”108
Other courts resorted to eccentric reasoning in order to get around
the high court’s exclusion of the press from §193 protection: hence,
for example, a 1910 ruling of the Leipzig Landgericht (appeals
court) in the case of an author of a book on stock-exchange rates
for devout (gläubige) Jews, who sued a newspaper for exposing his
book as a swindle. Mindful of the fact that the Reichsgericht
supported the right of small groups but not the press itself to the
protection of §193, the Leipzig court, ruling in favor of the newspaper, argued the article was legal because it had been written at the
behest and in the interests of representatives of the business class
[Handelsstand].109
107

Ibid., pp. 347–48.
“Presse und §193,” Kölnischer Volkszeitung, February 18, 1911. The quote is from
the author of the article summarizing the court decision.
109
Ibid.
108

The state

113

Important cultural and philosophical diﬀerences regarding honor
and speech rights underlay these divisions within the courts. The
Reichsgericht’s anti-press interpretations of §193 were based on a
corporatist, primordial, and authoritarian notion of rights that privileged state power over free speech and that viewed rights as diﬀerential, hierarchical, and personalized. Its protection of libelous speech
in defense of “personal” but not public interests may also have been a
function of spillage into the courts of a privatized dueling ethos with
which the judges, given their educational and class backgrounds,
would have been familiar and at home. By contrast, at least some of
the lower courts opposing the Reichsgericht used the reasoning of
liberal principles, basing their decisions on a more abstract, universalist, and egalitarian notion of citizenship rights. These ideological
splits are well illustrated in the reaction of the courts to the litigation
(see chapter 2) between the two businessmen X and Y, where X, a
military oﬃcer, had sued Y for writing him (X) a curt business letter
that, seeking to break oﬀ any further dealings with X, “gifted” him
the money Y felt was owed him. The courts split on the case, doing so
along the competing models of honor and rights outlined above.
Even though the lawsuit, deriving from an entirely private and trivial
matter, was the stuﬀ of a mere Privatklage, the state prosecutor
decided to take up X’s case thus elevating it to the status of a “public
matter.” He did so because, thinking about honor along corporatist
and hierarchical lines, he ascribed importance to the defense of the
principle of “diﬀerence[s] between Standesehre [here, that of an
oﬃcer, X] and bürgerliche Ehre.” X’s military honor deserved special
protection, which he received when the public prosecutor brought
charges against Y for insulting an oﬃcer by oﬀering him a “present”
(!). An appellate court, however, later threw out the case, acquitting
Y and rejecting the very basis of the initial trial, arguing instead along
liberal lines that “all Prussians” are equal before the law.110
Yet, despite the opposition of some lower courts, by the early
twentieth century the Reichsgericht’s narrow interpretation of §193
and press rights had become the dominant position within the
110

“Staatsanwalts-Anklagen,” Reichsfreund, August 23, 1890.

114

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

judiciary.111 This was politically explosive. It became a central point
of contention in debates underway in the press and the legislatures
about the broader implications of defamation law, honor, and state
power – debates, discussed in the next chapter, that merged national
politics and the personal politics of honor.
111

It was, however, rejected by a large number of legal scholars. See, e.g., Aschrott
and Liszt, Reform, p. 321.

CHAPTER 4

Politicization

“Today’s legal interpretation of §193 is nothing but a scare tactic
against everything in the public interest [jede öﬀentliche
Wirksamkeit]. Not only the woman, but the man is silenced under
the Prussian state!”1
“… our law courts almost completely fail in the task of protecting
the honor of [our] citizens. Our system of justice has the ungermanic trait of protecting material property but not ideal goods
[honor], which are contemptuously dismissed as merely conceited
values.”2

An impassioned debate over honor and the reform of libel law
pervaded Germany’s public square – in the press, the parliaments,
the legal profession, and the courts – reaching a peak of intensity in the
early years of the twentieth century. The debate was driven by two
countervailing trends. On the one hand, state repression and press
censorship were feeding tensions between Socialists and the government, while increasingly generating criticism beyond the Left. On the
other hand, there were anxiety and anger about the perceived growth
of threats to honor emanating most particularly from the “revolver
press.” The ﬁrst trend led to outcries against Beamtenbeleidigung and
§193, spurring demands for greater protections of free speech and legal
equality. The latter trend led in the opposite direction to demands for a
crackdown on trial publicity, the admissibility of evidence in court
(Wahrheitsbeweis), and for strengthening defamation sentencing. The
debates that ensued were bitter, intense, and raucous, profoundly
dividing the German political class and entangling libel in some of
1
2

“Das berechtigte Interesse,” Vorwärts, October 28, 1904.
“Der Kampf gegen das Duell,” Tägliche Rundschau, October 30, 1901.
115

116

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

the key political debates of the day – on civil rights, class inequality,
political power, and the state. In this environment, honor and its
correlates – privacy and morality – were charged code terms reﬂecting
broader political divisions and their agendas. This chapter follows the
debates, placing particular emphasis on those accompanying the
revised lèse-majesté bill of 1908 and the Eulenburg Aﬀair, the national
scandal surrounding trials between 1907 and 1909 involving members
of the Kaiser’s inner circle around charges of homosexuality, which led
to the notorious “Lex Eulenburg” libel law brought before the
Reichstag in 1909.
Even as the Reich Criminal Code was being signed into law, there
were voices calling for its reform, and they grew stronger over time.
By 1906, the government had committed to a general revision of the
Criminal Code and put together a commission to this end whose ﬁrst
draft version (Vorentwurf ) was presented for discussion to the public
in a 1909 publication.3 Extraordinarily wide-ranging and complex,
this legislation was still under debate when World War One and the
1918/19 revolution intervened to temporarily halt it.4 The ongoing
preparation of the Criminal Code formed one context for the libel
debates discussed below. Equally important was the enormity of what
was taking place on the ground – the perceived attacks on personal
and state honor, on the one hand; the incessant libel trials against the
oppositional press, on the other – and the way these events fed into
the broader political conﬂicts of the Kaiserreich.
Outrage and anger are the best terms to describe the reactions of a
wide swath of public opinion to the stiﬂing, inequitable eﬀects of libel
jurisprudence, sentiments that focused in particular on the incessant
Beamtenbeleidigung prosecutions and the courts’ narrow interpretation of §193. The liberalization of libel law in the nineteenth century,
which had abolished corporate legal distinctions among litigants,
3

Vorentwurf zu einem deutschen Strafgesetzbuch (Berlin, 1909). A number of the articles on
the debates covered in this chapter can be found in I HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8142, GStPK.
4
It was taken up again in the Weimar Republic, but abandoned in the 1930s as a result
of the constitutional crisis and the Nazi seizure of power. Eberhard Schmidt,
Einführung in die Geschichte der deutschen Strafrechtspﬂege (Göttingen, 1983).

Politicization

117

made the continued special treatment of oﬃcialdom all the more
glaring and intolerable. For critics, these prosecutions, together with
the refusal of the Reichsgericht to grant the press §193 protections,
were enormously controversial, holding profound implications for
free speech rights. Crushing the press’s “legitimate freedom,” they
amounted to a regime of censorship.5
Public criticism of the Reichsgericht was fed not only by the
draconian nature of its rulings against the press, but also by the
legal uncertainties those rulings engendered given the statutes’ lack
of clarity and their inconsistent application in the courts. As a result,
defendants and their attorneys searched for alternative defense methods and found one in the Wahrheitsbeweis: Germany’s rule allowing
libel defendants broad freedom to introduce into the court record
evidence of the truth of the libelous statements for which he/she was
standing trial. In eﬀect, the Wahrheitsbeweis gave the defense substantial power – not only to prove the truth of their libels but, in
doing so, to publicize the very information that plaintiﬀs or the state
were trying to censor in bringing charges, and even in some cases, to
turn trials on their head by introducing evidence that put the plaintiﬀs
on the defense (e.g. the Moabit trial in chapter 3). As such, the
Wahrheitsbeweis, along with the intertwined issues of §193 and
Beamtenbeleidigung, also became a hot-button matter, lambasted by
the Right and turning an otherwise arcane technical question of
evidentiary courtroom rules into the stuﬀ of heated political debate.
Socialists, focused on the ills of §193 and Beamtenbeleidigung, saw
existing libel jurisprudence as an egregious tool of “class justice,” a
method for crushing socialism and defending the capitalist-Junker
state – in short, as a form of class warfare. Many liberals saw in the
same court rulings disturbing evidence of the fragility of civil rights
and the constitutional state. But in both cases, the feeling was that
basic citizen rights were under attack. What this disparate – and
otherwise warring – group shared in common were certain liberal
assumptions about civil rights and the rule of law: publicity, government accountability, equality of rights, freedom of expression.
5

Frankfurter Zeitung, March 24, 1890.

118

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

Measured against such principles, libel law in the Kaiserreich was
an outrage. Today’s climate of denunciation [Denunziantthum] is so
bad, wrote one National Liberal paper, that, had they been living
today, Goethe, Schiller, and the other great writers would be in jail.6
Other reporters compared Germany to “despotic Russia,” arguing
that, given the muzzling of the press, the constitutional state no
longer actually existed. The Berliner Tageblatt described the ideal:
When public aﬀairs are dealt with in a way that includes the participation of the
entire nation, and all of its institutions … are based on the principle of publicity
[transparency] …, then it is a given that public aﬀairs are being subject to free
criticism and that freedom of expression about those aﬀairs must be unlimited.7

But this was far from the case in today’s Germany, where, to the
contrary, libel prosecutions and court rulings have made it no longer
possible “to discuss public matters openly, creatively, and according
to the truth, and without restraint.”8
Legal inequities and the stiﬂing of speech went hand in hand. Das
kleine Journal warned of an ever-widening “chasm between the feelings of the people and the administration of justice” caused by the
absurd lengths the courts were willing to go to defend the honor of
state oﬃcials and civil servants.9 Most recently, it noted, an Alsatian
editor was sentenced to an eight-month jail term for publishing two
satirical images, one showing an (unnamed, annonymous) arrogant,
chauvinistic “Prussian oﬃcer” ordering a waiter around; the other
image depicting a similar scene with the character of a teacher.
“Insulting the oﬃcer and the teaching estates” read his conviction.
“That a person should spend eight months in a small jail cell for such
a petty matter,” commented the paper, “in order to ‘rescue’ the honor
of two of our most respected estates” – that smacked of the “Middle
Ages.” The Berliner Zeitung condemned the inequities of the law seen
in the constant refusal of the courts to prosecute the right-wing Court
Chaplain Stöcker and his incessant “meanest” libels, whereas the
6

“Warnrufe,” Berliner Tageblatt, February 15, 1896.
“Wo ist Artikel 27 der Verfassung geblieben?” Berliner Tageblatt, August 1, 1883.
8
Ibid.
9
“Acht Monate Gefängnis,” Das kleine Journal, May 11, 1908.
7

Politicization

119

courts treated the other side, Stöcker’s political enemies, very diﬀerently: “As soon as Herr Stöcker ﬁles suit and seeks the intervention of
the state prosecutor, he ﬁnds a favourable hearing [of his case].”10
And, indeed, with no deﬁcit of other examples to draw from, the
publicizing of such cases became a staple of leftist and liberal reportage in the Wilhelmine years.
These critical sentiments subjected judicial rulings and the ﬁner
points of the law to intense scrutiny and public discussion. Mass dailies
published debates about whether the evidentiary rules for proving the
truth of a libel should be construed broadly or narrowly (the Left was
for keeping the law broad; the Right wanted to narrow it). There was
much commentary on the legal basis of Beamtenbeleidigung. Leftists, for
example, rejected its entire legal basis, pointing out that, while the
courts were treating it as a serious honor oﬀense, in fact neither the term
nor a speciﬁed crime for it actually existed anymore in the Criminal
Code. Citing liberal legal scholars like Professors Schulte (Bonn) and
Bierkmeyer (Munich), they argued for rethinking this and other legal
provisions along lines more favorable to the accused (and with an eye to
decreasing libel litigation altogether).11 There were debates about the
“legitimate interests” clause of §193 and the role of motive in assessing
guilt,12 and about the need for a precise legal deﬁnition of honor, which
rehearsed for a mass audience thorny questions long debated by legal
scholars: is the thing being protected by defamation law “subjective
honor” (i.e., the honor for which the complainant is demanding a legal
remedy) or “objective honor” (the honor that the complainant in reality
can assert)? If the latter, is it determined by the complainant’s moral
worth, social position, or rights of citizenship?13
Meanwhile, debates about Beamtenbeleidigung and §193 were becoming forums for discussions about fundamental questions of state power
and citizenship rights. Exposés of speciﬁc trials went far beyond the
10

“Die Beleidigungsprozesse in Deutschland,” Berliner Zeitung, June 24, 1885.
See, for example, “Die Strafsatzungen für Beleidigung,” Vossische Zeitung, January 9,
1897; “Berlin, den 13. Juli 1894,” Volks-Zeitung, July 13, 1894.
12
For example, “Oeﬀentliche Interessen,” Volks-Zeitung, April, 27, 1894; “Beleidigung
oder Wahrung berechtigter Interessen,” Strassburger Post, August 22, 1897.
13
“Warnrufe,” Berliner Tageblatt, February 15, 1896.
11

120

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

case at hand, or even libel law itself, to articulate visions of rights and
the societal good. When, in 1898, a newspaper reported on the case of a
private citizen who, having been abused by the police, lodged a
complaint and was subsequently himself prosecuted for “false accusation,”14 the point was to underline the broader nexus between oﬃcial
abuse and the repression of the press. For the answer to police abuse
was nothing if not publicity – a risky legal proposition under present
circumstances. How, wondered dozens of reporters, could the press do
its job of enlightening the public and holding government accountable
if investigative reporting in the public interest was not legally protected? Wasn’t it the very function of the press in a constitutional state
to “serve the newspaper profession, public opinion, and the general
interest”? 15 How, moreover, could politicians and the citizenry rectify
social problems if, as a result, they were ignorant of those problems?
The plain answer was: they could not.
Socialists turned such questions into radical critiques of the political, economic, and legal systems, using exposés of libel law as
agitation tools for raising consciousness and mobilizing supporters.
Their newspapers16 sustained readers on a regular diet of outrageous
libel rulings against workers, the labour movement, and the SPD.
Vorwärts, the SPD’s main newspaper, also specialized in a kind of
Schadenfreude reportage of bourgeois libel suits and oﬃcer dueling,
all the more to show the stupidity of these characters. The newspaper
related, for example, the farcical drama of factional ﬁghting at the
German Yacht Club that ended in a libel conviction of the Club’s
president, industrialist Adolf Steinberg.17
Socialists dismissed with contempt bourgeois and upper-class norms
of honor, and actively agitated against the duel – that embodiment of
14

“Die Gefahren der Beschwerdeführung,” Vossische Zeitung, October 8, 1898.
“Presse und §193,” Kölnische Volkszeitung, February 18, 1911.
16
After perusing editions of Vorwärts over a number of years, I randomly chose the
articles from two years – 1902 and 1911 – to read and use in depth.
17
“Vom Krawattenfabrikanten Adolf Steinberg,” Vorwärts, April 5, 1911. But the paper
also reported seriously and with sympathy on bourgeois libel defendants in order to
critique state censorship. See, e.g., “Bewiesene Wahrheit – kein Wahrheitsbeweis,”
Vorwärts, October 25, 1902.
15

Politicization

121

feudalist political power and German militarism.18 They exulted accordingly in unmasking the hypocrisy and hollowness of the “gentleman’s”
honor code. In 1911, the Prussian Minister of Interior von Dallwitz gave
an outraged speech before the Prussian Landtag accusing the SPD of
having bribed a police oﬃcial back in the days of Bismarck–Puttkamer
to work as a Socialist Party spy, and in so doing dishonorably “luring
him into disloyalty and violation of his oath of oﬃce.”19 SPD leader
August Bebel responded with unrepentant glee, giving the Minister and
his code of honor the verbal equivalent of the ﬁnger. Solemnly, Bebel
was sorry to say that the situation had in fact been worse than Dallwitz
imagined; the police oﬃcial in question was actually the one who
sought out the Socialists to oﬀer his services, and did so requesting a
fee – an alleged fact that made the man appear not only a political traitor
but a thoroughly avaricious, and non-gentlemanly one. Further, Bebel
clariﬁed, the SPD would have been fools had they not accepted the
oﬃcial’s services: his spying enabled the Party to “foil the devilish plans
of the ﬁrm Bismarck-Puttkamer,” revealed a whole “series of ‘men of
honor’” working against the Party as spies in the political police, and
was an act of reprisal for all the spies recruited by the government from
the Socialist ranks to work against their own comrades. So, Bebel
concluded, you’ll understand, Herr Minister, why “I can only smile
and shrug my shoulders … at your moral indignation.”20
In the press and in the parliaments, there was no better way of
exposing the inequities of class justice – the way “rank und class”21
and political ideology inﬂuenced judicial rulings – than in narrating
the stories of the discrepant outcomes of libel actions.22 In a 1913
Reichstag speech, deputy Cohn let forth with an impressive litany
of such cases:23 the denial of §193 protections to the editor of the
18

E.g., “Der Appell an die nationale Ehre,” Vorwärts, March 23, 1911.
A point of clariﬁcation: Dallwitz’s speech referred to an article in which Bebel
himself had revealed this information.
20
“An den Herrn Minister des Innern v. Dallwitz,” Vorwärts, February 19, 1911.
21
Cohn speech, SBR, February 8, 1913, p. 3589.
22
“Gibt es eine Klassenjustiz?” Vorwärts, March 14, 1911, provides one among many
journalistic examples.
23
SBR, February 8, 1913, pp. 3588f.
19

122

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

Rheinisch-Westfälische Zeitung whereas a court granted that very same
protection to a Jena judge (an Amtsgerichtsrat), a defendant charged
with calling a building contractor the “most insolent, mendacious, and
money-obsessed [händelwütigster] scoundrel”; the inequality of class
seen in a case arising from a carpenters’ strike against constructionindustry entrepreneurs, which led to boycott notices from both sides.
For the same oﬀense, a Hamburg court convicted the carpenters but
refused to prosecute the entrepreneurs.24 And so on.
Liberals, of course, rejected out of hand the Marxist critique and
class analysis of Socialists. And there were other diﬀerences in rhetoric
and approach among these critics. Both leftists and liberals, to be sure,
articulated their outrage in terms of the violations of civil rights.
National Liberal Eugen Schiﬀer, for example, bemoaning the “excessive growth of Privatklagen,” called in a Reichstag speech for a civic
and political “discourse of greater tolerance for free speech.”25 But
right-leaning liberals tended also toward the rhetoric of nationalism
and moral purity, as when Bonn professor and National Liberal Schulte
emphasized the function of freedom of opinion for the health of the
fatherland and the nation. Today’s stiﬂing of speech was instead only
feeding discontent and the forces of revolution: “nothing is more
dangerous for the fatherland than general discontent and griping …
within all levels of society about the feeling of being vulnerable to
denunciations.”26 Liberals, moreover, tended to combine their critiques of state repression with vociferous calls for harsher penalties in
Privatklage actions. Among other liberals, the rhetoric was more likely
to revolve around the contrast between progress and backwardness –
between a modern, free state, on the one hand, and the shameful,
backward authoritarianism of the German Reich, which they compared
to China, Japan, and despotic Russia.27 When searching for the
reasons for Germany’s Denunzianttum, the Berliner Tageblatt felt
24

Ibid., pp. 3590–91. The exact oﬀense for which the carpenters were convicted is not
clear.
25
“Energieverschleuderung,” Berliner Morgenpost, February 28, 1914.
26
“Warnrufe,” Berliner Tageblatt, February 15, 1896.
27
“Die Rechtsstellung der Presse,” Breslauer Zeitung, July 21, 1894. England for
these and other commentators was often a reform model as well as a mirror used to

Politicization

123

that the two deep-seated causes were the heritage of Bismarckean
repression and “national character,” namely, a “bureaucratism” that
made the country value freedom of press less highly than England or
France.28 By contrast, a Socialist class analysis located the causes and
injustices of libel law in capitalism and Prussian authoritarianism – in
the protection of “personal proﬁt,” “egoistic interests” and power.29
Leftist and liberal critics were not rejecting honor per se. Far from it.
They remained steeped in Germany’s honor culture and made copious
use of the Privatklage in their own lives, private and public. The
Socialist editor of the Potsdamer Nachrichten ﬁled a Privatklage against
the editor of a rival newspaper, the Potsdamer Tageszeitung, for calling
him a political slanderer (politischer Brunnenvergifter) and mole.30 Even
the Socialist leadership, while disdaining libel litigation against
the “boorishness of political enemies,”31 did not hesitate on occasion
to ﬁle suit against those enemies.32 General Lieutenant von Wrochem
(pp. 105–06 above), at the founding meeting of the Preussenbund
(Prussian league), called the Reichstag a “mixed society” and “rabble”
(Rotte). The allusion to Social Democrats, the majority party in the
Reichstag, was unmistakable, and, as the Center (no friend of the SPD)
put it, such a comment was undoubtedly a defamation of the parliament,
prompting a Social Democratic deputy to denounce Wrochem to the
state attorney.33 Farther to the right, liberals and Center Party members
critique problems in Germany. See, e.g., n.t., Hannoverscher Courier, April 17, 1895
on the Oscar Wilde case. But the liberal Vossische Zeitung (“Die Strafsatzungen für
Beleidigung,” January 9, 1897) argued, to the contrary, that England’s libel laws
were too harsh and unhealthy for free public debate.
28
“Büreaukratie und Presse,” Berliner Tageblatt, May 6, 1894.
29
“Das berechtigte Interesse,” Vorwärts, October 28, 1904. But most Socialist newspaper commentary did not provide causal analysis in this or any other vein.
30
“Der Mandatsverzicht des Reichtagsabgeordneten Pauli,” Vorwärts, March 18,
1911.
31
“Ein Lümmel, der noch in den Dreckhosen steckt,” Vorwärts, April 6, 1911.
32
This goes back as far as Karl Marx himself. One example of a Privatklage brought
by the Socialist leader Karl Liebknecht in defense of his professional reputation as a
lawyer can be found in “Zurückgenommene Beleidigung,” Vorwärts, April 12, 1911.
33
“Der beleidigte Reichstag und die untätige Staatsanwaltschaften,” Germania, March 9,
1914. Other examples of Socialist libel lawsuits can be found in Vorwärts, e.g., “Eine
Episode im Kampf zur Erlangung von Versammlungslokalen,” Vorwärts, March 16,
1911.

124

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

were particularly adamant about the defense of personal honor and
privacy. At times they even sounded like conservatives when talk of
citizenship rights included calls for harsher sentences in Privatklage
lawsuits, or when it included attacking the “sensationalist” press for
dragging people’s private lives into the public arena.34 Indeed, the
commitment to personal honor created a quandary for many (and
diﬀerences of opinion within the parties) when, as seen below in the
Eulenburg Aﬀair, the values of privacy and personal honor conﬂicted
with those of publicity, free speech, and legal transparency.
Leftists and many liberals were advocating not the end of honor,
but its redeﬁnition along democratic lines. When, for example, the
Kölnische Zeitung complained about low sentencing practices in
Privatklage cases, it did so, unlike Conservatives, in a language that
merged the idioms of honor and democracy, contrasting the low
sentences imposed on defendants convicted of libeling ordinary
citizens with the harsh ones meted out against the press for
Beamtenbeleidigung. The inequality of the situation, the lack of
proper respect for ordinary citizens, was what most disturbed: oﬃcials’ honor, it opined, should not be valued and treated as something
higher than the honor of “private people.”35 Calls to strengthen
protections of personal honor, moreover, were carefully crafted so
as not to infringe on the “rightful” rights of the press. Thus, the
Westfälischer Merkur made clear that it was not the “political side of
press freedom,” but the “gossip press” – the element that mixed in
“purely personal matters,” sullying the “honor of daughter[s]” and
their families – that needed to be reined in.36
Socialists, the most radical and the most aﬀected by defamation
prosecutions, articulated a thorough-going democratic-egalitarian
34

May 11, 1908. For a speciﬁc instance, see the case of Kirchoﬀ-Hairich, “Ist die Ehre
genügend geschützt?” Westfälischer Merkur, October 11, 1893.
35
“Beleidigungsprozesse,” Kölnische Zeitung, November 7, 1902. Indeed, it argued
that only when private people’s honor is defended in courts with the same harsh
sentences as those of government oﬃcials will the complaints about sentencing stop
and, perhaps, people won’t feel they have to resort to “extra-legal” measures
(i.e. the duel).
36
“Ist die Ehre genügend geschützt?” Westfälischer Merkur, October 11, 1893.

Politicization

125

vision of defamation jurisprudence and the honor question. This can be
seen, for example, in a Socialist commentary on a famous 1902 libel case
bearing on the question of §193 and “legitimate interests.” The case
involved a libel lawsuit brought against the professor (later Prussian
Minister of Trade and Reich Interior Minister) Clemens Delbrück by a
Prussian senior tax inspector (Loehning) which was heard before two
courts. The ﬁrst, before a Strafkammer (criminal court), ruled in favor of
Delbrück and free-speech rights. Its judgment was subsequently overturned in a second opinion issued by a higher appellate court (Berlin’s
Kammergericht). The initial Strafkammer ruling had acquitted Delbrück
on the basis that, as a “higher state oﬃcial” (Staatsbeamte), his alleged
libel was protected by §193 (he had “the interests of the higher state
oﬃcialdom to … safeguard”). The subsequent appellate ruling rejected
that position, arguing that the higher state bureaucracy was too diverse
a group to constitute a coherent “circle of people” recognizable by the
law (the plaintiﬀ, Loehning, was also a higher state oﬃcial) and
protected by §193. Socialist Vorwärts might have been expected to
embrace the ﬁrst Strafkammer ruling granting free-speech protection
and to reject the Kammergericht opinion. But the newspaper in fact was
critical of both rulings: the latter for its obvious anti-free-speech position; the former because of the reasoning it used to justify free-speech
rights. To be sure, Delbrück’s acquittal was a good thing, but the
opinion justifying it provided a “far too narrow” legal basis for freespeech rights. Delbrück’s libel, Vorwärts proclaimed, had a “legitimate
interest” (and hence deserved acquittal) not because he was a professor
(a higher state oﬃcial) but because he was a citizen (Staatsbürger).37
Freedom of speech, in other words, was not an end in itself – not if it was
constituted on hierarchical and corporatist grounds. The goal, rather,
was citizenship rights grounded on universalized principles of equality.
This meant narrowing and depoliticizing the deﬁnition of libel,
circumscribing it to the sphere of private life and private morality. In
a Reichstag speech, deputy Heine, referring to the “politics of
insult” targeting Social Democrats and the growth, more generally,
of a “dangerous denunciation-proneness and litigiousness” that had
37

“Das berechtigte Interesse,” Vorwärts, October 28, 1904.

126

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

overtaken German life, called for a deﬁnition of libel limited to false
accusations aimed at “placing the moral character of a victim in a bad
light.”38 A democratized honor, at the same time, required ridding
honor of its corporatist past. Vorwärts succinctly articulated this democratized honor, appealing to its working-class base and referencing its
socialist goals: “Personal honor,” it declared, “is not a special right of a
privileged personality. The proletariat possesses as great a right to
respect of its personal honor as the capitalist, Junker, prince.”39
Socialists did not stand in opposition to “personal honor,” it continued.
Far from it. What they opposed was the hierarchical corporate-class
state that underpinned the traditional ideology of honor:
This honor of the personality, this pride in a spotless moral badge, this respect for
personal honor, these we too hold as high as anyone else. But recognition of this
honor of the socially lowest, which is not inferior to the honor of those who
through accident or birth are superior, makes it also impossible for us to recognize
another specially constituted honor for speciﬁc persons [the monarch]. We respect
the honor of personalities, but we fail to understand reverence for rank or birth.

In terms of practical politics, a leftist position meant the championing
of defendant rights and opposition to reforms that adversely aﬀected
freedom of speech and the press. Leftists (though not most National
Liberals) opposed raising the penalties against defamation oﬀenses.
Joined by many liberals, they also wanted an end to Beamtenbeleidigung
prosecutions and advocated a broad interpretation of §193 in order to
protect critical and libelous speech and writing made in the public
interest. To the same end, they called for changes in the way the courts
treated the issue of motive. The defamatory intent of the accused, they
argued, needed to be a central consideration in determinations of guilt.
This would decrease verdicts against the press as well as mitigate the
problem that defamation laws were too harsh against legitimate
criticism while too weak against real, intentional defamation.40

38

SBR, November 23, 1907, pp. 1741–42.
“Majestätsbeleidigung,” Vorwärts, January 29, 1907.
40
“Warnrufe,” Berliner Tageblatt, February 15, 1896; “Beleidigung oder Wahrung
berechtigter Interessen,” Strassburger Post, August 22, 1897.
39

Politicization

127

Finally, many liberals and leftists emphasized the Privatklage as a
reform tool. By the late nineteenth century, as we have seen, most
jurists and legal scholars had come to loathe the Privatklage as a
bottomless pit of trivial lawsuits, and advocated either its abolition or
circumscription.41 Many non-jurist liberals and leftists saw things
diﬀerently. Within a continuing anti-state-prosecutor-monopoly
rhetoric going back to mid-century (see chapter 1), they argued for
expanding the Privatklage law. They spoke of its liberating beneﬁts
and the dangers, by contrast, of abuse of state power inherent in a
system where the state monopolizes the ﬁling of criminal charges.
Some, like a commentator in the Berliner Zeitung, called for the
wholesale elimination of state prosecutions in matters of defamation
and their replacement by the Privatklage.42 Referring to the unfair
and politicized basis on which state prosecutors did or did not
intervene in defamation conﬂicts (speciﬁcally, the Stöcker cases,
above), the author argued there was “one simple method” to end
the situation: “public charges in insult matters must be eradicated
altogether,” and ended with the chant: “Eradicate the ‘public’ oﬃcial
insult criminal lawsuit and eradicate the monopoly of the state
prosecutor!” The Privatklage would protect personal honor while
avoiding the ills of politicized libel suits.43
Philosophically, a leftist position on libel law involved a radical
redeﬁnition of honor, away from corporatist and hierarchical principles, and toward egalitarian and universalistic ones. It also meant a new
relation of honor to the public sphere, namely, its depoliticization and
removal to the realm of private conﬂict and the Privatklage. What the
Left represented in the history of honor was not its elimination, in
other words, but its dismantling as a tool of political repression. Yet,
this anti-corporatist and anti-authoritarian vision of honor potentially
clashed with the corporatist and status-conscious social and professional lives of many liberal voters and politicians (e.g. lawyers and
41

See, for example, the discussion in Die Reform des Reichsstrafgesetzbuchs (Berlin,
1910), p. 310.
42
“Die Beleidigungsprozesse in Deutschland,” Berliner Zeitung, June 24, 1885.
43
N.t., Frankfurter Zeitung, October 24, 1908.

128

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

civil servants – chapter 2). The result was division and ambivalence
within the ranks of liberals and the Center (see pp. 148ﬀ ).
Right of center, the libel-honor debate looked very diﬀerent. Far from
worrying about restrictions on speech, conservatives condemned the
personalized public attacks of a growing “revolver journalism” and
pushed hard for strengthening laws that, in their view, inadequately
protected citizens’ honor. Like their leftist counterparts, conservative
newspapers were ﬁlled with libel horror stories, only here the stories
were of a very diﬀerent kind. In 1911, for example, conservative
commentators blasted a court decision that failed to convict a
National Liberal Reichstag candidate from the district of MilitischTrebnitz, who had been sued by the district commissioner (Landrat)
for a campaign speech questioning the fairness of how district commissioners assessed taxes and accusing them of favoring the interests
of large landowners. His exact phrasing went as follows:
The social position of district commissioners [Landräte] is subject to a certain
degree of inﬂuence by the large landowners regarding tax assessments, which
may lead to preferential treatment of the large landowners as compared to the
small owners and to unjust assessments of taxes in the Militisch area.44

To be sure, the statement was “oﬀensive,” but the court ruled it
protected speech, largely on the basis of an earlier Reichsgericht ruling
that candidates’ speeches delivered at electoral meetings to their party
members were protected by §193. The court also noted that the
candidate had never mentioned a speciﬁc name and that there was no
evidence that he intentionally uttered a falsehood [about Militisch’s
Landrat].45 The Konservativer Korrespondent was livid. That such “reprehensible” methods (the use of “lies” and dishonoring accusations)
were granted §193 protection – this “surpasses the healthy moral
feelings and conceptual abilities of the layman,” it complained.46
44

This version of the candidate’s statements came from a quote in the Konservativer
Korrespondent that was reprinted in “Konservative Unzufriedenheit mit der
Rechtssprechung,” Leipziger Neueste Nachrichten, September 12, 1911.
45
“Berechtigte Interessen?” Hamburger Nachrichten, September 19, 1911.
46
“Konservative,” Leipziger Neueste Nachrichten, September 12, 1911.

Politicization

129

In an election year, conservative anger and the party’s exploitation
of this mini-controversy was only to be expected. But the rhetoric
chosen by the Konservativer Korrespondent had meaning far beyond
the speciﬁc case and the newspaper’s conservative readers. This was a
rhetoric that took for granted that personal honor trumped political
debate and that assumed, as a result, extensive restraints on speech. It
was a rhetoric and a set of beliefs that could appeal to a broad
constitutency, including many National Liberals. The National
Liberal Hamburger Nachrichten, for example, weighed in on the case
with an equally outraged reaction. Calling the candidate-defendant’s
behavior “political unrestraint,” it warned of dire consequences if the
principle underlying the court decision – the protection of political
speeches involving assaults on honor with the use of “objectively
untrue facts” – were to be generalized. It would “open the door to the
most morally questionable unruliness [Verwilderung] in election
campaigns,” allowing candidates to drag the “honor” of their opponents “through the mud.”47
Concerns over the inadequate protection of personal honor were
widespread in the conservative and bourgeois press. A series of cause
célèbre libel trials played an important role here as Germans were
treated in the Wilhelmine years to the spectacle of the corrosive
eﬀects of libel on the lives and careers of high-standing public ﬁgures,
including, most importantly, that of the Chancellor himself in the
Eulenburg Aﬀair (pp. 136–39).
The press was not the only cause of intolerable levels of libel. The
courtroom itself was deeply problematic. Here, the country’s ﬂawed
Wahrheitsbeweis wreaked its own kind of havoc, subjecting innocent
plaintiﬀs and witnesses to the outrages of public exposure and humiliation. Almost two decades before Eulenburg that point was driven
home in the most dramatic way in the Bochumer Steuerprozess
(chapter 2), in which the defendant, Catholic editor Fusangel, defending the truth of his libels – the corruption of Bochum’s tax commission –
forced dozens of that city’s elite Protestants and National Liberals to
testify in mortiﬁcation as plaintiﬀs or witnesses about private ﬁnancial
47

“Berechtigte Interessen?” Hamburger Nachrichten, September 19, 1911.

130

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

and family matters. The Kölnische Zeitung summed up the perniciousness of the Wahrheitsbeweis in the hands of libel defendants like
Fusangel:
In this way, the defamer succeeds in getting his grave accusations [the libels for
which he is charged] out into the world unopposed and with people ready to
believe them. Even though eventually, after months of investigation, the
innocence of the defamed comes to light, on the one hand the damage can
never be repaired and, on the other hand, in our fast-paced times, the mischief
caused by the defamer will be long forgotten.48

Closer to home, anxiety about honor was fueled by everyday
experiences – of plaintiﬀs, not defendants, and their search for
security and justice. Many upstanding citizens were feeling personally victimized by a system that seemed to have so little sympathy for
the plight of ordinary people and their struggles to defend their
social positions and livelihoods. Generalsekretär St. (chapter 2)
wrote in a tone of outrage about the kind of obstacles facing
a man like himself – a “peaceful, orderly, good citizen” – who
wanted nothing more than to redeem his honor in a court of law but
who found instead a tangled, lax nightmare of a system.49 This
applied as well to civil servants and politicians attacked in the press,
or to the businessman fearing the loss of credit sources.
Such experiences and sentiments help explain why those among
the Right calling for legal crackdowns found a receptive audience
beyond the conservative bastions of the East Elbian aristocracy, the
oﬃcer corps, and the upper bureaucracy.50 Building upon popular
anxieties, conservatives, like their leftist counterparts, shaped them
into an ideologically inﬂected legal agenda. For conservatives, honor
was central to a worldview and a way of life that seemed under attack
from all sides. Deﬁned in corporatist and hierarchical terms, personal
honor was code for the status and privileges of Stand, requiring
48

“Ein Rückblick auf den Bochumer Steuerprozess,” Kölnische Zeitung, June 20,
1891.
49
“Wie es um den Rechtsschutz des Staatsbürgers als Beleidigten in Preussen und im
Reiche steht,” Kölner Tageblatt, August 20, 1910.
50
Ibid.

Politicization

131

elaborate codes of etiquette that anchored a world of clearly deﬁned
hierarchies and deference to established authorities (monarchy, the
state, social superiors). But this world was being undone by social
leveling, political challenges to authority, and the individualism and
anonymity of mass society, one of whose symbols and symptoms was
the mass press.
Conservative newspapers reinforced and fed back to their readers
in alarmist terms their own experiences. There were the incessant
attacks of the press, an institution riven by sensationalism, and the
reason why “more and more a certain part of the public discussion
degenerates into personal attack and defenses, insult and suspicion.”51
There was a judicial system stacked against a man’s ability to protect
himself and the sanctity and privacy of his family and home. And
“when a man of honor is treated with dishonor,” he might as well
forget the law, given the outrageously low sentences and the other
tribulations awaiting him in the courts. The Berlin daily, the Tägliche
Rundschau, laid out the scenario of the “endless annoyances and
unpleasantness” a plaintiﬀ was forced to endure: ﬁrst, he must pay
a lawyer; then, as he waits a month or more for the hearing, he suﬀers
“nervous tension.” The day arrives, and if the court demands his
personal appearance, it may require the expense of travel and leaving
his business. If he thus withdraws his complaint, his opponent
triumphs and he publicly demonstrates his inability to defend his
rights. But if he goes forward with the proceeding, he risks public
exposure of all kinds of private matters when his opponent, the
defendant, uses the Wahrheitsbeweis to prove his innocence. Even if
the plaintiﬀ wins, what awaits him is the ﬁnal insult of the “absurd
ﬁne,” the “pitifully low” 10–20m. Eulenburg and other causes
célèbres hovered (explicitly or implicitly) in the background as this
and other writers anguished about the Wahrheitsbeweis and the
potential of the trial itself to destroy a man’s reputation. Not only
did the courts fail to redeem a person’s honor; they often increased
the damage, since, with the Wahrheitsbeweis provision, the defendant
could drag a plaintiﬀ’s private life into the courtroom in full public
51

“Interimistisches Schweigen bei Beleidigungsprozessen,” Die Post, August 20, 1892.

132

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

view, or, as in several well-known cases (e.g. the Bochumer tax trial,
above), tarnish the reputations of innocent bystanders testifying as
witnesses. Defamation trials, in short, made “a mockery of the
natural feeling for law and honor.”52
Conservative newspapers, in turn, merged objections to defamation law and the sensationalist press with a broader, antisemitically
tinged social critique of modernity. Unprecedented press exposure
and public discussion, often in the form of personal attack, left many
people feeling exposed, vulnerable, undermined, and defenseless. The
Right called this a decline of “civility” and contrasted it with an earlier
time of propriety, when the press had a “feeling for aﬄuence,”
“good morals,” and “decency.”53 It lamented a world transformed
by capitalism and social upstarts. A legal system that strongly protected “material property” (severe punishments for theft) but failed
to protect “ideal property” (honor) was “un-german.”54 Civility had
been replaced by “revolver journalism.”55 “Honor, law, and duty”
had been replaced by “hedonism and the debased inﬂuence of money
[Mammondienst].” If only the judiciary were made up of “irreproachable, impeccably brought up [men] with a Christian disposition and
education,” who moved in the right social circles, sighed Das Volk.56
The government’s policy of singling out Beamtenbeleidigungen for
prosecutions, in such a view, was absolutely correct and necessary.
Insults against state oﬃcials had for centuries been treated more
severely in German law,57 and for good reason. The protection of
state oﬃcials’ honor was a crucial component of a society of order and
“obedience.” The conservative Berlin daily Norddeutsche Allgemeine
Zeitung provided one such defense of Beamtenbeleidigung prosecutions:
oﬃcialdom, essential to the entire functioning of the ‘state organism’
52

“Der Kampf gegen das Duell,” Tägliche Rundschau, October 30, 1901.
“Der Schutz der Ehre,” Kreuz-Zeitung, March 28, 1908. 54 Ibid.
55
“Das Beleidigungs-Strafrecht,” Strassburger Post, April 19, 1914.
56
“Die Ehre und unsere Justiz,” Das Volk, October 18, 1893. Also, for links between
defamation, honor, and a critique of modernity, see “Verleumdung,” Leipziger
Nachrichten, November 20, 1913.
57
For the early-modern era, see, e.g., Döhring, Geschichte, pp. 14–15. This was not
unique to Germany.
53

Politicization

133

and the values of duty and obedience, must be granted a special
‘corporate-professional honor” status with special legal protections.
And even though the Criminal Code incorporated Beamtenbeleidigung
into the general defamation sections, it was entirely appropriate for the
courts to treat these cases diﬀerently with state prosecutions and
harsher sentences. The army, included as oﬃcials and “bearers of the
monarchist principle in public life,” was under attack from “oppositional and revolutionary elements.” Therefore, the newspaper
bemoaned the “light sentences” meted out in these cases and the fact
that “only rarely” did convicted oﬀenders receive the highest sentence
of two years incarceration. Such laxness was producing a rise in
defamatory statements against oﬃcialdom, encouraging a lack of
obedience (Gehorsamkeit) in revolutionary elements, since oﬀenders
never faced the full brunt of the law; all they needed was people with
money (kapitalkräftige Leute).58
Conservative angst over defamation litigation was of course in
part purely rhetorical, since the dueling ﬁeld, not the courtroom, was
the quintessential space for the restitution of upper-class male honor.
Indeed, the conservative press skillfully linked the duel and the
defamation lawsuit in order to press its vision of legal reform. If
critics on the Left wanted an end to dueling, they argued, then they
had better do something about the laughably mild court sentences,
the public exposure of respectable men’s private lives, and other
problems in the judicial system, which made dueling a positive
necessity as the only way a man could properly protect his honor.59
To be sure, commentators admitted, the aversion of the upper-class
and oﬃcer corps to the defamation lawsuit was bound up with their
honor codes, and to go against these constituted an “injury to class
tradition [Standesitte].”60 But many of these men could be enticed
into the courtroom if drastic legal reforms made it worth their while.
This was all the more necessary because, at a time when dueling –
illegal but on the rise and a symbol of anachronistic aristocraticmilitary values – was under political attack, dueling excesses like the
58
59

“Berlin, 4. Juni,” Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, June 4, 1894.
“Der Ehrenhandel,” Das Reich, July 21, 1910. 60 Ibid.

134

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

“rowdyism” and “honor terrorism” of university students were
feeding revolutionary fervor in the masses. The Tägliche Rundschau
worried that when prosecutors looked the other way in dueling cases,
“it is heightening the pressure [Gefühl] for legal equality and is more
grist for the Social Democratic mill.”61
But in other ways, conservative worries about libel law were
personal and real. Despite the assertions then and later, some members of the upper classes (not to mention conservative supporters
farther down the social scale), as I have shown, did engage in honor
lawsuits in the courts,62 while many others who did not probably
longed to, had it been more socially acceptable. The terrible burden
that satisfaktionsfähige men lived with – the ever-present possibility
of facing death in a duel over a personal insult – was most famously
thematicized in Theodor Fontane’s 1896 novel Eﬃ Briest. In violation of her marriage vows and her sexual honor, the eponymous Eﬃ,
wife of a Prussian oﬃcer, engages in a brief love aﬀair. When her
husband, Innstetten, discovers this, he is deeply torn. He ﬁnds
himself strangely indiﬀerent to the aﬀair itself and ill-inclined toward
anger or revenge: the aﬀair occurred years ago, he loves his wife,
and, in truth, he feels no “hatred at all, or even thirst for vengeance.”63 Yet, as he conﬁdes to a friend, there is no doubt of acting on
his feelings. He will duel (killing his opponent) and he will end his
marriage (socially killing his wife), not because he wants to but
because it is demanded of him by the honor code of his class.
Fontane captured the rigidity and deadly coercion of that honor
code in Innstetten’s thought process: “I’ve turned this [dueling
decision] over and over again in my mind,” he tells his friend:
We’re not isolated persons, we belong to a whole society and have constantly
to consider that society, we’re completely dependent on it … we’ve become
accustomed to judge everything, ourselves and others, according to its rules.
61

“Der Kampf gegen das Duell,” Tägliche Rundschau, October 30, 1901.
It is certainly not hard to ﬁnd cases of upper-class lawsuits against lower-ranked and
unsatisfaktionsfähige people. Two examples: “Wegen Beleidigung des livländischen
Barons von Rolcken,” Vorwärts, March 16, 1911; a short, untitled notice on a libel suit
brought by Landrat Freiherrn von Malzahn, ibid., October 30, 1902.
63
Fontane, Eﬃ Briest, trans. Douglas Parmée (London, 1967), p. 214.
62

Politicization

135

And it’s no good transgressing them, society will despise us and ﬁnally we will
despise ourselves … So once again, there’s no hatred or anything of that sort
and I don’t want to have blood on my hands … but that something which forms
society – call it a tyrant if you like – is not concerned with charm or love, or
even with how long ago a thing took place. I’ve no choice, I must do it.64

A man such as Innstetten who refused to duel faced ridicule, social
ostracization, and possible penury. One example from the historical
record is the Bismarck–Becker Aﬀair of 1908. In an encounter between
Becker, a journalist, and von Bismarck, a lieutenant oﬃcer, Becker,
according to a press report, “behaved boorishly, refusing to oﬀer
[Bismarck] his calling card and giving him a ﬁsticuﬀ.” A subsequent
Privatklage trial (oﬀ-duty at the time of the incident, Bismarck had been
dishonored as a private citizen) led to Becker’s conviction, a jail sentence
of 18 months, while the military authorities meted out their own
punishment – of the plaintiﬀ, Bismarck. For failing to challenge Becker
to a duel, he had violated the honor code prescribed for his oﬃcer
“estate” and was banished from the military.65 Such men were caught in
a terrible bind, torn between conﬂicting legal codes (dueling was outlawed by the state but required by the military honor code) and between
the duel’s physical violence, on the one hand, and the lax courts, on the
other. No wonder that so many men, opined one journalist, were forced
to passively tolerate unending “Unannehmlichkeit” in their daily lives.66
The anxiety caused by this predicament, strengthened by the
enormous growth of libelous attacks in the chaotic world of mass
politics, is palpable in conservative pleas for legal reform and in the
kind of measures they advocated. Those measures, aimed at protecting personal honor and restoring “civility” to public life, focused on
plaintiﬀ rights and further restrictions on speech in the press and in
the courtroom. Summing up the key aspects of this agenda in 1908,
the Kreuz-Zeitung called for much harsher sentencing practices to
deter libels and to make lawsuits worth the while of honorable men. It
cited Chief Administrative Judge von Tzschoppe who suggested
64

Ibid., p. 215. Emphasis in the original translation.
N.t., Frankfurter Zeitung, October 24, 1908.
66
“Interimistisches Schweigen bei Beleidigungsprozessen,” Die Post, August 20,
1892.
65

136

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

raising the maximum penalties for simple insult (§185) from 600 to
1500m. For the more serious crime of public libels (§§186–187) –
oﬀenses endangering a person’s good name – he advocated in the
lesser and more serious cases of defamation raising penalties respectively to 2000m. and 5000m; those convicted of calumny should be
subject to a possible three-year sentence and loss of certain of their
civil rights (bürgerliche Ehrenrechte).67 Second, and more importantly,
in light of recent events (below), the Kreuz-Zeitung and other conservatives wanted severe limitations placed on the kinds of evidentiary
facts a defendant was allowed to introduce into a trial in order to prove
the truth of his or her alleged libel (the Wahrheitsbeweis issue). Third,
the paper demanded the closing of certain sensitive defamation trials
from press coverage and the public square. Citing the Eulenburg
scandal and the general “desire for sensationalism” and immorality
of the modern press, it called for extending the rules governing marital
litigation in order to protect litigants’ privacy, namely barring the
public and the press from the courtroom in libel trials.
These political divisions, developing over decades, partly reﬂected welldeﬁned ideological and philosophical diﬀerences, ones we have earlier
seen within the judiciary itself. In other ways, they evolved ad hoc in
reaction to events on the ground, especially to the mass of lawsuits in the
courts. Nowhere was this more apparent than at mobilizing moments of
great controversy over causes célèbres, moments that oﬀer windows
onto the politics of honor in action. And there was no more important
event – in fame, political import, and sheer scandal – bearing on the
Kaiserreich’s honor politics than that of the Eulenburg Aﬀair.
The outlines of the Eulenburg Aﬀair, as it came to be known, are
well known.68 It began with articles penned by the journalist and
67

“Der Schutz der Ehre,” Neue Preussiche Zeitung (Kreuz-Zeitung) March 28, 1908.
The newspaper disagreed somewhat with the last point.
68
For the events I have found particularly useful James Steakley, “Iconography of a
Scandal: Political Cartoons and the Eulenburg Aﬀair in Wilhelmine Germany,” in
Martin Duberman et al. (eds.), Hidden From History (New York, 1989), pp. 233–57,
and Isabel Hull, The Entourage of Kaiser Wilhelm II (Cambridge, 1982). For an
in-depth legal analysis of the case, see Karsten Hecht, Die Harden-Prozesse:

Politicization

137

publisher Maximilian Harden accusing two members of the Kaiser’s
inner circle of homosexuality: diplomat Philipp Prince zu EulenburgHertefeld and General Kuno Count von Moltke, military commandant
of Berlin. These were explosive charges, not only because of the stature
of the accused and the seriousness of the accusation (§175, Germany’s
anti-sodomy law), but because they came on the heels of an ongoing
scandal over homosexuality in the army that had already led to the
courts-martial and convictions of twenty oﬃcers.69
Harden’s motive initially was purely political: to bring down
Eulenburg, whose inﬂuence over the Kaiser Harden (and many
others, including members of the military and Foreign Oﬃce)
detested because of Eulenburg’s “anti-imperialist outlook and willingness to seek an accomodation with the ‘hereditary enemy,’
France.”70 But, once set in motion, the charges took on their own
dynamic, consistent with their scandalous nature, the logic of honor
defenses, and the nature of German defamation law. Moltke
promptly sued Harden for libel (Harden had refused a dueling
challenge) and, after the state, to its later chagrin, refused to prosecute, the case went forward as a Privatklage.71 At trial, Harden ought
his defense with the tools available, skillfully using Germany’s liberal
evidentiary rules (Wahrheitsbeweis) to put on the stand witnesses who
testiﬁed to Moltke’s abnormal sexual proclivities. The result was a
scandal. Moltke’s former wife, Lili von Elbe, testiﬁed, in historian
Steakley’s words, that
Strafverfahren, Öﬀentlichkeit und Politik im Kaiserreich (Munich, 1997). For an
analysis of the press and the monarchy, see Martin Kohlrausch, Der Monarch im
Skandal: Die Logik der Massenmedien und die Transformation der wilhelminischen
Monarchie (Berlin, 2005). On the case in terms of the history of masculinity, see
Claudia Bruns, “Skandale im Beraterkreis um Kaiser Wilhelm II. Die homosexuelle ‘Verbündelung’ der ‘Liebenberger Tafelrunde’ als Politikum,” in
Susanne zur Nieden (ed.), Homosexualität und Staatsräson (Frankfurt, 2005),
pp. 52–80; Martin Kohlrausch, “The Unmanly Emperor: Wilhelm II and the
Fragility of the Royal Individual,” in Regina Schulte (ed.), The Body of the
Queen (New York, 2006), pp. 254–78. For a very detailed, ﬁrst-hand account of
the Moltke-Harden trial, see Hugo Friedlaender, Interessante Kriminal-Prozesse
(Berlin, 1920), pp. 5–203.
69
Steakley, “Iconography,” p. 239.
70
Ibid., p. 236. 71 Many accounts incorrectly label the ﬁrst trial a “civil” one.

138

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

in two years of marriage, conjugal relations had occurred only on the ﬁrst two
nights; on the few other nights they had shared a bed, Moltke had sometimes
placed a pan of water between them to discourage her advances. She reported
that her husband had once espied a handkerchief left behind by Eulenburg and
had warmly pressed it to his lips, murmuring “Phili, my Phili!” Moltke had
variously addressed Eulenburg as “my soulmate, my old boy, my once and
only cuddly bear,” and the two had referred to Wilhelm [II] as their “darling.”
They had behaved in such a blatant fashion that her ten-year-old son (by a
previous marriage) had taken to imitating their “revolting” mannerisms with
the servants.72

An equally devastating witness was the physician, sex reformer, and
homosexual rights activist Magnus Hirschfeld, who opined on Moltke’s
“feminine side” and his “unconscious orientation [of] homosexuality”
that allegedly existed irrespective of whether Moltke had ever actually
engaged in such sex acts.73 Harden was vindicated.
The disgrace of this trial – there was fear of the “undermin[ing]
[of] public conﬁdence in the regime” and the “respectability [of its]
ruling class”74 – made the state reverse course, taking up Moltke’s
case and prosecuting Harden in a second trial that found him guilty.
Harden, seeking vindication, reacted by purposefully manufacturing
a third (Privatklage) trial in April, 1908 that allowed him to introduce
into the public record still more damning evidence – of past sexual
relationships Eulenburg had had with a Munich milkman and a
Starnberg farmer. This trial led to the overturning of Harden’s earlier
conviction for libel, as well as the ﬁling of perjury charges against
Eulenburg.75 Meanwhile, a ﬁfth libel trial – sending the public into
“true paroxysms of rage” (wahre Wutparoxysmen)76 – had seen the
Chancellor himself (von Bülow) litigating against charges of homosexuality by the publicist Adolf Brand. Eulenburg himself, citing illhealth, managed to avoid his perjury trial over years of repeated
attempts by the courts.
72

Ibid., p. 241. 73 Ibid., p. 242. 74 Ibid.
The perjury charge led to repeated but ultimately unsuccessful attempts over the
years to try Eulenburg, who managed to sabotage all such attempts with claims of
ill-health.
76
Bruns’s paraphrase of Hirschfeld’s account (p. 54).
75

Politicization

139

The Aﬀair caught the government at a diﬃcult time when the
prestige and standing of the monarchy and the old elites were under
pressure at home and abroad, and when the government, faced with
the rising electoral fortunes of the SPD, was ﬁnding it increasingly
diﬃcult to put together legislative majorities in the Reichstag.
Chancellor Bülow’s Sammlungspolitik – governing with a coalition
of non-Socialist parties to defeat the SPD – had faltered on the
independent position of its linchpin, the Centre Party. Bülow’s
subsequent break with the Catholic Centre Party in 1907 and his
formation of a new coalition – the nationalist, anti-socialist, and antiCatholic “Bülow Bloc” – depended for legislative majorities on the
impossible harmonizing of left-liberal and conservative interests.
Any hope of this working was soon dispelled when the government,
faced with the ﬁnancial crisis of a mounting national debt, tried to
cobble together support for a new tax bill. This required concessions
to left liberals that deeply “alarmed” conservatives, united them with
the Centre in opposition to the government, and helped bring about
Bülow’s fall in spring, 1909. At the same time, the government was
facing serious setbacks in foreign aﬀairs. Germany’s defeat in the
Moroccan Crisis of 1905/1906 underscored its mounting isolation in
Europe as a result of the government’s aggressive Weltpolitik.77 The
Emperor’s political gaﬀes in his interview with London’s Daily
Telegraph in 1908 caused a domestic uproar and calls for his abdication, while further alienating Germany abroad. And now, the
Eulenburg scandal.78
Harden-Molkte caused panic in some quarters of government. (It
also, apparently, swamped the courts with copy-cat lawsuits.)79 Prussian
Justice Minister Beseler urged moving immediately on an amendment of
77

These domestic and foreign policy developments are concisely summarized in
Gordon Craig, Germany, 1866–1945 (New York, 1978), pp. 251ﬀ.
78
On the political fallout of the Aﬀair, some historians emphasize its contribution to a
“shift in German [foreign] policy that heightened military aggressivenenss” and
hence sped the outbreak of war in 1914; others have focused on its domestic
implications and the role it may have played in undermining support at home for
the Kaiser.
79
“Acht Monate Gefängnis,” Das kleine Journal, May 11, 1908.

140

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

the Reich Criminal Code to restrict the Wahrheitsbeweis and the publicity of sensitive trials.80 Given a situation where the most “sensitive”
aspects of plaintiﬀs’ “private and family life” were being “exposed” and
oﬀered up for “public commentary,” it was too “urgent” to wait for the
completion of the more general Criminal Code revisions.81 There were
other reasons as well, among which loomed a foreign policy consideration: the potential damage to Germany’s standing abroad caused by
such scandals.82 Furthermore, public opinion, whose pressure would be
crucial for getting the bill passed, was at the moment intensely outraged,
whereas waiting risked seeing such sentiment dissipate.83
Nieberding, State Secretary of the Reichs-Justizamt, the department overseeing the revision of the Criminal Code, did not buy
Beseler’s argument. He may have shared Beseler’s feeling of urgency,
but he was not letting it get the better of his political judgment, and
that judgment told him that the votes in the Reichstag were not there
for legislation in this form. That it was too late in the year to
introduce such a bill was only the least of the government’s problems.
More important was the “political consideration” that doing so would
contradict and thus undermine the strategy the government had long
been using in its dealings with the Reichstag, namely denying the
parliament’s criminal law reform attempts via supplemental legislation with the argument that all reforms must wait upon the completion of the entire Criminal Code. If, in these circumstances, the
government now presented its own supplemental bill, and one with
distinct “political signiﬁcance,” the Reichstag would be sure to
demand a trade-oﬀ with the inclusion of its own reform proposals.
To prevent this from happening, Nieberding had an alternative plan:
introduce the bill in the next legislative year and attach it to a host of
other minor and non-partisan reforms like lowering the penalties for
petty theft. This, he hoped, would make it harder for the Reichstag
to demand “deeper” reforms like “sharpening dueling penalities.”
80

At this point, Beseler believed that raising the penalties for libel was not a realistic
goal.
81
Beseler, December 15, 1907. I HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8405, GStPK, pp. 43–44.
82
Beseler proposal to the Prussian Staatsministerium, January 17, 1908. Ibid., p. 3.
83
Ibid., p. 7.

Politicization

141

In other words, in order to get through parliament a conservative
libel bill, the government would placate the Left by appearing
conciliatory to parts of its legislative agenda while surrounding the
bill with popular provisions that could not fail to pass.84
It was this plan of action that ultimately prevailed, as seen in the
actual supplemental bill brought before the Reichstag in spring of
1909. This was a piece of legislation born of genuine moral disgust,
fears about the prestige of the monarchy and social elites, as well as
pragmatic political considerations. The bill, promptly dubbed the
“Lex Eulenburg” by the SPD because of its clear link, despite
government denials, to that scandal and the protection of upperclass honor interests, embodied aspects of the kind of libel reform
conservatives had long been calling for. It proposed sharpening the
maximum penalties for public defamation (§186 to 10,000m or two
years prison; raising them from 900 to 3,000m for §187; from 6,000
to 20,000m for §188). Most controversially, in cases of public defamation85 (§186) or when a libel was spread through writing or
images, it declared that the truth of the alleged libel “need not be
proven” when it concerned “private matters not in the public interest.”86 This was legalese for what, in such circumstances, would make
the truth of a libel irrelevant to assessments of guilt and deny defendants the use of the Wahrheitsbeweis. In addition, it gave the plaintiﬀ
the power to decide on whether or not a hearing of the evidence
would be allowed. Both were reforms that threatened to signiﬁcantly
shift the balance of power in the courtroom to the advantage of the
plaintiﬀ and both targeted the kinds of press libel litigation that were
so controversial. The bill sought to lessen the sting of these libel
provisions with, at the same time, a package of crowd-pleasers:
decreased penalities for trespass, petty theft, and several other
minor crimes; increased penalities for the abuse of animals and
children; a more narrow and precise deﬁnition of blackmail.
84

Nieberding, December 20, 1907 and January 6, 1908. Ibid., pp. 45, 48–50.
Public defamation (öﬀentliche Beleidigung) meant defamations that reached a large
number of people.
86
Nr. 1262 “Entwurf eines Gesetzes,” SBR Anlagen, vol. 253 (Berlin, 1909),
pp. 7672ﬀ.
85

142

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

Aware of the politically explosive nature of the bill (correspondence between Beseler and Nieberding was stamped “secret!”), the
government tested the waters of public opinion by leaking its contents in advance to the National Liberal Kölnische Zeitung.87 Having
noted and assimilated the ensuing criticism, Nieberding rose in the
Reichstag on April 23, 1909, to introduce the bill. His speech,
seeking to assuage fears and placate the critics, was both defensive
and disingenuous. From the outset, it sought to downplay the
amendments’ conservative bias and its association with the class
politics surrounding the Eulenburg Aﬀair, namely, the public perception of the special treatment accorded upper-class honor. Besides
denial and outright falsehoods (it was simply untrue, Nieberding
asserted, that the government was only interested in the libel section
of the bill and that the rest of the legislation was intended for
“wrapping the libel provisions in an acceptable mantle”),88 the
speech employed a tone of “objectivity,” legalism,89 and conciliation, with much being made of comparative law and, as planned, the
other provisions of the bill. Nieberding divided the bill’s amendments into material crimes (theft) and crimes against “the ideal [nonmaterial] assets of the people,” which enabled him to group together
under the latter heading the crackdown on libelers with the crackdown on animal and child abusers. Pointing to the lower-classfriendly theft provision – which lessened penalties for crimes
found “in the life of [the] poor”90 – he set up a rhetorical parallel
between helping the poor (theft) and helping the honor-challenged
(libel). It was untrue that the government was trying to “conceal
from the public morally damaging aspects of high-placed people’s
lives” (i.e. Eulenburg, Moltke, and Bülow). No, this bill was about
ordinary people’s needs:
87

That it was an intentional government leak is my interpretation; the sources do not
speciﬁcally say this.
88
SBR, April 23, 1909 (Berlin, 1909), p. 8126. This was exactly what Nieberding’s
secret memo to Beseler had proposed doing.
89
“… ich bitte Sie, uns zu glauben, dass wir … bei dier Vorschrift … von rein
sachlichen Gesichtspunkten ausgegangen sind …” ibid., p. 8128.
90
Ibid., p. 8126.

Politicization

143

The principal people who are protected by this bill are not those in high places
or those who belong to distinguished circles, but rather people who, socially or
governmentally, are not in a position whereby their situations are connected to
the public interest [i.e. those using the Privatklage].

Gender seemed the perfect way to appeal on this point. Nieberding
called up the example of a young, “blameless” woman (Olga
Molitor), whose private life had been subjected to intense public
scrutiny and (unfair) viliﬁcation as a result of her testimony in the
famous 1907 murder trial of her brother-in-law Karl Hau.
In the political reactions to the Lex Eulenburg (and to the draft
bill’s similar libel clauses),91 one can see how the experiences and
ideologies outlined above merged, in the context of 1908/1909, to
form the ways in which parliamentarians and the public reacted to
and debated the issues,92 and where such terms as honor, privacy, and
morality functioned as codes for far-ranging political agendas. These
reactions also suggest how polarized the libel debate had become in
the wake of the Eulenburg Aﬀair.93

91

Vorentwurf zu einem deutschen Strafgesetzbuch (Berlin, 1909), pp. 51ﬀ. The signiﬁcant
exception for the clauses that overlapped was that the Vorentwurf (draft bill) left out
the provision that a hearing of evidence was dependent upon the plaintiﬀ’s agreeing
to this. The Vorentwurf, in addition, regulated libel procedures that were not
included in the Lex Eulenburg. Most importantly, §263 denied §193 protection
for those charged with calumny (Verleumdung).
92
The following discussion is taken from three Reichstag debates on the Novelle
(Lex Eulenburg): the ﬁrst occurred on January 18, 1909, after it was leaked by the
National Liberal Kölnische Zeitung; the much lengthier second and third debates
took place on April 23 and 24, 1909 when the government oﬃcially brought the
measure before the Reichstag. I also cite several earlier debates on the Eulenburg
Aﬀair in the Prussian parliament.
93
By contrast, the opinions of jurists and legal scholars on libel reform, while mixed,
reﬂecting (and helping to shape) the political debates, were somewhat less polarized.
For example, both Karl Binding and Franz von Liszt, who were the leaders,
respectively, of the opposing positivist and materialist schools of legal thought in
Germany, opposed the Reichsgericht’s interpretation of §193. Aschrott and von Liszt
(eds.), Die Reform des Reichsstrafgesetzbuchs (Berlin, 1910), pp. 321–22. For legal
debates about libel reform, see ibid., pp. 309ﬀ.; Zusammenstellung der gutachtlichen
Äusserungen über den Vorentwurf zu einem deutschen Strafgesetzbuch (Berlin, 1911),
p. 352ﬀ.

144

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

The Aﬀair channeled political passions into debates about privacy
and the Wahrheitsbeweis, while highlighting the class inequalities of the
legal system. In the 1880s, it was still possible for a paper like the
National Zeitung to take a fairly nuanced and pro-defendant position on
the Wahrheitsbeweis, calling, in eﬀect, for the burden of proof about the
truth or untruth of a libel in Beamtenbeleidigung trials to be shifted to
the plaintiﬀ (accordingly, the bar for proving the truth of a libel would
be lowered so that acquittal would be possible if the defendant simply
showed that the plaintiﬀ had not proven the untruth of the defendant’s
defamatory words).94 By 1909, it is hard to imagine any right-ofcenter newspaper taking such a stand, let alone trying to lower the
admissibility of evidence bar. The Eulenburg Aﬀair, more than anything, had made the Right obsessed with protecting the privacy of libel
plaintiﬀs and putting limits on the press. In the Reichstag, they argued
this in coded language supporting the bill in the name of protecting
honor and the sanctity of privacy and family. “Honor,” proclaimed
deputy Varenhorst, is “the most precious possession of humans … and
cannot be protected enough.” Because of this, “the private life of the
individual does not belong in public. One must draw a veil in front of
private life.” Limiting the Wahrheitsbeweis would thus help to protect
individuals against “gossip in the press … which dwells on such things
in order to satisfy the itch of curious people.”95 Indeed Varenhorst felt
the bill did not even go far enough in limiting defense evidence.
Some within the Center and National Liberal Parties, horriﬁed by
the “sensationalism” of the press coverage of Harden–Moltke and
its “dirty” contents (the trials had made known “vices and conditions
to classes of the population who knew nothing hitherto of these
matters”96), concurred. Von Campe, himself a jurist, called for limiting the Wahrheitsbeweis along the lines of English law.97 Reichstag
94

“Der Beweis der Wahrheit bei Beschuldigung von Beamten,” National Zeitung,
August 20, 1887.
95
April 23, 1909 debate. SBR 236 (Berlin, 1909), p. 8132.
96
January 18, 1909. SBR 234 (Berlin, 1909), p. 6339.
97
January 28, 1908 debate. SBPA, 1 (Berlin, 1908), pp. 1226, 1231. To do so, Campe called
not for expanding the Privatklage but its opposite: having the state aﬀord the same
gravitas to libels against private citizens by extending state prosecutions to these cases.

Politicization

145

deputy Belzer, in January 1909, declared the Center ready to
“help … the government” despite the party’s concerns for protecting
the “principle of publicity.”98 And, very few people supported the
defense’s use of the Wahrheitsbeweis when the libel at issue involved
the “dishonorable facts of [the plaintiﬀ’s] private life.”99
But for many moderates and leftists, Eulenburg conﬁrmed and
intensiﬁed suspicions about the true nature of libel prosecutions in the
Kaiserreich. On the Left, Socialist attorney and Reichstag deputy
Wolfgang Heine proclaimed:
Today the charge of ‘insult’ is the means by which the bureaucracy, militarism
and the ruling classes try to suppress any fearless criticism of public wrongs,
and, unfortunately, often not without success. There is not much of the free
German word to detect anymore in Germany.100

In fact, by European standards Germany had unusually liberal
rules for the admissibility of evidence in court, and to tighten these
would have done no more, essentially, than bring the country in line
with its neighbors.101 But most politicians outside the Right did not
see it this way and refused to support this section of the bill. The
Wahrheitsbeweis had been utterly politicized by decades-long battles
over libel law and state censorship (in turn linked to the Kaiserreich’s
broader political divisions), as well as by the more recent Eulenburg
Aﬀair. It was in this context that this obscure technical feature of
German law came to be a focal point for what many critics saw as a
battle between the principles of the liberal Rechtsstaat and those of
arbitrary absolutist and aristocratic power.
National Liberals, Center, Progressives, and Socialists were
(rightly) suspicious of the circumstances of the bill, convinced that
it was motivated by the Eulenburg scandal and thus about an upper
98

SBR, January 18, 1909, pp. 6339–40.
Liepmann, “Die Beleidigung,” in Mittermaier et al. (eds.), Vergleichende
Darstellung des deutschen und ausländischen Strafrechts: Besonderer Teil vol. 4
(Berlin, 1906), p. 107.
100
Heine, “Lex Eulenburg,” März 2 (April 1, 1909), p. 31.
101
Lilienthal, “Üble Nachrede und Verleumdung,” in Mittermaier et al. (eds.),
Vergleichende Darstellung des deutschen und ausländischen Strafrechts: Besonderer
Teil vol. 4 (Berlin, 1906), p. 413 ﬀ.
99

146

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

class acting to protect its own interests and reputations. They were
skeptical of the claim that the bill was aimed solely at the
“Revolverpresse,” fearing it would adversely aﬀect the entire
press.102 Repeatedly (and accurately), they pointed out that the law
already gave jurists the right to exclude from trial irrelevant facts that
the defense sought to introduce to prove the truth of the alleged libel,
and warned therefore about acting precipitously based on a case
(Harden–Moltke) whose worst features should be blamed not on
the law but on the mistaken application of the law by individual
prosecutors and judges. And they worried about the indeﬁnite terms
“public interest” and “private life” in the bill, with their potential for
arbitrary deﬁnitions by the courts to repress speech and accord special
treatment to oﬃcially connected and high-placed plaintiﬀs.103
In the two-day Reichstag debate of the original Lex Eulenburg,
only one deputy (the Progressive Heckscher) outside of the conservatives expressed support for its libel provisions.104 There was a
range of practical, juridical, and political objections raised against the
Lex Eulenburg, including those made in the name of honor, namely
that it would backﬁre and actually worsen the situation of plaintiﬀs.
But what is also striking is the role that liberal notions of law – of
publicity, transparency, and accountability – played in one form or
another in making the (Prussian and Reich) government’s reform
agenda a hard sell beyond the Right. Roeren, Center deputy in the
Prussian Landtag, was as appalled as any by the exposure of youth to
the “dirt and most intimate sexual operations” in the press coverage
of Harden–Moltke. But, he went on, there were other factors to
consider:
One must after all consider that, as a basic principle, the judicial proceedings
should be open to the public and that this principle has just been demanded by
the representatives of the people, ﬁrst, in order that the public be given the
opportunity to keep an oversight [kontrollieren] of the administration of justice,
102

Engelen speech, SBR April 23, 1909, p. 8131.
Osann speech, SBR April 23, 1909, p. 8137.
104
SBR , April 24, 1909 (vol. 236), pp. 8155–56. As the government expected and
planned for, the amendment’s other provisions were widely popular.
103

Politicization

147

then also in order to further the universally approved ideal aim of promoting in
the people the notion of the objectivity and independence of the justice system.
Only in exceptional cases should the public be excluded; indeed, when decency
and order demand it.105

Wladyslaw Seyda of the Polish party put it most succinctly: “In our
view, the right to free speech is at least as in need of protection as
personal honor.”106
On the far Left, Socialists were equally or more concerned about
civil liberties, but saw the matter of libel reform through the lens
of class politics and years of government persecution. The Lex
Eulenburg’s attempts to raise libel penalties were really aimed at
“ﬁnancially ruining oppositional newspapers.”107 Reichstag deputy
Frohme welcomed certain parts of the 1909 bill, given the “backwardness, injustice, and inhumanity” of the present criminal code.
But he rejected out of hand the libel sections, labeling them “a
type of exceptional law against the press” and “a new piece of class
justice.” The bill was not about honor; it was about protecting the
upper class and “raping the right to truth – to free, public dissemination of information [Kundgebung].”108 In an earlier Reichstag
debate, deputy Heine took a less confrontational but cleverer tack,
casting himself (and the SPD) as a defender of honor in order to
make the argument that even on its own terms (i.e. those of honor),
the bill was deeply ﬂawed and unacceptable.109 Socialist deputy
Frank, as the government feared, demanded that any reform of
libel laws take place in conjunction with reforms strengthening

105

SBPA, January 28, 1908 (Berlin, 1908), p. 1213. 106 SBR (1909), p. 8163.
This is a paraphrase of a 1910 Vorwärts article. Zusammenstellung der gutachtlichen
Äusserungen, p. 258.
108
SBR, April 23, 1909, pp. 8141–42.
109
SBR, January 18, 1909, pp. 6348ﬀ. For example, he argued that the massive
number of trivial libel lawsuits against the press was responsible for lessening the
“feeling of responsibility” in the press toward respecting individuals’ privacy and
honor. In other words, if the government wanted to protect honor, it should stop
persecuting the press. See also his article “Strafrechtsreform und politische
Reaktion,” März 4 (December 14, 1909), pp. 415–20.
107

148

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

punishments against dueling.110 No legislative reform of the law was
possible in such polarized political circumstances.111
In sum, these debates saw the articulation of widely diﬀering
notions of honor and libel law that were linked in turn to alternative
visions of civil society and the state. Conservatives, on one side,
defended a corporatist and hierarchical honor linked to the authoritarian state. Leftists and liberals, by contrast, generally sought the
privatization and depoliticization of honor consistent with a more
egalitarian society and liberal polity.
Yet, this Left/Right divide, though substantial, was far from
simple or set. Politicians often held ambivalent views, were inﬂuenced by changing events, and might shift positions depending upon
the context. Thus, while positions on honor and libel were in part
predetermined, driven by political ideology and personal sensibility,
there was also much blurring of political lines, complexity, ambiguity, and contradiction. Depending upon the political circumstances
and the speciﬁc honor issue at hand, politicians could be pulled in
diﬀerent directions, buﬀeted between liberal and conservative positions, which found them at times siding with their erstwhile opponents. Germany’s political culture of honor, in other words, was very
much in play in these years, vacillating between the Left/Right poles
described above.
This last section explores more closely the political dynamics
shaping that culture. A number of forces interacted in complex
ways: the Left/Right political divide; nationalism and the cult of
the state; and notions of honor. In this context, national debates over
libel legislation reﬂected the state of opinion. But they were also
causal, the debates themselves occasioning shifts in the political
dynamics. This was the case in 1907/08 during the Reichstag debates
leading up to the passage of a bill revising the lèse-majesté laws – the
provisions forbidding insults against the royal and princely houses.
110
111

SBR (1909), p. 8159.
As late as 1912, the government was still attempting in vain to get such a bill passed
by the Reichstag. Bethmann Hollweg to the Kaiser, May 25, 1912. I. HA Rep. 89,
Nr. 17726, GStPK, pp. 99–100.

Politicization

149

These statutes, as explained earlier, had become enormously controversial. Not only were they draconian (minimum sentences, for
example, of two months prison and loss of all public oﬃces for insults
against the Kaiser).112 Over the years, they had been incessantly used
to silence and intimidate critics of the state. Just as controversial was
the indiscriminateness of the law, which required prosecution of all
insults against the crown irrespective of the libeler’s motive or
context. This subjected to prosecution even statements lacking intent
or consciousness to harm the crown. It also included statements
uttered in private that became known subsequently to the state
only through personal denunciations. The result, as Nieberding,
State Secretary of the Imperial Department of Justice, put it, was
the “growth of a base and hostile climate of denunciation
[Denunzianttum]” in which “even members of the same family, indeed
the best of friends, denounce each other for lèse-majesté the minute
discord between them occurs.”113 Even denunciations brought years
after the initial oﬀense could lead to prosecution. All of this had made
lèse-majesté law, in Nieberding’s understatement, “not entirely reconcilable with the general sense of justice.”114
By 1907, even the Kaiser understood how problematic this state of
aﬀairs was. On January 27 of that year, in a dramatic concession to
public opinion, he issued an edict promising clemency to oﬀenders
whose insults against the Prussian monarchy stemmed “merely from
lack of understanding, indiscretion, heedlessness [that do not
involve] malicious design.” Only insults made with “malicious
intent” (mit Vorbedacht und in böser Absicht) would be prosecuted in
the future.115 Wilhelm’s edict, which applied only to Prussia and
Alsace-Lorraine, prompted the Reich government to bring before the
112

For an overview of German lèse-majesté laws in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, see Andrea Hartmann, Majestätsbeleidigung und Verunglimpfung des
Staatsoberhauptes (§§94ﬀ. RStGB, 90 StGB): Reformdiskussion und Gesetzgebung
seit dem 19. Jahrhundert (Berlin, 2006).
113
Speech at the November 23, 1907 session of the Reichstag. SBR 229 (Berlin, 1908),
pp. 1729–31.
114
Ibid., p. 1729.
115
Reprinted in “Majestätsbeleidigung,” Vorwärts, January 29, 1907.

150

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

Reichstag a bill extending the Kaiser’s edict to include other sections
of the lèse-majesté statutes and to apply to the entire nation.
The bill the government brought before the Reichstag in
November 1907, which was debated in three readings in the winter
of 1907/08, was presented as a signiﬁcant concession to public
opinion. In actuality, it sought to rid the system of abuses around
private denunciations and apolitical prosecutions while preserving
the state’s ability to use lèse-majesté as a tool of political repression.
Thus, on the one hand, it proposed softening prosecutions of nonpublic insults against the Emperor, the princes, and their families
(StGB, §§95, 97, 99, 101) by requiring a prior judicial investigation.
It also signiﬁcantly lowered the statute of limitations (i.e. the period
following the oﬀense during which criminal charges could be
brought) for prosecutions of lèse-majesté from ﬁve years to six
months. Its third provision, on the other hand, which made the
oﬀense “punishable only in instances of malicious intent,” also
ostensibly aimed to reduce and soften prosecutions, but it did so
with language – “malicious intent” – that controversially left the
government wide prosecutorial latitude.116
The Reichstag’s initial response was lukewarm at best. With the
exception of the Right, all of the political parties had serious reservations about the malicious intent clause, perceiving it as a potentially dangerous loophole ripe for government exploition as
justiﬁcation for and possibly the intensiﬁcation of political prosecutions and the repression of dissent. The SPD, predictably, was the
most adamant. There was only one good thing about the bill,
declared deputy Heine in a long speech redolent of bitter suspicion –
the statute of limitation clause. Otherwise, the legislation had all
of the “markings of its Prussian origins.” Under the guise of tolerance, the law will only sharpen the partisan nature of the judiciary; in
the hands of judges, the interpretation of “malicious intent” will be
politicized to reward those “right-minded” people loyal to the regime
and punish the “wrong-minded.” Heine backed up his case with a
litany of outrageous lèse-majesté rulings – one editor had been
116

Bill no. 348, “Entwurf eines Gesetzes,” SBR. Anlagen (Berlin, 1907), pp. 1959–60.

Politicization

151

convicted for writing of the “slaughter” of wild animals at a royal
hunt, because, unbeknownst to him, the Kaiser had been present at
the event – all of them directed against Social Democratic defendants. But Heine went even further, rearticulating a radical policy
move the SPD had been calling for since the 1890s: to treat the Kaiser
and other royal personages like any other citizen and abolish the lèsemajesté laws altogether (according to Heine, they could perfectly
well pursue defamation charges under the existing statutes of
§§185ﬀ). As Vorwärts put it, the SPD rejects the very notion of
lèse-majesté because it is “based on the notion of the [unfree] ‘subject,’ of people with less honor vis-à-vis the honor of those who by
chance and birth are the ‘superiors’.”117
The SPD’s last proposal was far too extreme for the other political
parties. But, from the Center-Left to the Center-Right, there was
striking unanimity with the Socialists on the matter of free speech. All
expressed in varying degrees the need to build into the wording of
the bill greater protections against the politicization of lèse-majesté.
National Liberal deputy Osann expressed concern that the bill lacked
“objective criteria” for determining “malicious” statements.118
Heckscher, speaking for the Progressive Party, put it in much
stronger terms: use of the term “malicious” was “extraordinarily
dangerous,” practically demanding of judges that they consider a
defendant’s political views as a matter of course when seeking to
clarify the motives behind a defendant. He gave the recent example of
a judge who opened a court hearing with the question posed to the
defendant: “Are you a Social Democrat?”119
Yet, just two months later, at the second reading of the bill, these
concerns about protecting free speech had all but evaporated in the
Center. The mood had perceptibly changed. Those who had earlier
expressed reservations were now embracing the bill, leaving the
Socialists isolated. National Liberals and Progressives were now
suddenly convinced that the bill’s wording suﬃced to keep politicized
prosecutions in check.120 The Center, likewise, was ready to give the
117
119

“Majestätsbeleidigung,” Vorwärts, January 29, 1907. 118 Ibid., p. 1735.
Ibid., pp. 1746–47. 120 SBR, January 21, 1908, pp. 2602–03, 2599.

152

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

bill its stamp of approval as an improvement, albeit ﬂawed, over
existing law.121
There had been a slight rewording in committee of the bill since its
ﬁrst reading, from “with malicious intent” to “with the deliberate
purpose and the malicious intent to commit an injury to honor.” But
the new wording, invoked by deputies to justify their new-found
support for the bill, was not much more than window dressing. What,
more importantly, had changed since the last reading (besides any
backroom deals, about which there is a lack of information) was the
interjection into the debate of nationalism and anti-socialism. And
what sparked this was an infamous lèse-majesté trial, ongoing during
the Reichstag debates – the Königsberg lèse-majesté trial.
The trial stemmed from a critical and irreverent editorial of
September 21, 1907, in the socialist Königsberger Volkszeitung on
the upcoming dedication of a national monument in the east
Prussian port town of Memel, the place in 1807 that became the
seat of the Prussian government during the Napoleonic occupation,
and where King Friedrich Wilhelm III had signed the October Edict
abolishing serfdom and inaugurating the era of Prussian reform and
renewal. The Memel monument, featuring a fresco of the King
and his wife Queen Luise ﬂanked by busts of important generals
and statesmen, commemorated the 100th anniversary of those events.
Far from joining in the spirit of pious national commemoration,
the Volkszeitung ridiculed the scene, calling the monument a
Schandsäule (pillar of shame) and launching into an historical critique
of the Prussian state under the hegemony of the Junkers and, since
1848, the bourgeoisie. For the article and its use in particular of the
term Schandsäule, the paper’s editor was tried and found guilty of
insulting the monument and all the participants at its unveiling. Since
one of those participants was the Kaiser, this made it into a lèsemajesté case. The editor was sentenced to a ﬁfteen-month jail term.
On all sides, the case became a notorious cause célèbre: conservatives and National Liberals were outraged by the content of the
article; Socialists were outraged by its repression in the courts. On
121

Ibid., p. 2595.

Politicization

153

the former side, nationalist outrage and anti-socialism, inﬂamed
by the trial, generated a perceptible shift in the dynamics in the
Reichstag as the deputies debated the new lèse-majesté bill, distinctly
tipping the scales in favor of the government and the bill.
At the bill’s ﬁrst reading in November, 1907, the Königsberger
case had not yet become the political vortex it would be two months
later, sucking in and concentrating broader political debates. Only
the far-right antisemite Bindewald, at this point, saw ﬁt to mention it
all, using it to scold the SPD in the name of the good German Volk
and the protection of innocent children.122 By the second reading,
after the trial had inﬂamed opinion, that sort of rhetoric had migrated
into the mainstream.
There was a correlation between nationalist outrage, anti-socialism,
and the willingness, suddenly, on the part of deputies to reverse their
earlier positions and support the government’s bill. National Liberal
deputy Osann, his pitch rising, suspected the SPD’s “intention [in the
Volkszeitung article] was to tear down – tear down Queen Luise, tear
down those who participated in the monument and its unveiling (yes!
Right and National Liberals) and who went [to Memel] with the
conviction they would see not the unveiling of a pillar of shame but
the erection of a national monument (tumultuous applause – shouting
rejection from the SPD and opposition).”123 At the same time, Osann
now felt the need to make the case for the importance and value of lèsemajesté prosecutions as a kind of national duty: such trials were not
about “the personality of the monarch”; they were about something
much bigger – thwarting insults against the monarch as “representative
of the state” itself.124
Even the Progressives were changing their tune. At the bill’s ﬁrst
reading, deputy Heckscher characterized the proposed legislation as
“extraordinarily dangerous.”125 By the second reading, his colleague
Ernst Müller was backing away from this position. To be sure, he
remained an opponent of “historical lèse-majesté prosecutions,” calling them dangerous and smacking of judicial political partisanship.
122
124

SBR 229 (Berlin, 1908), pp. 1747–49. 123 SBR, January 21, 1908, p. 2601.
Ibid., p. 2599. 125 Ibid., November 23, 1907, p. 1746.

154

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

Müller preferred the British model: a monarchy that, in maintaining a
policy of non-interference in public debates (according to Müller,
there had been no lèse-majesté cases in Britain since 1823), incurs the
respect of its citizenry. The British support their monarchy not
because of “humiliating police surveillance” (à la Germany), but
because the people are “trusted” and given free speech.126 Müller,
however, was now convinced that the revised wording of the bill
suﬃced to protect against future abuses.127 Two days later, at the
bill’s third reading, the Progressives had thrown in the towel altogether. Deputy Gyssling, joining the nationalist chorus, attacked the
Volkszeitung article as an “outrage” that has provoked the “indignation” of the “broadest circles in the entire German fatherland.”128
Nationalism and anti-Socialism here were closely intertwined
with honor and chivalry. What really upset someone like
National Liberal Osann was the article’s slanderous treatment of
Queen Luise (1776–1810), the only part of the article about which
he speciﬁcally spoke and doing so at length. He was incensed by the
article’s quote of Alexander von Humboldt calling the Queen
“selﬁsh, cunning, and underhanded” and of its picture of her,
quoting from her letters, at the time of the Jena defeat, when
starvation was rampant, enjoying leisurely strolls and squandering
public money.129
Such talk was dishonoring to the point of sacrilege for Osann and
other Protestant nationalists. Queen Luise had become a legend and
cult ﬁgure of Prussocentric national memory in the course of the
nineteenth century. Historians had turned her into the essence of
virtuous, bourgeois femininity: pious, modest, devoted to husband
and children, compassionate benefactress of the common people. As
such, she became a perfect vessel for a historical narrative about
Prussia’s suﬀering and redemption in the era of the Napoleonic
wars. In Droysen, she was an “emblem of hope – her purity and
innocence reﬂect[ed] the uncorrupted freshness of the state reawakening from its deepest misery, and the birth of the constitutional
126
128

Ibid., January 21, 1908, p. 2604.
Ibid., January 23, 1908, p. 2669.

127
129

Ibid., p. 2602.
Ibid., January 21, 1908, p. 2600.

Politicization

155

monarchy.”130 In Treitschke, she was the “violated and ‘abused’
victim of … Napoleon” who spurred the “avenging spirit of the War
of Liberation.”131 In short, she had become a maternal national icon,
and to dishonor her, as the Socialists had done, stirred political
passions capable of aﬀecting (though, certainly, not entirely determining) the outcome of a Reichstag vote. As Osann put it, diﬀerences of opinion about the events and royal personages of the
Napoleonic era were perfectly in order. But not when they crossed
the line from “critique” to “insults,” and this is what happened to
Queen Luise.132
It is not that the political center had suddenly abandoned its
concerns with civil liberties. Far from it. While conservative
Edward Wagner worried only that the bill did not go far enough
in protecting the “authority of the crown,” progressives and even
National Liberals remained worried about free speech issues. Osann’s
uneasiness was evident in the qualiﬁcations that hedged his criticism
of the Socialists.133 Yet, another, more emotional side of him – the
part passionate about nation, honor, and chivalry – intervened to
shift his vote towards the right. The point is not the authoritarianism
of German honor politics, but its complexity and tensions – the fact
that such politics were in play and the sorts of ideas and passions that
drove its dynamics.
Meanwhile, as we will see in the following chapter, grass-roots
movements outside the formal political institutions were forming
pressure groups and a new style of politics that utilized a hybrid
honor drawn from elements of both Left and Right.
130

Regina Schulte, “The Queen – A Middle-Class Tragedy: The Writing of History
and the Creation of Myths in Nineteenth-Century France and Germany,” Gender
and History 14 (2002), 281; Philipp Demandt, Luisenkult: Die Unsterblichkeit der
Königin von Preussen (Cologne, 2003).
131
Schulte, “Queen,” p. 284.
132
SBR January 21, 1908, p. 2600. Not that gendered language was not the exclusive
monopoly of conservatives and moderates. The Socialists employed similar ideas
but towards opposite political ends. Heine, for example, spoke of Germany’s lèsemajesté laws as “circumscribing” the right of criticism and posing a danger to the
“masculine openness of the nation.” SBR, Nov. 23, 1907, p. 1742.
133
January 21, 1908, SBR, pp. 2604, 2600.

CHAPTER 5

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

In the early twentieth century, in the tiny town of Reppen near
Frankfurt/Oder, a Jewish merchant from Berlin, Spiegel, was standing in a courtroom before a local magistrate when the latter, pointing
at Spiegel, turned to his clerk and asked with disdain, “So what does
this Jew want?” Mortiﬁed, Spiegel did what any self-respecting
German would have done: he sued, rushing home to employ the
services of the famous Berlin defense attorney Fritz Friedmann.1
Spiegel got his insult trial, but in a place like Reppen it had the feel
of a rigged Jim Crow courtroom. The antisemitic community was
outraged at the aﬀrontery of the suit, and Spiegel, probably sensing
trouble, skipped the trial altogether, sending his lawyer in his stead.
Entering the courtroom on the day of the trial, Friedmann had a
portent of things to come when he found the defendant (the town’s
judge) socializing in a backroom with the judge-juror panel presiding
over the case. The mood in the courtroom and in the town was so
menacing that, after the case was dismissed, Friedmann, himself a
Jew and fearing for his life, ﬂed in the ﬁrst train back to Berlin.
Spiegel’s reaction to an insult made sense given the honor culture
in which he lived. But the basis of his lawsuit was something new and,
in a place like Reppen, controversial: antisemitism. Filing such a suit
presupposed an inherent Jewish claim to dignity and the right to
defend it in law. That Spiegel believed this suggests the sea-change
underway in Germany as outsider groups were creatively seizing
upon and transforming a juridical honor idiom to claim new rights.
1

Fritz Friedmann, Was ich erlebte vol. 1 (Berlin, 1908), pp. 164 ﬀ.
157

158

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

This chapter examines the way prejudice and injustice were experienced through the lens of honor, and how, in turn, new democratic
ideas shaped the honor idiom into new political practices. It focuses
on two groups: Jews and lunatics. Here, it was not only a question of
individuals reasoning their way toward a more democratic vision of
honor. Those individuals organized themselves into pressure groups
that practiced a new style of grass-roots politics. Honor was central to
that politics.
JEWS

Municipal statutes for centuries had classiﬁed Jews with other undesirables, such as criminals and vagrants, as “dishonorable” and
unworthy of citizenship and guild membership. At the same time,
there is also evidence of a tradition of Jewish-Gentile insult litigation
going back centuries – a fact suggesting the de facto recognition in
popular culture and law of a kind of honor status on the part of
individual Jews. Most of these lawsuits, upheld in the courts, were
seemingly indistinguishable from the kinds of suits brought within
both the Jewish and Christian communities, revolving as they did
around the typical insults of daily life, e.g. epithets like “whore” and
“thief.”2 In one 1790s case, an angry exchange of words during a
horse sale resulted in the buyer, a cavalry oﬃcer (Rittmeister), bringing an insult suit against the Jewish horse-dealer.3 In another, a
Jewish merchant actually brought a physical insult (Realinjurie) suit
against a Prussian oﬃcer.4 Jews, of course, also sued one another, as in
the 1822 case of a kosher butcher who called the cantor a “cheat,”5 or
2

By contrast, Jewish cases brought against Gentiles for “defamatory statements relating
to allegedly Jewish characteristics or physical features” were rare. Robert Jütte, “Ehre
und Ehrverlust im spätmittelalterlichen und frühneuzeitlichen Judentum,” in
Klaus Schreiner et al. (eds.), Verletzte Ehre, p. 152. Other examples can be found in
Sabine Ullmann, Nachbarschaft und Konkurrenz (Göttingen, 1999), pp. 451–58.
3
II. HA Gen Dir. Frankisches Department, X, Nr. 394, GStPK.
4
The circumstances leading to the lawsuit are unclear. II Gen. Dir., X, Nr. 386,
GStPK.
5
I, 75 A Sta 2, Nr. 52 (Ident.-Nr. 7812), Stiftung Neue Synagoge Berlin, Centrum
Judaicum, Archiv (CJA).

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

159

the 1849 suit stemming from a confrontation outside a synagogue
before the weekly services when a merchant and member of the
Jewish community was physically prevented from entering and in
the process “publicly slandered and insulted” because he had failed to
pay his community dues.6
By the time of the Kaiserreich, a trickle of Jewish legal actions
against Gentiles had become a ﬂood, and the nature of these cases had
changed as Jews directly confronted and resisted anti-Jewish prejudice.
Whether it was the duel or the insult lawsuit, statistics show Jews
disproportionately embroiled in honor disputes. In 1891, Jews were
convicted of defamation at a rate of 181.8 for every 100,000 Jews in the
population, whereas the ﬁgures for Protestants and Catholics were,
respectively, 125.9 and 129.6.7 The psychiatrist and criminologist
Gustav Aschaﬀenburg was particularly struck by these ﬁgures because,
as he said, most insult lawsuits involved alcohol, and Jews were not
drinkers. Wagering a guess, he attributed the discrepancy to Jewish
“racial” features, namely, the tendency of “southerners” for wild
gesticulation, “shouting and easy excitability.”8
In fact, Jews were litigating and dueling to defend their honor
against antisemites. A Jewish soldier in 1905 brought a suit against a
superior oﬃcer (a Hauptmann) for saying to him in front of the rest
of the company, “well, you’re from E.; I’ve heard that there are a
lot of greasy cattle Jews [Viehjuden] there.”9 A Jewish merchant and
employer brought a suit against the antisemitic Deutscher Generalanzeiger
6

I, 75 A Dr 2, Nr. 24 (Ident.-Nr. 2161), CJA. The GStPK also has records of
eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century litigation, both Jewish-Gentile and
Jewish-Jewish. See, e.g. I HA Rep. 21, Nr. 206c3, Fasz. 1; ibid., Fasz. 25; II HA
Gen Dir, Fränkisches Dept., X, Nr. 394.
7
G. Aschaﬀenburg, Das Verbrechen und seine Bekämpfung (Heidelberg, 1903), p. 42.
Jews were also overrepresented in dueling. Aschaﬀenburg, ibid., p. 43, cites a study
of Baden university students in which Jewish students particpated in duels at a rate
ﬁve times higher than the percentage of Jews in the population. See also Ute Frevert,
Men of Honor: A Social and Cultural History of the Duel (Cambridge, MA, 1995),
pp. 113ﬀ on Jewish student dueling.
8
Aschaﬀenburg, Verbrechen, p. 44.
9
The court ruled in the plaintiﬀ’s favor. “Im Beschwerdewege,” Im deutschen Reich
(IdR) 8 (1905), p. 450.

160

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

for falsely accusing him of molesting a young female job applicant.10 A group of Jewish lawyers and doctors in Karlsruhe sued the
editor of another antisemitic paper (Volkswacht) for publishing an
article calling on Gentiles to entrust “your legal aﬀairs to no Jewish
lawyer, your body to no Jewish doctor, your children to no Jewish
teacher … in order that you are not harmed in your honor, body,
and soul!”11 The editor was convicted and given a two-week jail
sentence. The great master of this kind of litigation was Hirsch
Hildesheimer, the editor of the orthodox Jüdische Presse. One of his
specialities was the intentional goading of antisemitic agitators into
ﬁling libel suits against him in order, as in the political method
described above (chapter 4), to use the subsequent trials to publicly
rake them over the coals.12
In other words, a discourse of honor that had originated in a
premodern world of hierarchy and deference – a world that in
important respects had classiﬁed all Jews as dishonorable – this
discourse Jews were now adopting to make modern claims for
dignity and equal treatment as citizens. When, precisely, such practices began is not entirely clear, but as early as the turn of the
nineteenth century, one ﬁnds traces of a nascent new honor consciousness among Jews. It may have been present in Hirsch Wulﬀ,
whose lawsuit stemmed from an altercation in 1801 when, passing
through an East Prussian town on business, he stopped in for some
relaxation at a billiard room.13 Another patron, a court clerk, yelled
out to the room: “he [Wulﬀ] doesn’t know the rules; he’s a son of a
bitch [Schweinehund].” When Wulﬀ took exception to these statements, the clerk lunged at him with a billiard cue, hitting him on the
head; then two other patrons, the mayor and a merchant, allegedly
joined in, beating him. Wulﬀ sued for Realinjurie (physical defamation), an assault on a person’s honor via the body, and the court ruled
10

IdR 1 (1895), 109–10. The plaintiﬀ in this case as well was successful at the ﬁrst
instance.
11
Ibid., pp. 113–14.
12
Barnet Hartston, Sensationalizing the Jewish Question: Anti-Semitic Trials and the
Press in the Early German Empire (Leiden, 2005), pp. 87ﬀ.
13
I. HA Rep. 7A, Nr. 14D–Fasz. 4, GStPK.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

161

in his favor, giving the clerk the minimum sentence of a 40 Thaler
ﬁne.14 The court record made no mention of Wulﬀ’s Jewishness, but
it seems implicit – in the hostility toward a Jew participating in a new
space of bourgeois sociability (the court used the French term “the
Billard”) and thus the suggestive link to the ongoing struggles
around Jewish eﬀorts of inclusion in a new kind of bourgeois public
sphere emerging outside the old corporate order.
The link between honor and struggles over Jewish emancipation
was quite explicit in the contemporaneous Arnim–Itzig Aﬀair, the
famous 1811 incident in which a wealthy, well-connected Berlin Jew,
Moritz Itzig, challenged to a duel one of the leading literary ﬁgures of
the day, Achim von Arnim, only to be rebuﬀed as lacking (as a Jew)
the requisite honor.15 The Aﬀair can be seen as a dialogue about
Jewish emancipation within the symbolic language of honor. It
started with Arnim giving an anti-Jewish public speech. Itzig’s
aunt, the salon hostess Sara Levy, responded by a reassertion of
Jewish status in the one way she could: socially snubbing Arnim. She
threw a party to which his wife Bettina but not Arnim was invited.
Arnim retorted by showing up anyway, uninvited and dressed
scandalously in street clothes, an intentional insult meant to put the
Levy’s back in their socially inferior place. It was at this point that
Levy’s nephew, Itzig, took over, challenging Arnim to a duel.
Dueling was an upper-class aﬀair between social equals. Thus,
there could be no question of Arnim’s acceptance, indeed the refusal
of the challenge and a letter seeking an apology, which Arnim
accomplished with the utmost disdain, oﬀered the perfect avenue to
ritually demonstrate Itzig’s status as an inferior Jew. But given what
was at stake (defense of his own dignity and the assertion, more
generally, of Jewish honor), Itzig was determined to get his duel,
setting out (with great courage) to literally pummel Arnim into it
14
15

GStPK HA I, Rep. 7A, Nr. 14D – Fasz. 4.
The following information is taken from Deborah Hertz, “Dueling for
Emancipation: Jewish Masculinity in the Era of Napoleon,” in Marion Kaplan
et al. (eds.), Jüdische Welten (Göttingen, 2005), pp. 69–85. Hertz’s analysis, which
places the aﬀair in the context of Jewish attempts to integrate into Gentile society,
parallels and complements my own.

162

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

with the most provocatively insulting behavior. He physically
accosted Arnim on the street and called him a scoundrel and a
coward, the most heinous insults to an aristocratic man of honor.
Arnim, however, had the last word, withholding to the end recognition of Itzig’s honor by not only refusing to duel but by refraining
from even a lower-level method of honor resolution, namely, the
defamation lawsuit. Instead, Arnim chose to lodge assault charges, a
form of litigation that implicitly refused Itzig any honor status at all.
Moritz Itzig was a Jew pushing the boundaries of honor with
unusual boldness (or recklessness) for his time, and to this extent the
aﬀair was an extreme anomaly. This situation dramatically changed
in the course of the nineteenth century. What drove that change was
partly the spread of Enlightenment ideas about human equality,
which were already making themselves felt in the Itzig and Wulﬀ
cases. Change also occurred because of the policies of the centralized
state, which beneﬁted Jews in the German lands both directly
through emancipation laws and indirectly by the promotion of functional estates and an ethic of individual achievement as substitute for
an older, more closed social order.16
The legal case of a Jewish merchant, Deutschmann, in 1840s
Prussia exempliﬁed this trend. Embroiled in a defamation suit against
an innkeeper, Deutschmann adamantly wanted his case heard in a
higher court (ﬁskal) beﬁtting his sense of elevated honor in this era
when libel law was still organized by estate. But this court was
reserved for subjects belonging to higher estates (the upper bourgeoisie, aristocracy, etc.), and Deutschmann was only a draper and
business agent (Unterhändler). A provincial court in Breslau accordingly dismissed his petition. Yes, it argued, Deutschmann did pay at a
high tax rate, but he was really “only a Jewish shopkeeper and [smalltime] trader” for whom no exception would be made. Berlin, however, subsequently reversed this decision, ruling in Deutschmann’s
16

Kathy Stuart, Deﬁled Trades and Social Outcasts: Honor and Ritual Pollution in Early
Modern Germany (Cambridge, 1999), shows for an earlier period the way the central
authorities sought to undermine the discriminatory honor categories against executioners and skinners of early-modern craft guilds.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

163

favor by applying a much more ﬂexible and generous standard of
corporate status (and, thus, honor) that allowed his public service and
high standing in his community to qualify him for exceptional treatment as a member of a higher estate.17
The Kaiserreich’s Jewish litigation was driven by a structural
contradiction inherent to Jewish life in that era. Jews since 1871
were legally emancipated and increasingly assimilating into a
dynamic economy and civil society. At the same time, antisemitism
remained and was now forming the basis of an organized political
movement employing the tools of mass politics and newly minted
racial notions of Jewish inferiority. As a result, just as their expectations for respect were growing, Jews were more than ever likely to
experience the violation of those expectations, whether in their daily
lives or in the press.
Like Spiegel and countless other Jews, they did so through the lens
of honor, reacting with the duel or the libel suit. This could mean
identiﬁcation by elite Jews with the most reactionary aspects of
Germany’s honor culture, namely, aristocratic dueling traditions.
One sees this, for example, in the popularity of dueling clubs
among Jewish university students. The founder of modern
Zionism, Theodor Herzl, was himself enamored with the duel.
This embrace of aristocratic culture was particularly complex and
vexed for Jews because of the way in which that culture was merging
on the Right with a discourse of modern antisemitism. Fundamental
to its ethic – where it appears in lawsuits, disciplinary hearings, and
published sources – was a deﬁnition of male honorable behavior as
disinterested, public-minded, and dedicated to a higher ideal (usually
the state). Dishonorable people, by contrast, were motivated by
personal gain. Over and over again in these sources, charges of
greed, selﬁshness, and careerism appear as the insults triggering libel
lawsuits. And these characteristics, all associated with modern capitalism, were in turn coded as Jewish. Some Jews themselves adopted this
sort of thinking. Herzl’s novel Das neue Ghetto, for example, has a
Jewish mother counsel her son on his wedding day: “live according
17

The documents can be found in I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 49527, GStPK, pp. 120–24.

164

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

to your means so you won’t have to do anything unworthy. We have
raised you to be a man of honor, and you also don’t have the character
that debases itself for money.”18
But Jewish honor in the Kaiserreich also meant adapting older
practices to a new post-emancipation environment, and this involved
for many Jews linking honor with a discourse of democratic rights. In
the 1870s and 1880s, Jewish defense, in particular the libel suit against
antisemites, remained the province of individuals. By the 1890s, such
lawsuits were being organized into a full-ﬂedged Jewish defense movement with the founding of the Centralverein deutscher Staatsbürger
jüdischen Glaubens (CV),19 a group dedicated to defending German
Jews against antisemites. Traditional Jewish authorities oversaw religious, welfare, and educational aﬀairs of the community. This would be
a new kind of Jewish organization: an activist interest group in the
modern political sense, whose tasks were to monitor the progress of
emancipation, intervening whenever Jewish “civil rights” appeared
under attack.20 This meant founding a news journal (Im deutschen
Reich); lobbying legislatures for parity of the Jewish religion with
other faith communities; agitating against the exclusion of Jews from
trial juries or discrimination against Jewish job applicants in the health
care profession.21 And it meant unremitting litigation against the antisemitic press. In so doing, the CV hoped to “raise the social level of
Jews so that they will be free, proud, and viewed with honor [ihre Ehre
bedacht zu sein].”22
18

Herzl, Das neue Ghetto (Vienna and Berlin, 1920), p. 26.
For more on the CV and Jewish defense, see Arnold Paucker, “Der jüdische
Abwehrkampf,” in Werner Mosse (ed.), Entscheidungsjahr 1932: Zur Judenfrage
in der Endphase der Weimarer Republik (Tübingen, 1966), pp. 405–99; Hartston,
Sensationalizing; Sanford Ragins, Jewish Responses to Anti-Semitism in Germany,
1870–1914 (Cincinnati, 1980); Marjorie Lamberti, Jewish Activism in Imperial
Germany (New Haven, 1978); Richard Levy, The Downfall of the Anti-Semitic
Political Parties in Imperial Germany (New Haven, 1975). For Weimar, see
Douglas G. Morris, Justice Imperiled: The Anti-Nazi Lawyer Max Hirschberg in
Weimar Germany (Ann Arbor, 2005).
20
This discussion of the CV’s aims and principles is taken primarily from a speech of
Dr. Eugen Fuchs, deputy chairman of the CV, at the group’s third DelegiertenVersammlung, “Vereinsnachrichten,”IdR 3 (1896), 170–73.
21
Ibid., pp. 171–72. 22 Ibid., p. 172.
19

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

165

This was a new and hybrid form of activism, combining as it did
modern political organizing and liberal notions of justice with the
idiom and practices of honor. This is why, from the group’s founding
in 1893 until rising Nazi terror and other factors led to the end of its
litigation in 1932, honor lawsuits were at the heart of its activities.
Using both the defamation statutes and other sections of the Reich
Criminal Code,23 the CV systematically scoured the antisemitic press
for litigatable libels, ﬁling suit on behalf of countless individuals.
More importantly, the organization pressed collective charges in the
name of entire Jewish communities and the Jewish religion as a
whole. In 1896, for example, for a Jewish ritual murder allegation
stemming from a Hungarian case, it ﬁled suit against the antisemite
Karl Sedlatzek and his Deutsche General-Anzeiger, using §166 of the
Criminal Code, which made it a crime to distribute literature attacking a religion, religious group, or secular creed in such a way as to
disturb the peace.24 In another group case from that year, this time on
behalf of Jewish butchers, the CV, along with the state prosecutor,
ﬁled charges of grober Unfug (public nuisance) in a case stemming
from an article accusing them of intentionally contaminating meat sold
to Christians.25 As articulated by the CV in another case against charges
of Jewish ritual murder, “if German citizens of Jewish faith tolerate
such an insult without utilizing all the available legal tools against
the slanderer then they would in fact not be worthy of equality …”26
Litigation had a number of aims, not least of which was simple
suppression – shutting down (“reining in”) attacks from the antisemitic press. Centuries of pogroms were certainly in the minds of
CV activists when they spoke of anti-Jewish hate speech posing a
“grave danger.” But an equally important goal of litigation was the
publicity that court trials aﬀorded. The CV worked with a deep
belief, rooted in the Enlightenment tradition, in the power of knowledge and rationalist argument to defeat ignorance and hate. It thus
23

Eg. §11 of the press laws; §166; and §130 of the Criminal Code.
“Die Ritualmordlüge vor Gericht,” IdR 11 (1896), 537 ﬀ.
25
“Fleischbefudelungs-Prozesse,” IdR 10 (1896), 465 ﬀ.
26
“Ein zweifacher Rechtsirrthum,” IdR 6 (1896), 294.
24

166

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

tended to treat trials as educational forums for exposing and refuting
antisemites, hoping to sway the minds of Gentiles like those “scholars” who were “divided” on the question of Jewish ritual murder.27
Implicitly, there was a ﬁnal reason to expend so much energy on libel
litigation: the requirements of honor. Had Jews and the CV not sued
anti-Jewish statements, it would have been an admission either of
the truth of the libels or a demonstration of their own cowardice.
The mere fact of ﬁling defamation suits, moreover, symbolically
asserted Jewish honor, irrespective of the contents or outcomes of
those trials.
A related beneﬁt was the public shaming ritual of newspaper
retractions that convicted libelers were often forced to publish. A
good example is an 1885 Privatklage brought by one Alex Flechtheim
against the author of a defamatory article, “Juda in der Sommerfrische,”
concerning himself and his family. A court convicted the author and
sentenced him to two months in jail. It was at this point that
Flechtheim, who had been friends with the defendant’s father,
oﬀered the convicted man a deal he could not refuse: the prison
sentence was dropped and in exchange, the libeler agreed to pay a
sum of money to the town’s needy (poor and sick) and to publish a
public admission of guilt. This humiliating little public notice,
which the CV gleefully reprinted in its journal, related the events
of the case, including Flechtheim’s generous oﬀer, and concluded
with the declaration that “everything derogatory that [my] article
said about Herr Flechtheim and his family were libelous misrepresentations of the most shameful sort and my actions were all the
more reprehensible because they lacked [reasonable] motive …”28
Flechtheim’s justice was in the form of a shaming ritual that humiliated
his opponent while restoring his own reputation.
Jewish honor litigation was either partially successful or mostly a
failure, depending upon one’s point of view. On the one hand were
the numerous convictions of antisemites in individual cases, legal
judgments that implicitly aﬃrmed the dignity and equal citizenship
of Jews in a Rechtsstaat. On the other hand, the more important
27

Ibid., p. 295.

28

IdR 3 (1896), 163.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

167

collective lawsuits met with resistance at every turn and, seemingly,
almost always failed. A key obstacle lay in a far-reaching 1881
Reichsgericht ruling that established the legal framework denying
Jews the ability to bring collective defamation (Kollektivbeleidigung)
lawsuits. The case involved several Jewish plaintiﬀs who had sued
the author of a newspaper article for defamatory antisemitic statements. A lower court initially ruled in the plaintiﬀs’ favor on the
ground that, while the plaintiﬀs themselves had not personally been
attacked, libels against Jews in general potentially targeted and
harmed all Jews.29 The Reichsgericht reversed this decision in a
ruling with far-reaching implications that denied Jews as a group
(unlike some other groups) the status of being a legal entity capable
of suing in respect of defamatory speech. This decision in eﬀect
denied Jews protection as a persecuted group. It did so by arguing
that proof of personal harm was required and that therefore to
successfully bring a collective lawsuit, plaintiﬀs would have to meet
the impossibly high bar of proving that every Jew was harmed by the
libel being adjudicated.30
Thus, just as the modern politics of defamation law began, Jews
were severed from what could have been a powerful legal tool. The
Reichsgericht did, on the other hand, rule repeatedly that Jews
qualiﬁed under §130 as a protected “population class.” But many
lower courts persisted in rejecting this interpretation of the law,
ruling over and over again against Jewish plaintiﬀs.31 Likewise, the
courts were loath to interpret §166 (crimes of attacking a religion) as
applying to Jewish libel plaintiﬀs when the libel did not directly
target an individual. Thus, in the case of the butchers accused of
contaminating meat, for example, the CV was forced to ﬁle charges

29

Alfred Michaelis (ed.), Die Rechtsverhältnisse der Juden in Preussen (Berlin, 1910),
p. 548–49.
30
Ruling of October 6, 1881. Rechtssprechung des deutschen Reichsgerichts in
Strafsachen 3 (Munich and Leipzig, 1881), p. 606. This ruling, which remained in
eﬀect for decades, had signiﬁcant and long-lasting consequences, hampering Jewish
resistance to the poisonous antisemitic attacks of the far Right in Weimar.
31
“Korrespondenzen,” IdR 8 (1900), 405 ﬀ.

168

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

for “grober Unfug” instead of viliﬁcation of the Jewish religion
(Beschimpfung der jüdischen Religionsgesellschaft).
LUNATICS

32

In 1900, Elise Hegemann-Vorster, a devout Protestant, mother of ten,
and widow of a wealthy Mannheim industrialist, took what can only be
considered an extraordinary step: she published a pamphlet revealing
her experiences, over many years, as an insane asylum inmate.33
Strange as it might sound, Hegemann was not alone in her indiscretion.
Between 1890 and 1914, dozens of “mad” people from the respectable
bourgeoisie – businessmen, civil servants, pastors, academics, lawyers,
doctors, writers – went public with the most intimate and stigmatizing
details of their private lives.34 The stories were frightening and desperate: healthy people branded as insane, deprived of their legal
capacities, and incarcerated in insane asylums as a result of the machinations of doctors, police oﬃcials, judges, and family members. The
pamphlets were also often didactic and enormously tedious, diatribes
about corruption and malfeasance that took the reader through every
twist and turn of events – family disputes, failed business partnerships,
lawsuits, doctors’ reports, and asylum experiences.
As the victims of grave injustices, the authors were now taking
their cases to the “court of public opinion.”35 And the public readily
32

The following chapter section was originally published in somewhat diﬀerent form
as Ann Goldberg, “A Reinvented Public: ‘Lunatics’ Rights’ and Bourgeois
Populism in the Kaiserreich,” German History 21 (2003), 159–82.
33
Elise Hegemann-Vorster, Was ist Geisteskrankheit? Was ist Irrenanstaltsbedürftigkeit?
Was ist Wahrheit? Selbsterlebtes in 7 deutschen Irrenanstalten (n.d., self-published). The
husband, whom Hegemann had previously divorced, died while she was writing the
pamphlet. Her (living) uncles included a Landesdirektor and major, a captain, and an
Oberregierungsrat.
34
A good bibliography of this literature can be found in Bernhard Beyer, Die
Bestrebungen zur Reform des Irrenwesens (Halle, 1912). Some of these pamphlets
were written anonymously or under pseudonyms. Yet, given the detailed information that most pamphlets revealed, it would not have been diﬃcult for an interested
reader to ﬁnd out their authors’ identities.
35
Fr. Kretzschmar, Die Irrenfrage am Ausgange des 19. Jahrhunderts (Großenhain,
1896), p. 253.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

169

listened. These stories became the stuﬀ of public scandal, debate, and
politics. They were taken up by the press and debated in the parliaments.36 They also became the basis of an organized “lunatics’
rights” movement (Irrenrechtsreform), dubbed “antipsychiatry” by
its opponents, that came to be centered in the Bund für Irrenrecht
und Irrenfürsorge (“Bund”) (1909–1922) – an extra-parliamentary
pressure group founded and largely led by the “mad,” whose journal
(Die Irrenrechts-Reform), the organization claimed, had a circulation
of 10,000.37
This was an extraordinary moment. The antipsychiatry movement
after World War Two would be dominated by the discourse of
experts and intellectuals – psychiatric, welfare, academic – especially
by the philosophical tracts of Foucault, Szasz, and Laing.38
36

For more on the parliamentary debates, see Ann Goldberg, “The Mellage Trial and
the Politics of Insane Asylums in Wilhelmine Germany,” Journal of Modern History
74/1 (March 2002), 1–32. Key parliamentary debates in Prussia and in the
Reichstag on the insanity question can be found in: SBR 154. Sitzung, Jan. 16,
1897; 20. Sitzung, Jan. 28, 1899; 106. Sitzung, Feb. 20, 1908; 70. Sitzung, Nov. 26,
1912; Feb. 16, 1914; SBPA, March 16, 1892; 10 March, 1893; June, 1895; 18. Sitzung,
Feb. 18, 1910; Feb. 14, 1914; Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des
Preußischen Herrenhauses, April 1, 1892; May 26, 1893; May 29, 1894; July 9, 1895;
April 29, 1913.
37
For more on Wilhelmine lunatics’ rights, see Goldberg, “A Reinvented Public”;
Heinz-Peter Schmiedebach, “Eine ‘anti-psychiatrische Bewegung’ um die
Jahrhundertwende,” in Martin Dinges (ed.), Medizinkritische Bewegungen im
Deutschen Reich (Stuttgart, 1996), pp. 127–59, provides an overview of many
basic facts of the movement. Cornelia Brink, “‘Nicht mehr normal und noch
nicht geisteskrank …’ Über psychologische Grenzfälle im Kaiserreich,”
WerkstattGeschichte 33 (2002), 22–44. Several recent articles focus on the diagnosis
of “Querulantenwahnsinn”: Karen Nolte, “Querulantenwahnsinn – ‘Eiginsinn’
oder ‘Irrsinn’?” in idem et al. (eds), Moderne Anstaltspsychiatrie im 19. und 20.
Jahrhundert – Legitimation und Kritik (Stuttgart, 2006), pp. 395–410; Rebecca
Schwoch
and
Heinz-Peter
Schmiedebach,
“‘Querulantenwahnsinn,’
Pschiatrikritik und Öﬀentlichkeit um 1900,” Medizin Historisches Journal 42
(2007), 30–60. On a notorious asylum scandal: Goldberg, “Mellage Trial.”
38
Thomas Rechlin, Antipsychiatrie, ihre Wurzeln und Voraussetzungen (Bochum,
1987); Norman Dain, “Psychiatry and Anti-Psychiatry in the U.S.,” in Mark
Micale and Roy Porter (eds.), Discovering the History of Psychiatry (New York,
1994), pp. 415–44; Jaques Postel and David F. Allen, “History and Anti-Psychiatry
in France,” ibid., pp. 384–414; Gerald Grob, From Asylum to Community
(Princeton, 1991).

170

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

Wilhelmine Germany’s Irrenrechtsreform movement, by contrast,
privileged the voices of the aﬄicted themselves (especially the bourgeois among them), who, in revolting against psychiatric abuses,
seized on the tools of democracy, building a grass-roots social reform
movement. As in the CV, the movement melded a litigious culture
of honor with the tools of the pressure group – mass media, lobbying,
citizen committees, petitions. However, it took this politics further,
appealing much more broadly to a mass audience and selfconsciously constructing a movement that transcended class and
political ideology. In this sense, it was a quintessential, if largely
unknown, example of the era’s new populist politics.39
Irrenrechtsreform was a response to the massive expansion of the
carceral system and the perception of psychiatrists as repressive,
ignorant, and corrupt. In the early nineteenth century, psychiatry
was a novelty, a barely recognized profession, and the modern
insane asylum was identiﬁed among the educated bourgeoisie with
humanitarian progress (freeing the mentally ill from the brutality
of the early-modern madhouse and prison). By the end of the
century, by contrast, asylums had become vast institutions warehousing an ever-expanding variety of social deviants and “degenerates.” And psychiatry, fully professionalized with institutional
bases in the universities, asylums, courts, and a network of professional organizations and journals, had established itself as a
powerful arbiter of social norms. That professionalization, at the
same time, entailed the shift from holistic and “anthropological”
conceptions of mental illness toward biological determinism and
degeneration theories.

39

Its activists, in turn, were part of broader intellectual currents that included the
popularization of anti-elitist and “holistic” scientiﬁc alternatives to the mechanism
and materialism of the establishment sciences in the universities. More speciﬁcally,
the Irrenrechtsreformbewegung had very close links to the natural healing movement
(Naturheilbewegung), another, better-known popular movement against the medical
establishment. Andreas Daum, Wissenschaftspopularisierung im 19. Jahrhundert
(Munich, 1998); Paul Weindling, Health, Race and German Politics (Cambridge,
1989), pp. 3ﬀ.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

171

The lunatics’ rights autobiographical pamphlet, on which part of
this chapter section is based, derived from and spoke to this reality,
one that encouraged the overuse and abuse of the insanity diagnosis.
But that literature, written by the mad, who appealed to the public for
justice and the recovery of their honor, can not be taken at face value
as “true” in any simple or obvious sense of the term. Certainly many
or most aspects of their asylum stories truly happened, but those
stories were also (self-serving) constructed narratives whose original
experiences they told were already mediated by bourgeois values and
the political culture of the Kaiserreich. Even further, those stories did
not simply uncover psychiatric abuse; they also helped in important
ways to construct the ﬁgure of abuse and disenfranchisement (the
wrongfully incarcerated and/or legally incapacitated, and the disenfranchised asylum inmate) who, as we shall see, then became the
object of a whole new politics of extending rights to that group of
people.
Bourgeois citizens were more likely to encounter psychiatry at the
turn of the century partly because the erection of a carceral asylum
system coincided in time with the heyday of “nervousness,” a host of
aﬄictons associated with the stresses of modern, industrial life.40 The
authors of the lunatics’ rights movement were steeped in a culture of
nerves and mental maladies: most had voluntarily sought out nerve
treatments, and unlike the second wave of antipsychiatrists after
World War Two, they did not doubt the existence of mental illness.41
However, nerves and insanity, strictly speaking, belonged to two
entirely diﬀerent worlds of illness. Nerves (though not conﬁned to
the middle classes) were a lifestyle, even a leisure activity, an
extension of bourgeois identity. The spa, the sanatorium, and the
private consulting oﬃce were the spaces of nerves; the services they
oﬀered: gentility, luxury, and caregiving, a respite from life to be
coddled and nurtured. Here (ideally), the doctor-patient relationship
40

Joachim Radkau, Das Zeitalter der Nervosität (Munich, 2000), argues that both the
discourse and epidemiology of nervousness were more prevalent in Germany than
anywhere else.
41
Though, of course, they disputed their own insanity diagnoses.

172

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

built up the ego, respected boundaries, and reinforced class identity.42 The insanity diagnosis, in radical contrast, belonged to a world
that extinguished bourgeois existence – the world of legal incapacitation and the insane asylum. The problem was that the boundaries
between nerves and insanity were not as sharp as one had assumed.
According to the pamphlet literature, it was, in fact, entirely possible
to consult a doctor for a simple case of nerves but then end up
ensnared in the coercive mental health system. “No person is invulnerable” to the clutches of the asylum, went a typical warning,
because of the ubiquitous “nervousness of the age.”43
Adolf Glöklen, who went on to found the Bund in 1909, was one
such unlucky person. His nerves shattered by a daughter’s suicide,
Glöklen, a Kaufmann (businessman) by profession, consulted his
physician who recommended that he speak with a specialist at
Heidelberg University’s psychiatric clinic. Glöklen showed up
expecting a short consultation and hoping for a medical certiﬁcate
to cover the insurance for a stay at a private sanatorium. Instead, he
was whisked away to a back room, admitted as a patient, and held
against his will. Unable to contact the outside world, he endured ﬁve
nightmarish days in the asylum until his wife, appearing on visiting
day, rescued him.44
Except, perhaps, for the stories circulating in the press, nothing in
his secure world had prepared Glöklen for what he faced in the
asylum. Stripped and placed in a bath, he was astonished to see the
attendants “plundering” his clothing and inspecting his briefcase with
its “private written things.” His body was also invaded, forced to
42

Hegemann-Vorster’s description (Was ist Geisteskrankheit, pp. 50–54) of her
(voluntary) stay at the Rhenish asylum Andernach, which she loved, oﬀers one
of the most illuminating accounts of bourgeois expectations and needs in the
treatment of nerves. I discuss these issues for an earlier period in Ann Goldberg,
“Conventions of Madness: Bürgerlichkeit and the Asylum in the Vormärz,” Central
European History 33 (2000), 173–93.
43
Ludwig Ernst, Für die Lebendig Begraben, 2nd edn (Vienna, 1904), pp. 30–31, 41.
44
N.a. [Adolf Glöklen], Zustände in der Heidelberger Universitäts-Irren-Klinik. Oder 5
Tage lebendig begraben (Heidelberg, 1908). His wife had initially signed the
admittance papers, but, Glöklen claimed, she was coerced and did not realize
what she was doing.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

173

undergo a cleaning and inspection for vermin and contagious diseases. Dressed in institutional clothing, his possessions taken from
him, he was sent to a dorm-like room and, even though it was the
middle of the day, ordered to stay in bed. His fellow inmates, he
discovered with horror, included criminals (transfered from prison).
Glöklen knew a huge mistake had been made, but no one would
listen: as “insane,” he was a “Mundtoder.” The attendants barked
orders and humiliated him in front of the other patients when he
protested the dirtiness of the glass he was assigned for brushing his
teeth. He waited impatiently for a doctor – someone, ﬁnally, with the
education to understand his predicament. But when the professors
came by with their students on their daily round, they discussed
Glöklen in the third person, as a scientiﬁc case, as if he wasn’t even
present. Glöklen was shaken to his core. Powerless and robbed of his
“individuality,” he searched for imagery to express the feelings of
violation: it was like being treated as a “vagabond,” a “recruit in a
military barrack,” a “prisoner,” an “object,” an “under-age child.”45
Glöklen, like other bourgeois patients, had entered the unfamiliar
terrain of powerlessness, discipline, declassing, and objectiﬁcation of
Foucault’s “carceral society.”46 This experience, and what drove the
outrage that turned to authorship and activism, was mediated by
bourgeois values and sensibilities, particularly those associated with
honor. The writings of these people narrated how the insanity
diagnosis (leading to incapacitation or the asylum) tore away at the
dignity and respect of the individual, violated the basic rights of the
Staatsbürger, ruined reputations and careers, and invaded the private
sphere of the patriarchal family, turning men into (legal) “children”
and promiscuous, avaricious wives into the real power in the home.
This last point needs emphasis. An obsession of the movement,
legal incapacitation, being a disaster for both a “lunatic’s” honor and
his ﬁnancial interests, was at the same time about losing manhood. It
is no accident that gender and parent-child role reversals were not
uncommon in this literature. Here, one encountered cases not only of
45
46

This imagery appears repeatedly in the lunatics’ rights literature as a whole.
Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York, 1977).

174

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

wives and children using the asylum to get rid of a husband/parent,
but even of incapacitated men placed under the guardianship of their
wives or (grown) children.47 Irrenrechts-Reform devoted an entire
article to a disturbing trend: a kind of “marriage sport” played by
“women lacking scruples, conscience or decent morality,” who used
the asylum to rid themselves of inconvenient husbands.48 Even when
wives had more legitimate motives (i.e. defending themselves against
alcoholic husbands), what, apparently, was so alarming about the
current situation was a new-found freedom of women through their
alliance with psychiatry and the state.49 Ernst Müller, a Ph.D. and
author of agricultural works, knew this from bitter experience, having been shunted oﬀ to an asylum after his wife, in fear of her safety,
contacted the authorities. In his pamphlet, he blustered about the
“assassination of my personal freedom” when what he was talking
about was his right to abuse his wife (“tyrannize,” as his psychiatrist
put it) without interference of the state or the asylum.50
The “mad” turned to the public with their stories of wrongful
incarceration and incapacitations, in order, paradoxically, to reclaim
reputation, honor, and citizenship – in a word, personhood. These
authors faced the unenviable task of convincing a public that, contrary to the judgments of oﬃcials and experts, they were indeed sane
and rational. This presented them with one of the more unusual
problems in the history of authorship: the very subject about which
they wrote – their experiences as certiﬁed lunatics – by deﬁnition
47

On the loss of “Vaterrechte,” see Rudolf Arndt, Geisteskrank. Unzurechnungsfähig.
Entmündigt (Greifswald, 1896), p. 12. On cases of wives and daughters appointed as
guardians: Irrenrechts-Reform 14/15 (1910), 1; 30/31 (1912), 294. Despite its
enshrinement of patriarchy, the Civil Code, which went into eﬀect in 1900,
permitted the guardianship of men by their wives. Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch vom 18.
August 1896 (Munich, 1902), p. 453.
48
Paul Elmer, “Die Ehefrau als Schlepperin des Irrenhauses,” Irrenrechts-Reform
14/15 (1910), 150–52. The wife as evil instigator of her husband’s incarceration
was central to the discourse of the Fuhrmann case, a national cause célèbre in 1901.
49
Ibid. The discussion in this article of the alliance of wives and psychiatrists was
reminiscent of contemporary anticlerical discourse about pernicious relationships
between women and priests.
50
Ernst Müller, Drei Monate ohne Grund im Irrenhause (Dresden, 1898), p. 5.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

175

seemed to invalidate the voice that spoke about it. Thus, while the
pamphlets had diﬀerent agendas, establishing the legitimate status of
the writer’s voice was always their deeper purpose and subtext. This
was the key to erasing the stigma and shame of an insanity diagnosis,
to reclaiming legal capacity and honor, and to picking up the pieces
of a shattered life. Writing thus went far beyond sympathy pandering
(or scandal-mongering); it was an act of claiming a (rational) voice,
of shifting the author’s social identity and thereby recapturing the
person of civil society.
Lunatics’ rights pamphlets were predicated on the fact that
publicity, and only publicity, could perform this act of social
alchemy. One wonders how, in earlier decades and centuries, the
“mad” negotiated their way back to honor and personhood.
However this occurred, it took place locally, in families and communities. The self-revelatory asylum pamphlet was the extreme
exception before the 1880s.51 This changed with the expansion of
the public sphere as a result of national uniﬁcation and the broadened (Reichstag) franchise, urbanization, a mass press and literacy,
and the rise of mass politics.
By the 1890s, the “mad” were learning to use this new public to
bypass and subvert the authorities and medical experts, in order to
mediate the disputes of private life and the social status of the
51

There was, however, a partial precedent for the Wilhelmine pamphlets that dated
back to Karl Philipp Moritz’s Magazin zur Erfahrungsseelenkunde (1783–1793). This
late Enlightenment journal published, among other things, autobiographical stories of educated and well-placed individuals who had undergone experiences of
mental derangement and loss of their rational selves. But unlike the Wilhelmine
pamphlets, these experiences of mental illness, as far as I can tell, were ephemeral
and had not caused the authors to be legally certiﬁed as insane. Their authors thus
spoke from within the dominant culture, and did so for the purpose of engaging
philosophical discussions about the nature of the mind. Their stories were about
introspection and self-knowledge. Wilhelmine antipsychiatry stories, by contrast,
were about injustice and rights. On the Magazin and mental illness in bourgeois
culture, see Doris Kaufmann, Aufklärung, bürgerliche Selbsterfahrung und die
‘Erﬁndung’ der Psychiatrie in Deutschland, 1770–1850 (Göttingen, 1995); LeeAnn
Hansen, “At the Boundaries of Enlightenment: Deﬁnitions of Health, Illness, and
Insanity in Karl Philipp Moritz’s Magazin zur Erfahrungsseelenkunde” (unpublished
paper).

176

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

psyche.52 They did this by inventively adapting an existing cultural
practice: the personal self-revelatory pamphlet. Having suﬀered
some kind of injustice, Germans took their cases in print to the
public, creating a pervasive but ephemeral popular literature of legal
self-defenses, confessionals, and exposés of oﬃcial corruption,
which, as discussed in chapter 2, included the pamphlets of the
insulted and defamed seeking to recover their honor. Lunatics’
rights works took this literature a step further, in eﬀect commodifying the most private of experiences and the psyche itself, oﬀering
them up for sale in the literary marketplace.
Raw and improvisational, these publications were a literature in the
making, groping for its voice. There were no formal literary rules,
because its authors were by deﬁnition speaking from a marginalized,
non-institutional position. They were thus free to ransack the history
of print culture, constrained only by the marketplace and the inner
logic of their objectives. The results were inventive new literary
hybrids that cannibalized diﬀerent genres: the novel (high and low),
the play, the memoir, the legal brief, the political polemic, and the
philosophical tract. The novelistic narration (usually in the ﬁrst person
voice) had the advantage of all drama, especially when the author drew
from lowbrow, popular crime and prison novels: the engendering of
emotional identiﬁcation in the reader as well as the appeal to a public
greedy for sensational true-life horror stories. Some pamphlets
unabashedly sought out this market, prominently displaying the
words “sensational!” or “conﬁscated!”53 Yet the novel was distinctly
incapable of, even harmful to, making claims about the facticity of
events and the objectivity of the author. Here is where most authors
turned to the legal brief and the primary document, inserting into the
52

Kretzschmar, Irrenfrage, p. 253, provided the clearest articulation of the idea,
underlying lunatics’ rights, that “publicity” was the key to the defense of “personal
autonomy” in the face of “state and scientiﬁc” malfeasance and injustice.
53
For example: Ewald Krüner, Moderne Folterkammern, 5th edn (Hagen and Zurich,
1913), whose subtitle reveals the mass audience it sought: “Ein Volksbuch zur …”
P. Klos, Deutsche Beamtenherrschaft in ihrer ganzen Machtentfaltung (Zurich, 1909),
which announced its “conﬁscated” status, was a politically subversive pamphlet
written by a Socialist.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

177

text or in an addendum reproductions of letters, medical opinions,
parliamentary petitions, judicial rulings, and legal briefs.
There were inﬁnite variations on the novel-legal-briefdocumentary-sourcebook form (and in style and tone), reﬂecting the
diﬀering ways the authors were positioned socially (by occupation,
education, gender, and religious, political and philosophical beliefs),
their intended audience, and a host of idiosyncratic factors. Male
authors in established professions imprinted their pamphlets with
writing techniques and an organizational coherence taken from their
education. They also favored an “objective” tone and style, including
the philosophical proclamation and the didactic survey. Carl Brill, a
prominent Magdeburg physician before his troubles, bombarded the
reader with court documents, press clippings, medical reports, and
footnotes.54 A legally incapacitated Rechts-praktikant felt the need to
announce on his title page: “not a novel, [rather] a history based on the
oﬃcial record [aktenmäßige Geschichte].”55 He was claiming a status and
voice while distancing himself both from the sensationalism of much of
the lunatics’ rights literature and its mass audience.56 (The negative
association of this literature – most of which was produced by middleclass authors and publishers – with the gutter press, modernity, and the
masses, had been cleverly made a few years earlier by what appears to
be a piece of psychiatric propaganda put out to discredit and defuse
antipsychiatry sentiment. Its opening pages described how the
“author,” a quintessential cigar-smoking bourgeois and [happy] former asylum inmate, is disgusted when, in a train station pressed by the
“struggle for existence,” he discovers that the “booklet” he bought
from a “peddlar” is in actuality a scandal-mongering asylum penny
dreadful in the manner of the “spirit of the masses” [Volksgeist].57)
54

Carl Brill, Pﬂichtwidrigkeiten hiesiger Richter in einem Ehescheidungensprozeß
(Magdeburg, 1906). On the other hand, Anton Maleszka, Wie man Geisteskranke
fabriziert (Berlin, 1905), a teacher, wrote in pure novelistic form, but used the third
person, as if he were talking about someone else.
55
Georg Platner, Modernes Standrecht (Zurich, 1896).
56
His prefatory remarks make this clear.
57
Hans Schmidt, “Das Haus des Schreckens” oder Dichtung und Wahrheit (Leipzig,
1890), quotes from pp. 3–6.

178

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

The lunatics’ rights pamphlet was overwhelmingly a male,
middle-class phenomenon,58 the most obvious reason being the
empowerment to speak out that social position and education
brought. This status also gave bourgeois men expectations of security
and privacy which, when violated by experiences of psychiatry and
asylum, inﬂamed feelings of outrage and injustice. This sense of
male, bourgeois entitlement is all the more striking in authors who,
whether from lack of talent or from a disturbed mental state, lacked
mastery over their chosen medium (writing). Their pamphlets were
wild, obsessive, and incoherent, capable of, say, bursting into song in
the middle of a diatribe against Roman law.59
The discord (and inventiveness) of Elise Hegemann’s pamphlet
came from a diﬀerent source: as a woman, she lacked the education
and training in writing, but she also had greater barriers to surpass in
the search for a public voice. She thus sought to pre-empt criticism at
the outset with an apology and the reinscription of herself in a
traditional female role, begging the reader to view her pamphlet
“not as a literary work, but merely as the complaint, questions, and
narrative of a mother robbed [of her children].” Likewise, her
pamphlet did not begin with a philosophical statement, or even
with the facts of her case. Instead, she chose to establish her identity
indirectly by surrounding herself with a jumble of images and texts
from history, culture, and religion: a picture of the ﬁfteenth-century
religious reformer and martyr Jan Huss; Old Testament verse, with
accompanying lithograph, of Judith decapitating the Assyrian
invader Holofernes; Berlioz on Beethoven; Ernst Moritz Arndt’s
poem, “Der Gott, der Eisen wachsen ließ”; a Ludwig Auerbach
song: ‘O Schwarzwald, O Heimat, wie bist Du so schön!’60 The
58

Despite the fact that most insane asylum inmates were from the lower classes.
One example: Franz Schäfer, Ein “Schwabenstreich” der Züricher Polizei oder 4 Tage
“auf Beobachtung” in der Züricher Irrenanstalt Burghöli (Belfast, 1897), a dramatist
whose “songs” were quotations of passages from his plays.
60
The inclusion of material on Beethoven and the Schwarzwald signalled to the
reader elements of Hegemann’s sensibility: the ﬁrst referred to her love of music
and her fond memories of the one psychiatrist (Nasse in Andernach) who treated
her with respect; the Schwarzwald was the site of her worst asylum experiences (in
59

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

179

result was pure chaos, but eﬀective, establishing for the reader and
reaﬃrming in the author who she was: a woman of culture, faith, and
placeness, but also a ﬁghter.61
Hegemann’s prefatory pages had another function: to cast the
author’s perilous and transgressive act of self-revelation in terms of
a higher purpose and cause. The old Testament ﬁgure Judith,
another gutsy widow, had given Hegemann, as she said, “the courage
to write.” Judith provided a female model of heroism and revenge,
elevating and transmuting Hegemann’s rancour against men in her
life (husband, uncles, and psychiatrists)62 into a battle for freedom
akin to Judith’s stand against the Assyrians.63 This was also the
message of Arndt’s patriotic poem urging Germans to defend their
“rights” against the Napoleonic “tyranny.” Directly addressing the
reader, Hegemann explained her “duty” to write as follows:
In my view, the individual is not only a member of his own family but of the
great family of humanity. ‘The truth … can heal the deepest wounds!’ and this
brave standing up for the truth can only have a favourable eﬀect on my
children’s lives.

Lunatics’ rights literature recast the particular, the petty, and the
base in terms of universal principles and higher causes. Its authors
had multiple motives for writing, and revenge and the public shaming
of enemies (familial, medical, judicial) were often among them. Yet no
matter their motive, authors always purportedly wrote out of a sense
the asylums Illenau and Emmendingen), but also a place that enchanted her with its
beauty. (These were her own explanations.) Her use of the Auerbach song can also
be linked to the Kaiserreich’s Heimat movement, which celebrated the local and
linked it to the nation.
61
Hegemann-Vorster, Was ist Geisteskrankheit?
62
Hegemann sought revenge against both abusive psychiatrists and her husband,
who had engineered her incarcerations. In her 1901 petition to the Bundesrat, she
called this “publicly explaining the injustice [I] suﬀered … due to my husband’s
intrigues …” Resp. 86/1273, Bd. 1, Bundesarchiv, Berlin-Lichterfelde (BA); and
her remarks in the preface of her pamphlet. Hegemann was also using her pamphlet
to publicly shame her uncles, prominent members of the community, into ﬁnancially providing for her, as well as a son, who retained administrative control over
her fortune. See the back cover of her pamphlet.
63
On the wealth of images and interpretations down the ages of this iconic ﬁgure, see
Margarita Stocker, Judith. Sexual Warrior (New Haven, 1998).

180

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

of “duty.” In so doing, they linked personal sagas with the fate of the
nation. They asserted that personal injustices and violations of their
honor had broad implications for questions of law, freedom, and
rights. The businessman and former asylum inmate Ewald Krüner
saw his life – the injustices and his duty to speak out – through the
model of Schiller’s Wilhelm Tell courageously battling “tyranny.”64
For the antisemitic Jew Morris de Jonge, whose hatred of his father
ﬁts right in to his contemporary Freud’s oedipal theories, it was the
battle against “international stock market Jewry.”65 More typically,
in Hamburg, Ahrens “entered this battle [against city medical oﬃcers] … because it is a question not of an individual person, but of the
rights of all … in our republican free-state [Hamburg].”66
The plight of individual “mad” people thus came to be seen in
terms of narratives of systemic corruption and the struggle for the
freedom and rights of the Staatsbürger. Madness, in turn, was nationalized – seen in terms of the fate of the nation (and literally put on the
national legislative agenda).67 The Bund institutionalized this discourse in its journal Irrenrechts-Reform, oﬀering a constant stream of
articles on sensational wrongful incarcerations and incapacitations
(a speciality of the journal) that made the connection between
individual cases and nationwide problems in the mental health,
judicial, and political systems.68 It also presented a vision that linked
psychiatric abuse to the maladies of modernity: psychiatric power
was code for external and threatening forces – science, bureaucracies,
police forces, big industry, big cities – that undermined the free
burgher, his honor and inviolable private sphere.
At the same time, lunatics’ rights were juridifying the insanity
question. Forty years earlier, at mid-century, an exposé pamphlet on
wrongful incarceration, Eine Mutter im Irrenhause, presented the case
64

Krüner, Moderne Folterkammern, p. 1.
Morris de Jonge, Ein Akt moderner Tortur (Berlin, 1890).
66
Ad. Ahrens, Anti-Vernunft. Beweisstücke für die jetzigen ungenügenden Irrengesetze
(Hamburg, 1891).
67
My point about the “nationalization” of madness is diﬀerent from the work on
national narratives of decline and degeneration at the turn of the century.
68
Its critique, in particular, of the Prussian three-class voting system.
65

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

181

as an anomaly – a “perhaps unique case, never occurred before [nie
dagewesen].”69 By the 1890s, “mad” people were increasingly seeing
the individual events of their lives as emblematic of a broader pattern
and in terms of national narratives of systemic abuse and corruption.
This was both cause and eﬀect of the fact that the “mad” had the ear
of the nation: individual cases became public scandals widely
reported in the press and the subject of parliamentary debates. This
led other “mad” people to reconsider their own experiences in a new
light and to contact a network of reformers and publishers specializing in asylum literature.70 After 1909, they contacted the Bund,
which publicized their cases and provided legal and other services,
including lobbying parliaments on their behalf. A striking example of
the Bund’s tactics involved an incarcerated patient who succeeded in
smuggling out a letter to the organization. The Bund then went into
action, pressuring the institution to transfer the patient to an opencare unit. When this did not work, the Bund turned to the daily press
(Vorwärts) and the publicity worked. After his transfer, the patient
simply walked away, turning up one day at the editorial oﬃce of
Irrenrechts-Reform, which continued to aid him when he was later
harassed by the police.71 Finally, the Bund energetically lobbied for
the passage of a federal asylum law to rein in the power of psychiatrists and regulate every facet of insanity.72
In 1851, Eine Mutter expressed its outrage in the language of
morality, castigating the “mother’s” persecutors (her children,
69

Anon [Adolph Ebeling], Eine Mutter im Irrenhause. Beitrag zur Sittengeschichte
unserer Zeit (Bremen, 1851), p. 142. This pamphlet caused a scandal, particularly
because its subject, Louise Gabe de Massarellos, belonged to one of Hamburg’s
leading patrician families. See also, n.a.., Der Prozeß der Familie Gabe in Hamburg
(Bremen, 1851).
70
One example of the mobilizing eﬀect of asylum causes célèbres: a civil engineer,
whose asylum “nightmare” consisted of trivialities (e.g. bad food and disturbed
morning sleep), nevertheless heard about the famous Hegelmaier case (below),
began to reconsider his own experiences, and ended up publishing his own
pamphlet of complaint. A. De., Zustände in der Staats-Irrenanstalt Winnenthal
(Stuttgart, 1895), p. 5.
71
IR 24/25 (1912), 239 ﬀ.
72
Calls for such legislation actually began years before in the early 1890s when the
asylum issue was ﬁrst politicized.

182

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

guardian, doctors, asylum) for the violation of their duties and
responsibilities. Wilhelmine antipsychiatry, by contrast, spoke the
language of law and mass democracy: justice, due process, freedom,
the rights of the Staatsbürger. The spreading use of the insanity
diagnosis, explained one author, threatens the very fabric of society
by undermining the basis of “human rights,” namely the presumed
autonomy and free will of the rechtsfähig citizen.73 Psychiatry was an
impenetrable regime of the experts that raised the frightening spectre
of an arbitrary power acting outside of the law – what the Bund called
Überpsychiatrie74 – invading the private life of citizens75 and robbing
them of their rights. The literature written by the “mad” powerfully
evoked the sense of vulnerability in the imagery of the knock-on-thedoor-out-of-nowhere, whereby an entirely normal and upright, but
somewhat nervous, bourgeois citizen ﬁnds his study invaded one day
by medical oﬃcials who haul him oﬀ to the asylum. (He did not
realize that, say, his wife or children had been plotting behind his
back to steal his fortune.)
Once the mad came to see their plight in legal and political terms –
as violations of the rule of law – they acted: beside themselves with
anger, they turned to the press; petitioned parliaments and oﬃcials to
have their cases reversed;76 wrote open letters to the Kaiser and other
oﬃcials;77 cited law codes and ﬁled lawsuits against their doctors. In
so doing, they turned the defamation lawsuit into a tool of protest
and reform. Doctors who had written allegedly false or incompetent
reports declaring insanity diagnoses ﬁgured prominently in these
lawsuits. One such case involved the leading psychiatrist Emil
73

Kretzschmar, Die Unvollkommenheit der heutigen Psychiatrie und die
Mangelhaftigkeit der deutschen Irrengesetzgebung (Leipzig, 1891), p. 5.
74
IR 14/15 (1910), 150.
75
This issue was everywhere in the lunatics’ rights literature. For one example that
places privacy in a broader political perspective, see “Die geistigen Hinrichtungen
in Ostelbien,” IR 40/41 (Sept. 1913), 368–74.
76
The BA holds some of the petitions ﬁled in 1895–1906. See Rep. 1501/11909,
Nr. 39.
77
For example, K. v. R. [Oswald Knorr], Oﬀene Briefe an Seine Majestät den König von
Preußen (Charlottenburg, 1896); Carl Paasch, Oﬀener Brief an Reichskanzler von
Caprivi (Leipzig, 1891).

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

183

Kraepelin, against whom Elise Hegemann, with the help of the Bund,
ﬁled suit in 1909.78
The “non-insane” in the wider community were likewise motivated
to take action. In Tilsit, on the eastern border of Germany, a citizens
committee, led by a Gymnasium teacher and the editor of a local newspaper, took up the cause of an incapacitated and incarcerated doctor and
Lithuanian nationalist (Brozeit), whose case, tapping into ethnic politics,
divided the town’s inhabitants in the late 1880s and early 1890s.79 In
1901, at the other end of the Empire, a group of citizens in the Rhenish
town of Neuenahr outraged by the “kidnapping” and incarceration of a
local businessman, Joseph Fuhrmann, allegedly at the instigation of his
wife, wrote an open letter to the Kölnische Volkszeitung defending
Fuhrmann’s character and sanity, while the wife was subject to a boycott
and collective attacks against her home.80 Citizen action could involve
instances of individuals “liberating” a patient from an asylum. (The
most famous case was that of the innkeeper Mellage, who, in 1894,
succeeded in freeing a Scottish priest from a Rhenish Catholic asylum
only to face libel charges, as a result of his published exposés on the
asylum, in a trial that riveted the nation in 1895.)81 It also manifested
itself in a citizen-sponsored conference on the asylum problem that took
place in Göttingen in 1894, as well as in the mounting press coverage
and parliamentary debates devoted to asylum scandals.82
The Wilhelmine discourse of law and justice on the asylum issue
can be found across the political spectrum, from Socialists to rightwing antisemites.83 This was most spectacularly displayed in one of
78

Bilﬁnger, “Die Irrenanstalten im Lichte der natürlichen Heilweise,” IR 3 (1909), 2.
Another example is August Menn, “Hallucinationen” und Gegenbeweise. Ein
Rechtsfall (Salzburg, 1897), whose lawsuit against a Sanitätsrat was rejected by
the state attorney’s oﬃce.
79
Beyer, Bestrebungen, pp. 260–74. 80 Ibid., pp. 290–304.
81
Goldberg, “Mellage Trial.” See also the interesting case of the globe-trotting
aristocrat Prince von Sulkowski, whose Hungarian lover helped him escape from
an Austrian asylum. Beyer, Bestrebungen, pp. 214–21.
82
The conference brought together (mostly) conservative politicans and concerned
citizens from the middle and upper classes.
83
For a Socialist example among the self-revelatory pamphlets, see Klos, Deutsche
Beamtenherrschaft.

184

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

the great psychiatric causes célèbres of the Kaiserreich: the dismissal,
on the basis of an insanity diagnosis, of Heilbronn’s mayor Paul
Hegelmaier. In the 1880s, Hegelmaier had made himself a hated man
with his strong-arm tactics, and opposition to him fed into liberal
critiques of Württemberg’s anachronistic system of life-long mayoral
appointments. Yet, in 1892 “all of Württemberg rose up”84 in
Hegelmaier’s defense when it was discovered that the government,
seeking to oust Hegelmaier without touching the system of irremovable mayors, had gotten around the law by having the Württemberg
medical board declare him insane. The ensuing outcry united all the
political parties against this instance of political interference from on
high with the judicial process (“Cabinetjustiz”), and the case escalated into a public relations disaster for the government.85
The juridical nature of lunatics’ rights discourse reﬂected to an
extent the prominent role of lawyers and jurists within the movement.86 But it was also more broadly rooted in the intensely legalistic
and litigious culture of the Kaiserreich that is the subject of this
book.87 Long before their troubles with psychiatry, lunatics’ rights
authors had been immersed in this litigious culture, and it is this that
often led to their insanity diagnoses. The press accounts and pamphlet literature on cases of wrongful incarceration and incapacitation
were ﬁlled with people who spent huge amounts of time and energy
bringing lawsuits, going to court, and ﬁling petitions. They viewed
local and familial disputes through the lens of law and rights. As a
result, the courts (along with the press) were the institution of choice
to vent rage and ﬁght out the petty and not so petty injuries of daily
life. Von Bröcker, an artillery oﬃcer turned engineer at the Krupp
84

Kretzschmar, Irrenfrage, p. 118.
An overview sympathetic to Hegelmaier, together with some primary sources, can
be found ibid., pp. 107–44.
86
This was related, in turn, to the “boundary disputes” between psychiatrists and the
legal profession that resulted from the steadily widening role of psychiatric
expertise in the courts.
87
Margaret Anderson, Practicing Democracy: Elections and Political Culture in Imperial
Germany (Princeton, 2000) has masterfully analyzed this political culture within
electoral politics. Her work, however, does not deal with the justice system.
85

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

185

plant in Essen, ﬁled suit over a maternal inheritance against the father
he had long detested. When the case did not go as Bröcker wanted,
he turned on the judge, accusing him of “perversion of justice”
(Rechtsbeugung).88 In another case, a ship’s doctor, who had been
ﬁred from his ﬁrm, initiated legal proceedings for reimbursement of
his fees and ended up being ﬁned for defamation against the court.89
Most importantly, the courts were battlegrounds for the defense of
honor and reputation. For August Menn, the oﬀense that began his legal
imbroglios was a supposed veiled attack against him in the local
(Stuttgart) paper.90 The Magdeburg physician Carl Brill, after losing
his divorce case, accused his father’s cousin (also a doctor) of having him
(Brill) declared insane in order to cover up his adultery with Brill’s wife.
This led to hearings before a medical disciplinary court and petitions by
Brill to the Minister of Justice to intervene. He was subsequently
outraged when the authorities failed to prosecute anyone involved in
the case, including himself, because it prevented him from defending
himself and his reputation in “a public” forum.91 For years, a power
struggle in the conservative party was partly fought out in a series of
seemingly petty defamation suits, including those between Adolf Stöcker
and the Berlin clergyman Carl Witte, who was eventually declared
insane and later became an activist in the lunatics’ rights movement.92
Originating within the Kaiserreich’s culture of honor and law, the
legal cases of these bourgeois men, who in many respects were typical of
their class and gender, spiraled out of control into furious obsessions,
88

Kretzschmar, Irrenfrage, pp. 177–81.
Ibid., pp. 101–02 90 August Menn, Hallucinationen.
91
Brill, Pﬂichtwidrigkeiten, p. 10.
92
Carl Witte, Mein Conﬂict mit Herrn Hof- und Domprediger Stöcker (Berlin, 1889);
Kretzschmar, Irrenfrage, pp. 153–59; Walter Frank, Hofprediger Adolf Stoecker und
die christlichsoziale Bewegung (Hamburg, 1935). An insanity diagnosis most directly
dishonored men by denying them even the ability to sue for defamation. According
to Liepmann, “Die Beleidigung,” in Mittermaier et al. (eds.), Vergleichende
Darstellung des deutschen und ausländischen Strafrechts: Besonderer Teil vol. 4
(Berlin, 1906), p. 69, the insane, like children, have “human worth,” but they
are only in the most limited sense “bearers of honor” (Ehrenträger) and thus can
only be defamed for an “attack against [their] social position from the period of
their health,” i.e. before they were declared insane.
89

186

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

personal crusades, and attacks in all directions – most damningly,
against judges and other oﬃcials. Psychiatrists, called in by alarmed
authorities, responded with a diagnosis that was tailor-made for this
character type: querulous insanity (Querulantenwahnsinn). A species of
“moral insanity” and generally hereditary, Querulantenwahnsinn,
explained the psychiatrist Bernhard Beyer defensively, does not label
as ill people who pursue justice (ihr Recht), but how they do so.
According to Heinrich Schüle, co-editor of a leading psychiatric journal,93 Querulanten pathologically imagine themselves to be the victim of
a “wrongful injury from external machinations [and] intrigues” and, in a
paranoid state, engage in endless written complaints, petitions, and
lawsuits. A compulsion [Zwangsimpuls] drives them to oppose “subordination,” to ﬁght for “human rights,” and, in the worst of cases, even
to commit “lèse-majesté in open court.”94
Querulantenwahnsinn was a paradigmatic diagnosis of its time and
place – the site where the Kaiserreich’s litigiousness intersected with
the onslaught of psychiatry, asylum, and the authoritarian state.
Fiercely contested, it was also the paradigmatic mental illness of
the lunatics’ rights movement – not only because of its frequency
among authors and activists, but, more importantly, because it
embodied in the most extreme form what was felt to be wrong with
institutional psychiatry. If the insanity diagnosis stripped citizens of
their rights, Querulantenwahnsinn went one step further, pathologizing the very act of asserting those rights.95
The Bund went after the Querulantenwahnsinn diagnosis and other
psychiatric abuses with a vengeance, forging in the process a populist
special-interest group that brought together a heterogeneous collection
93

The Allgemeine Zeitschrift für Psychiatrie. Schüle was also the director of Baden’s
Illenau asylum.
94
Heinrich Schüle, Klinische Psychiatrie (Leipzig, 1886), quoted in Beyer,
Bestrebungen, pp. 359–63.
95
As one author put it, Querulantenwahnsinn allows medical practitioners to dismiss as
illness “real injustices and conspiracies.” Düsing, Künstlicher Irrsinn. Eine Warnung
vor Irrenanstalten (Leipzig, 1894), p. 24. The Bund’s journal, Irrenrechts-Reform, was
ﬁlled with attacks on the concept of Querulantenwahnsinn and its use by medical
practitioners and the courts.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

187

of former asylum inmates, Freigeistiger, Monists, natural-healing adherents, and other sundry social reformers. Class politics were anathema to
the Bund’s view of itself. Its message, rather, was inclusion – the unity
of an aggrieved Volk battling the corrupt powers that be. Thus it
worked hard to represent itself as a non-partisan, truly “national”
organization transcending class, ideological, religious, regional, and
even gender divisions in German society.96 In reality, the Bund
was overwhelmingly bourgeois, and primarily male and Protestant.97
Its non-partisanship, however, was important and not mere rhetoric. The movement’s language of unity ﬂowed from its understanding of psychiatry as a tool of social control in the Kaiserreich – its
insight that the insanity diagnosis was dramatically increasing partly
because more and more “inconvenient” people, including political
outsiders, were arbitrarily labeled as such. This led the Bund to take
on and defend cases from people across the political spectrum,
irrespective of whether the organization agreed with their personal
views. These people included antisemites and their opponents, the
Guelph and homosexual von Schulenburg (“private matters” are not
the business of the state),98 and, in 1919, Karl Liebknecht and the
Spartacists.99 It also publicized cases of wrongful incarceration and
96

In its later years, its journal proclaimed this explicitly on its front-page logo.
There were women members in the Bund, and their cases were taken up by the
organization from time to time. The Bund also sought to appeal to a female
audience by publishing some female-oriented articles. But the organization’s
leadership, editorial staﬀ, and, seemingly, contributing writers were male, and
the general tenor of its articles reﬂected this. Its Protestant orientation can be seen
in its leadership and in its defense of several persecuted Protestant clergyman
(including the above-mentioned Witte) against the hierarchy of the Evangelical
church. I have not found anything similar for persecuted Catholics.
98
IR 18/19 (1911), 194–95; ibid., 26/27 (1912), 255–62. Schulenburg was a cousin of
von Bülow. The Bund argued that Schulenburg’s legal incapacitation was the result
of persecution for his political views and his homosexuality, as well as the ﬁnancial
machinations of his family.
99
IR 63 (1919), 183–84. The Bund defended them against the “crazy” charge, and,
while deploring Liebknecht’s “violent methods,” called him a “Volksfreund”!
Though no friend of the Left, Kretzschmar, Irrenfrage, pp. 7–18, was typical in
deploring the use of the insanity label against political opponents, including
anarchists and Socialists.
97

188

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

incapacitation from all classes and both genders, although those of
men from the middle classes predominated. The message, at this
level, was not only unity, but tolerance of diﬀerences.
The Bund also managed to create a coalition of followers from
opposite poles of the political spectrum. On the Right, its ideological
roots can be traced to an 1892 antipsychiatry manifesto published by
the Kreuzzeitung (the organ of Prussian conservatism). But, at the
same time, the Bund used the Social Democratic press for many of its
exposé pieces, attacked “East Elbian reactionaries,” and called for the
democratization of the Prussian electoral system.100 Parliamentary
debates saw similar alliances across ideological divisions, with conservatives taking the lead on the asylum issue in the early 1890s,
followed, increasingly, by the SPD after the turn of the century.101
Neither Right nor Left in any conventional sense, the lunatics’
rights movement ﬁts to an extent the “anti-politics” of the “social
reform milieu” analyzed recently by Kevin Repp.102 More broadly,
its bourgeois populism was part of the reconﬁguration of public life in
the Kaiserreich that came with the rise of mass politics in the 1890s.
The result was the decline of notable politics (the bastion of ascendant liberalism in the 1860s and 1870s) in the face of challenges both
from the Left (SPD) and from a new style of right-wing, bourgeois

100

See, for example, “Die geistigen Hinrichtungen in Ostelbien,” IR 40/41 (1913),
368–74.
101
Needless to say, the asylum issue remained peripheral to Socialist politics, and
Wilhelm Liebknecht’s essential sympathy for psychiatry may have been more
representative of the SPD’s leadership than that of the antipsychiatry activists
Adolf Thiele and Arthur Stadthagen. Liebknecht’s basic faith in the scientiﬁc and
humanitarian value of psychiatry was the position of liberals. However, he did
support asylum reform as a civil rights issue.
102
Kevin Repp, Reformers Critics, and the Paths of German Modernity (Cambridge,
MA, 2000). On the whole, the lunatics’ rights movement shared with this milieu a
“discourse of an alternative modernity” (227) that emphasized social unity, nonpartisanship, and the “rejection of existing party-political relationships” (217).
Further, individual activists, e.g. Lehmann-Hohenberg, were very much a part of
that milieu. But the movement was much more ambivalent about scientiﬁc
expertise, and its rhetoric of scandal departed signiﬁcantly from the technocratic
pragmatism of the reformers Repp analyzed.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

189

populism that combined radical nationalism and antisemitism with a
discourse of democracy.103
Accordingly, if the Bund could claim support from Socialists and
conservatives, liberals were another matter: they were a “hindrance”
to asylum reform, complained the Bund.104 With their strong faith in
science as a force of enlightenment and freedom, liberals were mostly
allied with psychiatry in support of the asylum status quo.105 This
position, however, had become severely outdated by the mass warehousing of deviants and the rising rates of legal incapacitations. The
lunatics’ rights movement, arising out of this situation, was helping to
reshape public discourse on modernity by decoupling the terms
liberalism, freedom, and science. Earlier in the century, the new
ﬁeld of psychiatry (in the view of the educated bourgeoisie) was
synonymous with liberalism and human rights. The lunatics’ rights
discourse of the Wilhelmine era, by contrast, represented the defense
of civil liberties as a battle, if not against science per se, then against
psychiatric expertise, the medical establishment, and, by extension
(implicitly) a liberal worldview. In the new “key” of bourgeois
populism, it used the language of radical-democracy and liberalism
to make claims for the rights of a newly “discovered” disenfranchised
group (the mentally ill and wrongfully diagnosed). It did this, as
I have shown, by powerfully linking societal ills with private traumas
and the class anxieties of the bourgeoisie.
This reconﬁgured discourse made possible new sorts of alliances
(e.g. between Left and Right). It also appealed to the völkisch Right,
whose presence can be felt in some of Irrenrechts-Reform’s articles,
as well as in the Bund’s leadership.106 One of its leaders, Johann
Lehmann-Hohenberg (1851–1925), a tireless and well-connected
social reformer and publisher, who had been ﬁred from his
103

The literature is too large to list here. For an introduction and important analysis,
see Geoﬀ Eley, Reshaping the German Right (Ann Arbor, MI, 1991).
104
“Neuorientierung und Irrenrecht,” IR 56 (1916), 68.
105
For a more extended discussion of this, see Goldberg, “Mellage Trial.”
106
One article, for example, contrasted “materialist medicine,” which it called
superﬁcial, female, and oriental, with “German depth” and a “spiritual elite.”
IR 2 (Sept. 1909), 13.

190

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

professorial position at Kiel University under suspicion of insanity,
was an inﬂuential advocate of “Germanic Law” – a favorite idea of
the far Right that would gain currency among the likes of Anton
Drexler in the Weimar Republic.107 At its 1914 conference, the Bund
adopted Lehmann-Hohenberg’s anti-Roman law resolution.108 For
an organization so insistent on the law, the Bund’s interest in legal
reform is not surprising.109 It is noteworthy, however, how easily its
legalism accommodated a völkisch viewpoint. And, while the Bund
itself avoided antisemitic rhetoric, some of the loudest lunatics’ rights
voices in the Kaiserreich were those of rabid antisemites.110
Practically speaking, the lunatics’ rights movement had very
limited eﬀect, never managing to get national reform legislation
passed, although some of its activists did later participate in drafting
such legislation (never passed) under a more sympathetic regime in
the Weimar Republic. The spread of eugenics and the Nazi takeover
meant, however, that the next decades would see not civil rights but
the mass murder of the insane in the Third Reich. Wilhelmine
antipsychiatry participated in the radicalization of bourgeois politics
107

A very interesting ﬁgure, Lehmann-Hohenberg had a career that included numerous publishing ventures, connected an array of causes and social reform “milieus,”
and moved steadily to the Right. His personal ﬁle (Geheimes Staatsarchiv
Preußischer Kulturbesitz, Rep. 76 Vf, Lit. L, Nr. 35) contains a wealth of
information, as well as many of his writings. His literary archive (BA, N2170)
may have been purged of incriminating correspondence by his heirs. See also
Schwoch and Schmiedebach, “Querulantenwahnsinn,” pp. 35ﬀ; Albrecht Götz von
Olenhusen, “Zur Entwicklung völkischen Rechtsdenkens. Frühe rechtsradikale
Programmatik und bürgerliche Rechtswissenschaft,” in Hans Jochen Vogel et al.
(eds.), Die Freiheit des Anderen: Festschrift für Martin Hirsch (Baden-Baden, 1981),
pp. 87–88.
108
“Allgemeine Irrenrechts-Konferenz,” Vossische Zeitung, March 8, 1914.
109
It especially wanted to severely limit (or eliminate) psychiatry’s role in the courts,
returning the legal judgment of insanity to judges (e.g. IR 36/37 [1913], 341) or to
civil juries made up of laymen (e.g. F. Kretzschmar, Die Unvollkommenheit der
heutigen Psychiatrie und die Mangelhaftigkeit der deutschen Irrengesetzgebung
[Leipzig, 1891], p. 59).
110
Indeed, conservatives ﬁrst seized upon and politicized the asylum issue in the early
1890s by publicizing several cases of antisemites who, it was asserted, had been
wrongfully incarcerated or incapacitated. These cases included, among others, the
antisemitic leader Karl Paasch. Kretzschmar, Irrenfrage, pp. 81–98, 170–94.

Popular mobilizations: Jews and lunatics

191

after 1890, a phenomenon linked to the later rise of Nazism. Yet,
antipsychiatry was, in its own way, emancipatory,111 stretching our
understanding of the uses of the public sphere in the Kaiserreich.
Here, the “mad” made the public the medium for the conversion of
private traumas into ideology and politics, radically extending its
democratic functions in strategies of empowerment aimed at undermining or bypassing the psychiatric and judicial establishments. They
invented new ways of addressing the public and in the process
constructed a new disenfranchised group – the wrongfully incarcerated and incapacitated, as well as the mentally ill inmate without
rights – that became the focus of a politics of rights led by the Bund.
Notions of bourgeois privacy, honor, law, and masculinity were
central to that politics.
111

On the socially repressive aspects of the movement, see Goldberg, “Reinvented
Public.”

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

It was October, 1965. The war in Vietnam was massively escalating
under US President Johnson, and a group of German protestors,
bearing banners and shouting antiwar slogans, gathered near the US
embassy in Bonn. Amid a welter of angry denunciations (“Vietnam:
America’s Auschwitz,” “Negotiations, Not Murder”), one chant
caught the authorities attention: “Child Murderer Johnson – Child
Murderer Johnson.” A slanderous attack against a named head of
state, albeit a foreign one, constituted a criminal oﬀense under §103 of
the German penal code. An investigation was opened – the leaders
of the demonstration, in addition to the above oﬀense, were reputed
to have communist connections – and the US State Department
contacted about pressing charges. But the US had a very diﬀerent
legal history and no law approaching that of §103. There ensued a
moment of diplomatic confusion. Possibly stunned, the US State
Department had to confess to the absence in American law of any
basis for prosecution. The Germans were thus forced to drop the case.1
The case is reminiscent of one seventy years earlier when the German
authorities under the Kaiser advised their Belgian counterparts of
“their right to prosecute” the German Socialist editor Reinhold
Stenzel for an article in a German newspaper attacking the Belgian
King Leopold II for “his colonial exploits” and other matters.2 The
1

Rep. 104, Nr. 548, NWHSA. Seven years later, the Nixon administration – not
known for its tolerance of dissidents – had a similar response when asked to sign
onto a lawsuit against a leftist student group (Spartakus) distributing a pamphlet that
called Nixon a “war criminal.” Rep. 195, Nr. 1701, NWHSA.
2
Alex Hall, “The Kaiser, the Wilhelmine State and Lèse-Majesté,” German Life and
Letters 27/2 (1974), p. 108.
193

194

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

outcome in this earlier instance, however, was diﬀerent: the case went
to trial and Stengel was given an eight-month prison sentence.
The persistence of Germany’s culture of honor in the courts across
every turning point of its history – 1848, 1871, 1918/19, 1933, 1945 – is
striking. After World War Two, the numbers of cases brought to
trial dropped oﬀ and the nature of some of the litigation predictably
changed with the new Zeitgeist and government. If, under the Third
Reich, for example, being a Jew or Jew-like were slanderous charges
subject to litigation,3 after the war the opposite was true. Now, being
called an antisemite or a Nazi collaborator were felt to be slanderous,
prompting lawsuits.4 But the culture itself remained very much alive
in the West German courts, structuring daily conﬂicts in ways that
appear similiar to earlier times.5 Across the border, in communist East
Germany, lay civil courts, set up to adjudicate daily conﬂicts, were
swamped by honor lawsuits (50–60 percent of all cases). Plaintiﬀs,
like their Second Reich counterparts, sought not money but the
restitution of their reputations.6
This chapter brieﬂy reviews the post-Kaiserreich history of honor
and defamation as they played out in the Weimar Republic, the Third
Reich, and the postwar eras. It returns at the end to the historiography and the issues of tradition and continuity in the history.

WEIMAR REPUBLIC

The abdication of the Kaiser and the coming to power of a left-center
coalition in the revolution of 1918/19 brought a partial reckoning
with the past. Along lines Socialists had long advocated, the Weimar
Republic attempted, amidst the chaos of its fourteen short years of
3

For example, the court case against one Frau Seikriet, who in 1939 accused Boris
Blacher, a famous composer, of being Jewish. Rep. 17, Nr. 25, NWHSA.
4
For example, a 1960s case in Rep. 104, Nr. 538, NWHSA.
5
Hans-Georg Doering, Beleidigung und Privatklage (Göttingen, 1971), a criminological study of the years 1957–1965; James Whitman, “Enforcing Civility and Respect:
Three Societies,” Yale Law Journal 109 (2000), 1279–398.
6
Paul Betts, “Property, Peace and Honor: Neighborhood Justice in Communist
Berlin,” Past and Present 201 (2008), 215–54.

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

195

existence, the democratization of libel law and the eradication of
some of the worst abuses of the Kaiserreich. In the interest of
republican egalitarianism, the lèse-majesté laws, for example, were
purposefully not transferred to Weimar’s new political leaders,
whose honor claims were thereby placed on an equal footing with
those of private citizens.7 §193 remained a topic of heated debate in
the press and the legislatures, and led to the placement in 1929 of
liberal protections of speech in draft legislation for a revised penal
code.
But politics, culture, and the many crises of the Republic put
breaks on these reformist impulses. As a result of the explosion of
right-wing extremism after 1918 – years of communist uprisings,
hyperinﬂation, right-wing political murders and coup attempts –
and in the wake of Foreign Minister Walther Rathenau’s assassination, the government issued its July 21, 1922 Law for the Protection
of the Republic. The law included a crackdown on antirepublican
speech in the form of hefty prison sentences for political defamations.
With Rathenau in mind – a public ﬁgure who, even after his murder,
remained intensely reviled in right-wing propaganda8 – §7 made it a
crime punishable by up to ﬁve years in jail to defame an assassinated
member of the government. §8 punished with up to ﬁve years in
prison whomsoever “slandered,” “demeaned,” or “defamed” the
republican state and its members of government, or publicly or in a
gathering slandered the ﬂag. Yet, for all its echoes of past censorship
via defamation jurisprudence, these laws turned out to be singularly
ineﬀective in the face of an intransigent judicial bureaucracy.
That bureaucracy, a holdover from the Kaiserreich, was dominated by conservative jurists and prosecutors whose antirepublicanism deeply aﬀected defamation jurisprudence. There had been great
hopes that the revolution would usher in broad §193 protections of
the press in line with the values of republicanism and popular
sovereignty. Some courts did begin ruling in favor of greater press
7

H. Haccius, Die Gesetze zum Schutz der Republik von 1922 und 1930 (Göttingen, 1931),
p. 19.
8
Ibid.

196

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

protections. At the top, however, the Reichsgericht maintained its
extremely narrow interpretation of §193.9 Meanwhile, in the lower
courts, a pernicious double standard of justice pervaded the treatment
of honor. It involved, among other inconsistent applications of the
law, the meting out of extremely lenient sentences and acquittals to
employer, right-wing, and antisemitic defendants while punishments
of leftist, Jewish, and worker defendants tended to be draconic by
comparison. The Jewish Hamburg bankers Max Warburg and Carl
Melchior, for example, ﬁled suit in 1924 against the antisemitic
publisher Theodor Fritsch for an article in his Hammer calling them
prototypes of a “Jewish world domination.” A court refused to
convict, aﬀording Fritsch §193 protection. Fritsch’s inability to provide proof of the truth of his defamatory statement was not a problem
according to the court, since, as the Berliner Tageblatt critically
summarized, “it is not possible to provide proof of the truth of such
value judgments about contemporary events.”10 In sharp contrast, a
few weeks earlier, the SPD journalist Martin Gruber was denied §193
protections and sentenced to a ﬁne of 30 days’ jail or 3,000rm by a
Munich court for calling two right-wing, stab-in-the-back propagandists “fools” and “liars.”11
The same judges and prosecutors who had sharply limited left-wing
dissent under the Kaiserreich were now strangely quiescent in the face
of right-wing attacks on the republican state. There was an acute
awareness of the problem in the press and parliaments, a problem
that, to the dismay of the government, seemed intractable and immune
to legislative ﬁxes. Reichstag deputy Kuttner was appalled by the
“passivity” of the state attorneys: “In many rabble rousing papers
one ﬁnds serious insults of the government, but the state attorney
never pays any heed, even when they’re calling for serious disobedience like refusing to hand over weapons … The state attorney never
once investigates whereas previously [in the Kaiserreich] it zealously
studied Vorwärts [the Socialist newspaper] in order to ﬁnd any sort of
9

“Die Tragweite des §193 in der Gegenwart,” Deutsche Zeitung, October 10, 1926.
“Warburg, Melchior und Theordor Fritsch,” Berliner Tageblatt, January 28, 1926.
11
“Das Ende der Dolschstosslegende,” Berliner Tageblatt, December 9, 1925.
10

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

197

prosecutable expression.”12 Deputy Rosenfeld painted a picture of class
warfare in rural Pomerania taking place around defamation lawsuits.
The judicial authorities, in deciding which cases to charge with
defamation, were making decisions based on whether the defendant
was a worker or employer-landowner, so that:
in numerous cases [the authorities proceeded] entirely one-sidedly against
employees and indeed often for entirely simple swear words that are commonplace in the countryside, whereas in cases of defamation of employees or their
representatives in worker associations by lords of the manor [Rittergutsbesitzer],
the state attorney never gets involved in protecting the insulted party and
bringing legal charges.13

Meanwhile, Germans continued suing one another at an alarming
rate. The contents of the lawsuits were both old and new. Old were
the invective and cursings, the feuds and hatreds of daily life. A 1931
list of Berlin Privatklagen gives a taste of these:“You old pig, now
you’re ﬁnished, I’ll beat the crap out of you,” or “kiss my ass.”14
Other cases involved accusations of criminal behavior. The everyday
feuds were often bound up with the hard economic times. The most
common causes of such lawsuits, explained an experienced Berlin
judge, were “ﬁghts in pubs, ﬁghts between employer and worker,
diﬀerences over business deals, gossip and, above all, the housing
shortage,” which forced enemy housemates and “even divorced
couples” to remain living in close quarters.15 One lawsuit alleged
that a female defamer had purposefully denounced the complainant
to the welfare authorities in order that the latter be deprived of her
beneﬁts.16
The language and practices of honor were the same, but the new
events and circumstances of the Weimar years were also changing the
content of defamation lawsuits. In August 1919, the Ober-Präsident
of the province of East Prussia wrote in alarm to his superior at the
12

Protokoll des Hauptausschusses über den Haushalt der Justizverwaltung, June 9,
1921. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8140, GStAPK, p. 81.
13
Ibid.
14
“Übersicht über die im Monat März 1931 bei zwei Privatklageabteilungen des
Amtsgerichts Berlin eingegangen Privatklagesachen.” R22, Nr. 1113, BA, pp. 34, 38.
15
“Vier Jahre Beleidigungs-Richter,” January 27, 1927. 16 Ibid., p. 35.

198

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

Justice Ministry about rising defamations on the part of the civilian
population against members of the military. Those attacks were
physical; they were also coming in a barrage from the Socialist
press, causing a “rising irritability” and demands by the military
for government “protection of their honor.”17 The occupation of the
industrial Ruhr region by French and Belgian troops in 1923, in order
to force the payment in kind of German war reparations, provoked its
own set of lawsuits. From Elberfeld came reports of right-wing thugs,
masked and armed, breaking into homes and, in a symbolic ritual of
sexual retribution recalling the early-modern charivari, cutting oﬀ
the hair of German women suspected of having “intimate relations”
with the French. The victims included the Werners, a married couple
in the village of Vohwinkel about whom “there was suspicion among
the population of intimate relations with members of the French
occupation force.” They sued for physical defamation, but lost the
case on appeal because, despite Frau Werner swearing she could
identify one of the defendants (a neighbor), the court found insuﬃcient proof of his or the other defendants’ culpability.18 In 1926, the
wife of a railway worker, one Elisabeth Kreimeier, was tried for antiFrench slurs against her landlord. Kreimeier and her husband rented a
ﬂoor from a police oﬃcial who, during the Ruhr crisis, had helped out
a French family in need. As a “loyal, German-minded woman,”
Kreimeier explained to the court, she disliked this sort of behavior on
the part of her landlord. It came out during a ﬁght over household
matters, when she exploded, cussing her landlord out with: “Fatherlandtraitor, French friend, separatist …”19 She was convicted, but her
subsequent appeal for clemency was viewed quite sympathetically, the
court even scolding the plaintiﬀ – the police oﬃcial landlord – for his
friendly behavior to the French.
Then there were the racial verbal attacks, reﬂecting the explosion of
antisemitism and nationalist xenophobia. The attacks ranged from the
simple and unsophisticated – “Polish whore”;“ﬁlthy Jewish pig”20 – to
17

August 1, 1919. I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8140, GStPK, p. 62.
Ibid., Rep. 84a, Nr. 58212. 19 I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 58205, GStPK.
20
R22, Nr. 1113, BA, pp. 30, 34.
18

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

199

the poisonous völkisch rhetoric spewing forth from right-wing intellectuals, publicists, and politicians. Its victims fought back with the
defamation lawsuit. They were the rich and famous – e.g. Max
Warburg, Arnold Zweig – and the entirely obscure. The latter included
Dr. Zellner, a Breslau lawyer, who became the object of attack after he
had won a civil action for a client in a rental disagreement. The loser, a
Landschaftssekretär, after being forced to pay the court fees, including an
amount to Zellner, turned for revenge to the antisemitic press, where an
article appeared (“Judische Kostenberechnung”) quoting him accusing
Zellner of falsiﬁcation, as a Jew, of his legal fees. Zellner, feeling his
“professional honor oﬀended” and his reputation “debased in public
opinion,” successfully sued under both the defamation and press laws
(though a higher court later reversed the decision).21
Like Zellner, there were Jews who were successful in these kinds of
lawsuits. (One famous case involved the writer Arnold Zweig who sued
the Deutsches Adelsblatt in 1929 for a venomously antisemitic review of
his book Der Streit um den Sergeanten Grischa.)22 But it was also true that
many courts were systematically denying Jews the same honor protections they aﬀorded non-Jews. One hears it in the complaints of the
Prussian Minister of Justice in 1922, for example.23 One sees it in the
“hair-splitting” argument of the Reichsgericht in a 1923 decision that
reversed a series of lower-court convictions of the far-right Erhardt
Brigade for its defamatory song: “We don’t need any Jew republic!
Shame, Jew republic!”24 One sees it in the many cases of “prominent
Jewish ﬁgures in government … who were refused protection from
libel by the courts,”25 and in unknown, more everyday cases like that of
Hermann Grünberg, a Berlin businessman. In 1924, Grünberg went to
a police station to lodge a complaint against a coachman. At the station,
as he later asserted, he was “mocked and insulted” when the police
21

I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 58222, GStPK.
Many of the relevant documents, including clippings of the extensive news coverage generated by the trial, can be found in GStAPK, Rep. 84a, Nr. 53457.
23
I. HA Rep. 84a, Nr. 8140, GStPK, p. 113.
24
Ingo Müller, Hitler’s Justice: The Courts of the Third Reich (Cambridge, MA, 1991),
p. 18.
25
Ibid., p. 19.
22

200

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

sergeant (Polizeioberwachtmeister) sneered: “you confounded Jew,
you’re going to get a few slaps on the face.” Grünberg lodged a
complaint against the policeman only to ﬁnd himself indicted, tried,
and convicted for the crime of “false accusation.”26
A racialization of honor in daily life was occurring in a broader
sense. One sees this in the way “Jewish” and “Jew” were becoming
accepted epithets to be ﬂung against non-Jewish enemies. It is also
evident in the distinctions some Germans were making between
“Germanic” and “Jewish” honor. In 1925, a Berlin woman was in
conﬂict with a judge, who called her “seriously hysterical.” Deeply
oﬀended, she had a friend knowledgeable in the law write the judge a
letter of complaint:27
I am from honorable German stock and no Jew … I can only say one thing …
in a public courtroom in front of strangers, you so severely insulted me with
the words “seriously hysterical” … if I were immediately sent to prison at least
I would have my German honor … you expect a German woman to put up
with such a thing [!] … The public must be informed.

THE THIRD REICH

Both the entrenched persistence and the plasticity of German honor
culture is particularly striking under the Third Reich. The Nazis
sought to revolutionize honor, eradicating its individualism and
substituting a racially based group honor of the Volk. This racialization and nationalization of honor had a profound impact on the laws,
courts, and daily life. But the regime’s radical zeal encountered
barriers, one of which was Germany’s entrenched popular honor
culture. That culture, while adaptable to the new regime, also served
as the basis for resistance to it.
The restoration of “German honor” – from the degradations of
the Versailles Treaty and “Jewish” liberal democracy – was, as is well
known, central to Nazi rhetoric. Less well known are the legal and
social aspects of this obsession. Honor was deﬁned by National
Socialist legal experts as a radical break from both Old Regime
26

HA I, Rep. 84a, Nr. 58213 GStAPK.

27

Rep. 84a, Nr. 58217 GStAPK.

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

201

corporatism and liberal individualism. As Walter Buch, chief judge of
the Nazi party, put it: previously, German honor was “divided:
professional and corporate honor, family honor, national honor …
Today [by contrast] we now know that … honor is embedded in
blood … and we [Aryan Germans] are all carriers of the same blood
of our race and the same honor.”28 Honor derived, in other words,
neither from membership in a corporate status group nor from
an inherent humanity; it came from membership in a race-based
community – the Volk. And that membership required as the mark
of honor above all: obedience, loyalty, and sacriﬁce to and for the
Volksgemeinschaft and the Führer. The submersion of the individual
into the Volk meant, in turn, that legal questions of honor would now
be measured not by individual or universal human standards but
according to what beneﬁted or harmed the Volk. For, As Roland
Freisler, State Secretary of the Reich Ministry of Justice and
President of the Volksgerichtshof, explained, “damaging a person’s
honor is simultaneously an attack on the honor of the nation
[Volkstum], of which the person is a member.”29 This principle
applied more generally to criminal law in the Third Reich, where
the purpose of trials “became not so much to determine whether the
accused had broken a law, but rather ‘whether the wrongdoer still
belongs to the community.’”30
This fascist egalitarianism, race-based and radically authoritarian,
had severe implications for the legal and legislative treatment of
honor. Well known, of course, is the Law for the Protection of
German Blood and German Honor, which criminalized marriage
and sex between Jews and Aryans; those found in violation of the
law were tried, literally, for “dishonoring the race.”31 It is not yet
clear, however, how these notions aﬀected the ability of Jews and
other non-Aryans to bring Privatklagen since, theoretically, those
28

Buch, “Des nationalsozialistischen Menschen Ehre und Ehrenschutz,” Deutsche
Justiz (October 21, 1938), 1659.
29
Roland Freisler, “Gedanken zum Gemeinschaftsehrschutz,” Deutsche Justiz,
September 25, 1936, 1461.
30
Müller, Hitler’s Justice, p. 79. 31 Ibid., p. 100.

202

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

“lesser races,” in Nazi thought, were not entirely honorless; they
simply had a diﬀerent, inferior kind of honor.32
Much of the political policing of speech under the Third Reich
occurred under a series of decrees and laws issued in the ﬁrst years of
the regime dealing with the protection of state and party honor. That
this was so should not surprise: the practice was a clear continuation of
policies, discussed in this book, that went back many decades. The
extremity of the repression and the völkisch ideology in which it was
embedded, however, were new. Newspaper editors were required to
censor any statement dishonoring a German. Laws regarding “treacherous attacks” against the government made the intentional spreading
of assertions with potential to damage the well-being and respect of the
Reich, government, and National Socialist party members punishable
by up to two years’ jail time. Other laws protected dishonoring comments against Hitler, the ﬂag, and other symbols of the state.33
More changes of the honor laws were in the works. A revised penal
and procedural code would abolish the Privatklage and, reversing the
liberal era reform, reinstate the state’s monopoly over criminal prosecutions. For, as the Criminal Law Commission (Strafrechtskommission)
put it, “it is not consistent with the essence of today’s state to make the
prosecution or not of a crime dependent upon the will of a private
person.”34 A 1933 report of the Prussian Minister of Justice, which laid
out a set of inﬂuential principles for a revised criminal justice system,
envisioned a new crime of Volksverleumdung (defamation against the
national community) that was incorporated into the draft proposal of the
proposed penal code.35 The new thinking aﬀected the juridical status
of lèse-majesté. In the Justice Ministry report, attacks against the honor
of political leaders came to be equated with attacks against the
32

Brezina, Ehre und Ehrenschutz im nationalsozialistischen Recht (Augsburg, 1987),
p. 23. Useful information on defamation law in the Third Reich can also be found in
Jörg Ernst August Waldow, “Der strafrechtliche Ehrenschutz in der NS-Zeit”
(Baden-Baden, 2000), a law-school dissertation.
33
Ibid., pp. 59–67.
34
“Aufzeichnungen für die 2. Lesung über Ehrenkränkungen.” R22, Nr. 995, BA,
p. 147.
35
Brezina, Ehre und Ehrenschutz, p. 121.

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

203

Volksgemeinschaft. Thus, early on, when high party and government
leaders chose not to prosecute citizens who uttered defamatory statements against them in private, a chief state attorney recommended,
by contrast, prosecution for “an attack against the honor of the
Volksgemeinschaft, to whose leadership the defamed belong.”36
Nazi notions of duty, nation, and race were also forcing a rethinking of §193 (§295 in the draft proposal). There was a shift taking place
from the “liberalist era” focus on “personal interest” as the basis for
the legal protection of dishonoring statements to a new standard: the
“health of the Volk” and “duty” to the state.37 The result was the
simultaneous contracting and expanding of the protection of insulting speech. On the one hand, “now” (as opposed to during the
“liberalist era”), according to the Strafrechtskommission, dishonoring speech is tolerated only in “exceptional cases.”38 On the other
hand, it became a duty for citizens and party members to report on
matters aﬀecting the Volk, even if this involved the use of insulting
statements, and a clause to this eﬀect was inserted in the penal code
draft.39
Thus, while newspapers underwent rigid censorship, the notion of
duty to the Volk ironically gave the press a certain freedom of
reportage that had been denied it in the Kaiserreich and the
Weimar Republic. In those earlier eras, the Reichsgericht’s illiberal
interpretation of §193 (which had refused to extend this protection to
newspaper stories with insulting content that were published in the
public interest) had presumed (and rejected) an oppositional role
between state and society via a free press. Now, under the Third
Reich, that distinction disappeared, the press being merged with the
party state. Newspaper editors, faithful to the party line, were
36

Oberstaatsanwalt Jung to Generalstaatsanwalt Naumburg, Erfurt, August 6, 1934.
R22, Nr. 995, BA, p. 17.
37
“Aufzeichnungen für die 2. Lesung über Ehrenkränkungen” (no date). R22,
Nr. 995, BA, p. 144.
38
Ibid.
39
Ibid., p. 157. §295, which was to replace §193, gave protections to dishonoring
speech made in the “Erfüllung einer rechts- oder sittlicher Pﬂicht oder sonst zu
einem nach gesunder Volksanschauung berechtigtem Zwecke …”

204

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

therefore granted §193 protections when the insulting material they
published served the greater good of the Volk.40
These ideas were making their way into the courts, some of whose
judgments evinced a new willingness to sacriﬁce the personal honor of
citizens and even oﬃcials to the larger needs of the state and Volk. In
1936, the Reichsgericht reversed a lower court decision that had denied
§193 protection to a citizen who had denounced a state oﬃcial for abuse
of power and been sued by the latter for defamation. The lower court
(Strafkammer), in ruling against the defendant, had argued that state
and party oﬃcials enjoy a special honor status and thus protection from
defamations. The Reichsgericht, overruling this decision, asserted that
(in the words of an approving reporter) it violated the “National
Socialist principle that in the interest of upholding the cleanliness
[Sauberkeit] of public administration, abuses of power both in the
party and the other oﬃces” must be communicated to the authorities.41
The same principle of the higher good of Volk and state could in other
cases work in the opposite direction to protect party and state oﬃcials.
Thus a magistrate’s ruling against a plaintiﬀ who had brought a
Privatklage against a low-ranking party oﬃcer (Ortsgruppenleiter)
after the latter, in a speech at a party gathering, called him a “white
Jew.” The magistrate proclaimed that the defendant’s insult was
protected speech because it had been uttered in the exercise of his
oﬃcial “duty to realize … the Party program.”42
There were, however, distinct limits to how far this revolution was
able to go, given the chaotic state of Nazi administration, the
regime’s prioritization of rearmament and war, and the complexities
and entrenched nature of the legal traditions at issue.43 But perhaps
the most important barrier resided in popular culture. That culture –
its longstanding practices of denunciations and the involvement by
citizens of the state in personal honor disputes – was in one sense
40

Brezina, Ehre und Ehrenschutz, pp. 86–87.
“Anwendung des §193 StGB, auf Anzeigen gegen Amtsträger,” Deutsche Justiz, 34
(1936), 1268.
42
“Abschrift,” April 14, 1937. R22, Nr. 996, BA, p. 83.
43
Brezina, Ehre und Ehrenschutz, p. 208, argues that National Socialist honor notions
had little practical inﬂuence.
41

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

205

remarkably adaptable to the environment of the new regime.44
A 1934 state prosecutor’s communication from Erfurt spoke of the
“regularity” with which private citizens denounced statements they
overheard that were dishonoring of government oﬃcials.45 In one
case, a citizen denounced a local oﬃcial for “anti-National Socialist
behavior,” and was promptly sued by the latter for false accusation
and libel.46 These denunciations under the Third Reich, while about
events and political dynamics speciﬁc to that era, should also be seen
in terms of the longer-standing legal culture discussed in this book.
But there were a number of ways in which that culture set up
roadblocks for the regime. One was the sheer scale of the number of
suits. Despite repeated attempts to do so, the state seemed helpless to
stop the inundation of the courts by what were considered contemptibly trivial matters that wasted money, time, and administrative
manpower. The state tried imposing a late Weimar (October 6,
1931) regulation that limited and streamlined Privatklagen.47 In
1938, Heinrich Himmler, chief of the SS and police forces, invoking
the overburdening of the police, ordered the courts in Privatklage
cases to severely limit the involvement of police organs.48 During
World War Two, there was a sharp rise in Privatklagen, the result
mostly of an epidemic of ﬁghts breaking out in air-raid shelters
during allied bombings.49 Orders again went out for judges to
shorten these procedures and to refuse hearings altogether in “trivial” cases.50 But this hardline generated so much anger on the part of
the citizenry (the “population complain that comrades are no longer
being protected from insults”) that the authorities found themselves
44

On denunciation in Europe and the Third Reich, see Sheila Fitzpatrick and Robert
Gellately (eds.), Accusatory Practices: Denunciation in Modern European History,
1789–1989 (Chicago, 1996).
45
R22, Nr. 995, BA, p. 17.
46
“§164 StGB. Zum Begriﬀ der falschen Anschuldigung,” Deutsche Justiz, 49 (1936),
1855.
47
January 22, 1941. R22, Nr. 1113, BA, p. 104. 48 R22, Nr. 1113, BA, p. 63.
49
Figures for 1938–1940 are listed in R22, Nr. 1113, BA, p. 149. They show a marked
increase in lawsuits in the third quarter of 1940.
50
Berlin, October 28, 1940. R22, Nr. 1113, BA, p. 144.

206

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

having to backtrack and reconsider their position.51 The problem
of Privatklagen burdening the courts continued, and a decree of
August 13, 1942, tried once again to limit them by shifting these
cases to a system of civil arbitration and, among other measures,
requiring a one-month waiting (or cooling-oﬀ) period between the
defamatory incident and the ﬁling of a legal action.52
The depth of popular sentiment for the Privatklage, shared in part
by some jurists, was also why the initial aim of abolishing the
institution was far from successful, and the new draft legislation
ended up looking a lot like the one it was to replace. Concessions
had to made. Thus, citizens were given the right, if not to initiate and
ﬁle a criminal suit themselves, then to function as a co-plaintiﬀ
(Nebenkläger) if and when the state prosecuted their case. The
proceedings before a Friedensrichter (a local magistrate) in those
cases deemed inappropriate for state criminal proceedings were not
dissimilar to the old Privatklage.53
Not only would the legal culture that underlay popular opinion
not go away, it empowered a kind of autonomous action and
resistance on the part of citizens. When the April 7, 1933 Law for
the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service resulted in the
ﬁrings of Jewish and politically undesirable civil servants (including
teachers, professors, and judges), the reaction was a barrage of
Privatklagen. They initiated criminal proceedings for false accusation
or defamation or ﬁled Privatklagen against people whom they held
responsible for the loss of their jobs.54 During the war, a doctor’s
wife, Edit Rudofsky, sued the party Kreisleiter (district leader) in
Bischofteinitz for defamation after the latter, having accused
Rudofsky in a formal hearing for “forbidden contact” with a
French prisoner of war (for giving him cigarettes), went on to
smear her character, calling her underhanded, self-important, an
alien to the community, work-shy, and other derogatory things.55
51

Nuremberg, September 6, 1941. R22, Nr. 1113, BA, p. 254.
Waldow, “Strafrechtliche Ehrenschutz,” pp. 497–98.
53
Brezina, Ehre und Ehrenschutz, p. 145. 54 R22, Nr. 995, BA, pp. 23–26.
55
Ibid., Nr. 3097, p. 2.
52

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

207

This was not an isolated case. So frequent, in fact, were “unwanted
Privatklagen proceedings against bearers of the highest or especially
high responsibility in the party and state” that they produced another
round of discussions, decrees, and rethinking of draft legislation for
the new procedural code.56
THE POSTWAR ERA

Partly in reaction to the Nazi years, some signiﬁcant changes in
German defamation law in the interests of freeing political speech
occurred in postwar West Germany. Political defamation (§187
StGB) was downgraded to a Privatklage oﬀense. The legal discourse
of honor came to be stamped by the notion, dating back to the
nineteenth century, of “personal rights” (Persönlichkeitsrechts) and
the value of protecting a universal right of the individual to “free selfdetermination.”57 Judges, moreover, began incorporating civil-law
remedies in the form of less punitive monetary rewards to plaintiﬀs.58
The development of European-wide institutions is potentially crucial, pushing Germany and other European countries with restrictive
libel laws in the direction of greater freedom of expression. Article 10
of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) guarantees
the “right to freedom of expression,” a provision potentially at odds
with features of German libel law. Indeed, beginning in the mid1980s, the European Commission59 has been issuing “a series of
decisions either upholding or quashing criminal libel convictions
against journalists accused of publishing defamatory political stories.”60
The legal principle now being enforced by the European Commission
56

Ibid., Nr. 996, p. 248.
Dieter Leuze, Die Entwicklung der Persönlichkeitsrechts im 19. Jahrhundert (Bielefeld,
1962).
58
Rüdiger Koewius, Die Rechtswirklichkeit der Privatklage (Berlin, 1974), pp. 169–74.
59
Its precise name: European Commission and Court of Human Rights.
60
Ian Loveland, Political Libels (Oxford, 2000), p. 108. Previously, its rulings, as in the
1975 X v. Germany, had tended to support the limitation of political speech with libel
laws. Ibid., p. 104, and passim. For a comparative discussion of West German, US,
and EU law, see Georg Nolte, Beleidigungsschutz in der freiheitlichen Demokratie
(Berlin, 1992).
57

208

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

(and by post-Sullivan jurisprudence in the US) is exactly the
opposite of the era discussed in this book. In the Kaiserreich (and
in other nineteenth-century European countries),61 public ﬁgures,
particularly government oﬃcials and civil servants, were aﬀorded
more protections against libel than private citizens, the latter
being forced to pursue their cases as Privatklagen. By contrast, the
European Commission now privileges free speech on “matters of
legitimate public interest” over protecting the reputations of public
persons, oﬀerring “substantially more eﬀective defences than those
available to purveyors of ‘private’ information.”62
Still, as the legal scholar James Whitman cogently shows, the
power of a German “insult culture” – of honor and its defense in the
courts – remains strong to this day.63 Its impact can be felt in the way
the legal system treats hate speech against Turks and sexual harassment of women as forms of disrespect rather than as discrimination
against outsider minority or “traditionally inferior” groups. (Special
laws, by contrast, protect Jews against hate speech.) “German jurists
ask [in cases of insults against Turks or women] whether there has
been an outward show of individual disrespect, not whether the larger
climate of equal dignity has been endangered.”64 The result is
anachronistic court rulings, as in a Privatklage brought by a female
law student against a male stranger who groped her breast as he
passed her on a Frankfurt street. She was told by the public prosecutor that such conduct did not constitute sexual harassment because
there was no intent on the part of the perpetrator to demean her
dignity, since respect for a woman “can include treating her as
attractive and desirable” and this may involve “unwanted sexual
advances.”65 Clearly, the anachronistic “traditions” of honor, to
the extent that, as Whitman argues, they continue to prevail in the
German courts, provide an inadequate legal basis for modern claims
of equal treatment and anti-discrimination.
61

See, for example, on French law: Lilienthal, “Üble Nachrede und Verleumdung”,
in Mittermaier et al. (eds.), Vergleichende Darstellung des deutschen und ausländischen
Strafrechts: Besonderer Teil vol. 4 (Berlin, 1906), pp. 413–14.
62
Loveland, Political Libels, p. 155. 63 Whitman, “Enforcing Civility.”
64
Ibid., p. 1311. Emphasis in the original. 65 Ibid., p. 1307.

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

209

How one deﬁnes those traditions – their nature, origins, and
transmission over time – however, makes an important diﬀerence.
Whitman, using mostly prescriptive sources such as law codes,
argues that Germany’s traditions derive from a premodern aristocratic culture of deference, hierarchy, and dueling justice. In his
argument, this culture, still exclusive to the upper classes in the
nineteenth century, was gradually diﬀused throughout the population. In the nineteenth century the upper bourgeoisie, mirroring the
values of their social superiors and empowered by changes in the
legal codes, adopted the Privatklage as an extension of the aristocratic
dueling concept of “private prosecutions.”66 The Privatklage was
thus a redoubt of the satisfaktionsfähig upper classes. Ironically, it was
not until the Nazi era that honor, in the egalitarian form of the
national Volksgemeinschaft, was fully democratized and inclusive of
the entire population, a process continued in an altered, liberaldemocratic key after World War Two.
This book is likewise about the democratization of German honor
traditions, but it tells a very diﬀerent story. Those traditions were
never homogeneous nor exclusively aristocratic. They did, however,
originate in a premodern corporate society, where, not in the 1930s,
but as early as the late Middle Ages, lower- and middle-status people
took their honor claims to court. Those lawsuits, limited by the legal
and social hierarchies of a corporate, premodern world, were conﬁned to horizontal suits within same-ranked people or vertical ones
of superiors against inferiors. That situation changed in the nineteenth century when the law itself was liberalized and citizens were
placed on a footing of formal legal equality. This opened up a new set
of possibilities as traditionally inferior and excluded people began to
utilize the defamation lawsuit to make new claims for respect and
rights. It was in this context that the premodern Privatklage gained a
new lease on life. It was a renewal that derived from liberal battles
against the absolutist state, not the victory of aristocratic traditions.
To be sure, corporate identities remained strong in middle-class
honor, and those identities were inﬂuenced by aristocratic traditions
66

Ibid., p. 1321.

210

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

(most clearly in the duel). But corporate and hierarchical notions of
honor were themselves merging with and being transformed by liberalism, universal male suﬀrage, and mass politics. The Kaiserreich, in
this sense, developed a hybrid legal culture of honor that fused old and
new, and furthered the continuity of corporate traditions while modernizing and partly democratizing them. In discussing the democratic and/
or populist practices of honor, this book has looked at a range of actors –
workers, peasants, women, Socialists – devoting particular attention to
the examples of Jews and lunatics. It has also shown the very modern
politicization of honor in Germany’s parliamentary politics around
debates – §193, Beamtenbeleidigung, the Wahrheitsbeweis, the lèsemajesté bill – about free speech rights and state power. Indeed, parliamentary politics itself functioned in many ways within a (contested)
honor idiom. This hybridity challenges the dichotomy, built into many
studies of German history, between modernity and tradition, progress
and backwardness.
Finally, the Nazis, it is true, developed a racialized honor that
transcended earlier corporate distinctions. But the lessening hold of
those distinctions was already far advanced in the nineteenth century,
and the Nazis, rather than opening up the Privatklage to the masses,
tried their best (in vain) to shut that legal device down, while shifting
trivial honor cases to a system of civil arbitration.
Honor and its legal practices were extremely adaptable to new
historical circumstances, political regimes, and socio-economic realities. Rather than a static set of values or traditions handed down and
diﬀused through the population, they constituted, in the argument of
this book, a language and strategy within which many of the battles
of German history – large and small; personal and political – took
place. The staying power of this honor culture across the upheavals
and regime changes of German history lay precisely in its multipurpose and malleable character. If honor was a tradition, it was
constantly being (re)“invented” and appropriated in diﬀerent contexts that involved disputes over power, status, identity, and rights.67
67

Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger (eds.), The Invention of Tradition
(Cambridge, 1983). One wonders, in this context, about the “traditional” notions

Conclusion: Beyond 1914

211

By paying close attention to those contexts, this book reveals how the
practices of defamation litigation could, strangely, function simultaneously as methods of government repression and tools of empowerment; as a means of defending corporate interests and preserving the
stratiﬁed social order and of challenging that order. The obsessive
litigation around honor derived from and reinforced a society of
intense status anxiety. Yet, it also partially worked as a dissolvent of
traditional status diﬀerences. This was the reality of modernization.
Germany was far from alone in the importance it accorded honor
and in its use of defamation law to repress speech (see, Introduction
and chapter 1). The protection of the honor of heads of state via lèsemajesté laws was the norm in nineteenth-century Europe. The
French and Italians dueled with the same passion as their German
upper- and upper-middle-class counterparts. But Germany developed a quite distinctive legal culture around honor, which encouraged an explosion of litigation of all manner of personal and political
conﬂicts. This was a culture of surveillance – from above and below –
in which diginity, respect, and reputation often trumped free speech.
It was also a culture that propped up the state by treating civil
servants and other oﬃcials as a specially protected class. I do not
believe, however, that the evidence produced in this book supports
the idea (long debated among historians) of a German Sonderweg
(special path), at least not in the older sense of the 1960s and 1970s.
Built upon modernization theory, that idea of German exceptionalism argued that Germany in the nineteenth century began to
pathologically diverge from Western democratic norms, culminating in twentieth-century fascism, because of the weakness of
German liberalism and the survival of premodern elites and attitudes. I hope that this study contributes to a renewed focus on
continuities in German history.68 But in the history of law, as this
of gender honor that, according to Whitman, were (are) embedded in postwar
court rulings against female claims of sexual harassment. Certainly, the nineteenthcentury tradition, as shown in this book (chapter 2), was anything but tolerant of
sexually demeaning aggression against women.
68
See, for example, Helmut Walser Smith, The Continuities of German History: Nation,
Religion, and Race across the Long Nineteenth Century (Cambridge, 2008).

212

Honor, politics, and the law in imperial Germany

and other recent studies show,69 the picture does not conform to
that earlier way of conceiving continuity. Rather than constituting a
hinderance to modernization, Germany’s honor culture was in part
an instrument of it, and in complex ways that nation’s famous
litigiousness and legalism could support both repressive and
reformist impulses. That double-sidedness – authoritarianism and
democracy – is the history I have tried to tell in this book.
69

Benjamin Carter Hett, Death in the Tiergarten: Murder and Criminal Justice in the
Kaiser’s Berlin (Cambridge, MA, 2004); Ian McNeely, The Emancipation of
Writing: German Civil Society in the Making, 1790s–1820s (Berkeley, 2003);
Kenneth Ledford, “Formalizing the Rule of Law in Prussia: The Supreme
Administrative Law Court, 1876–1914,” Central European History 37 (2004),
203–24; Richard Wetzell, Inventing the Criminal: A History of German
Criminology, 1880–1945 (Chapel Hill, 2000).

Index

Anderson, Margaret, 13
antisemitism, 18, 77, 132, 157ﬀ., 189–90, 196, 198ﬀ.
Arnim, Achim von, 161
Arnim, Bettina von, 161
Arnim, Harry von, 84
Aschaﬀenburg, Gustav, 159

in England, 2, 3, 32, 34
in France, 3, 35
in Kaiserreich, 4
liberalization, 9, 14, 19, 22ﬀ., 36, 116–17
policies for top Prussian oﬃcials, 83ﬀ., 97
Privatgenugtuung, 21, 23
postwar Germany, 4, 207–08
Procedural Code (StPO), 26, 29, 30, 32
in Third Reich, 201ﬀ.
in US, 3, 34
in Weimar Republic, 195ﬀ.
defamation lawsuits, 3, 8, 19
and class, 41, 59ﬀ., 187
as form of state rule, 8, 16, 50ﬀ., 81ﬀ., 211
horizontal and vertical, 11, 209
statistics,
in East Germany, 194
in France, 5 n. 16
in Kaiserreich, 4–5
uses in daily life, 14
in Kaiserreich 37ﬀ.
in Third Reich, 205ﬀ.
in Weimar Republic, 197ﬀ.
denunciations, 149, 204ﬀ
Drexler, Anton, 190
dueling, 2, 7–8, 31, 41, 45, 47–48, 51, 87–88, 113,
120, 209
and conservatives, 133
in Eﬃ Briest, 134–35

Beamtenbeleidigung, 16, 17, 34, 82, 96ﬀ., 115ﬀ.,
132–33, 210, 211
Bebel, August, 74, 88, 121
Beseler, Max von, 95, 139–40
Bethmann Hollweg, 86, 94–96
Bismarck, Otto von, 15, 16, 29, 83–85, 87, 100, 121
Bismarck–Becker Aﬀair, 135
Bochumer Steuerprozess, 79–80, 129, 132
Bruhn, Wilhelm, 75
Bülow, Bernhard von, 86, 138, 139
Bund für Irrenrecht und Irrenfürsorge (Bund), 169,
180–81, 183, 186–90
Campe, von, 144
Caprivi, Leo von, 86, 88
censorship, 8, 13, 16–17, 81ﬀ., 115, 117, 145
in Third Reich, 202ﬀ.
Center Party, 29, 123–24, 139, 144–146, 151ﬀ.
Centralverein deutscher Staatsbürger jüdischen
Glaubens (CV), 164–66, 170
Conservatives, 144, 146
and lunatics’ rights, 188
and political debates, 128ﬀ.
courts 9, 17, 41, 107 ﬀ. (see also Reichsgericht)
divisions within, 112ﬀ.
in Weimar Republic, 195ﬀ.
Crosby, Eileen, 72

Eulenburg Aﬀair, 17, 89, 116, 124, 129, 131, 136ﬀ.,
142–45
European Convention on Human Rights,
207–08
Eysoldt, Friedrich, 29

Dallwitz, Johann von, 92ﬀ., 121
defamation law 3–4, 19 (see also defamation
lawsuits; courts; Privatklage; Reichsgericht)
Allgemeines Landrecht, Prussia, 20ﬀ.
Criminal Code (StGB), 28, 32ﬀ., 40, 116, 133, 140
early modern, 19ﬀ.

Fichte, Johann 12
Fontane, Theodor, 134
Foucault, Michel, 169
Freisler, Roland, 201
Fritsch, Theodor, 196

213

214

Index

Gowing, Laura, 71
Harden, Maximilian, 137, 138
Hegelmaier, Paul, 184
Heine, Wolfgang, 125, 145, 147, 150
Herzl, Theodor, 163–64
Himmler, Heinrich, 205
Hirschfeld, Magnus, 138
honor, 2, 10–11
and anthropology, 6–7, 11, 43
and anti-socialism, 152ﬀ.
bourgeois, 10, 12, 45–46, 64, 173–74
business, 14, 56ﬀ., 64
and class, 41, 44ﬀ., 72, 77
and conservatism, 130–31, 76, 209–10
corporate, 5, 8, 10, 11–12, 17, 20ﬀ., 51, 58, 64
of the courts, 113, 126
and culture, 2, 4, 8–9, 11, 13, 14, 18, 43ﬀ.,
210–12
democratization, 10–11, 14, 123ﬀ., 157ﬀ.
Enlightenment, 12, 46
and free speech, 59, 65, 80, 112, 203ﬀ., 207
gender, 15, 66ﬀ., 143, 154–55, 173–74, 178–79
labor relations, 14, 59ﬀ., 104–05
legal opinion, 40–41, 47, 143 n. 93
liberals, 14, 30ﬀ., 123ﬀ.
literature, 46
lunatics, 18
nationalism, 152ﬀ.
oﬃcialdom, 14, 16, 45, 50ﬀ., 83ﬀ, 98–99
politics, 74ﬀ., 93, 115ﬀ.
pre-modern, 7, 45, 60–61, 71–72, 158, 162, 209
the professions, 9, 15, 61ﬀ.
and disciplinary courts, 8, 62–63, 64
racialization of, 198ﬀ.
Socialists, 17, 48, 123ﬀ. (see also SPD)
status anxiety, 10, 14, 52
Jacoby, Johann, 22
Jews, 10, 12, 17–18, 77, 157–68, 180;
and the Arnim–Itzig Aﬀair, 161–62
and the duel, 159, 163
post-World War II, 208
and Reichsgericht decision on
Kollektivbeleidigung, 167–68
under Third Reich, 198–200;
Johnson, Lyndon, 193
Kaiser Wilhelm II, 139, 149–50
Kaiserreich, 12–13
political system and developments, 15–16, 139
Koch, Adolf, 42
Kollektivbeleidigung, 167
Königsberg lèse–majesté trial, 152ﬀ.
Kulturkampf, 29 (see also religious politics)

Laing, R. D., 169
legal culture, 4, 8–9, 11, 13, 19, 30
“legitimate interest” clause, 17, 33, 83, 108ﬀ. (see also
Paragraph 193)
Lehmann-Hohenberg, Johann, 189–90, 190 n. 107
lèse-majesté, 22, 82, 83, 86, 210, 211
1908 bill, 17, 116, 148, 150ﬀ.
statutes, 33, 149
in Weimar Republic, 195
Levy, Sara, 161
Lex Eulenburg, 116, 141ﬀ.
Liberals, 126, 128, 129, 142, 144, 151ﬀ., 155, 189
and political debates, 117ﬀ.
Liebknecht, Karl, 103, 187
Liepmann, Moritz, 47
Lilienthal, Karl von, 40
Lindenberger, Thomas, 92
Luise, Queen (of Prussia), 152ﬀ.
lunatics, 17–18, 50, 168ﬀ.
use of defamation lawsuit, 182–86
lunatics’ rights, 169–70
Melchior, Carl, 196
Moabit uprising, 89–90, 101, 106
and libel litigation, 90ﬀ., 95
modernization, 10–11, 14, 19
theory,
Moltke, Kuno Count von, 137
Natural-healing movement, 64–65
New York Times v. Sullivan, 3 n. 9, 208
Nieberding, Rudolf Arnold, 140ﬀ., 149
Osann, Artur, 154
pamphlet literature, 10, 14, 18, 48–50, 171, 174–82
Paragraph 193, 17, 33–34, 61, 82, 83, 97, 105, 115, 210
(see also “legitimate interest” clause)
and 1881 ruling, 108ﬀ.
under Third Reich 203ﬀ.
in Weimar Republic, 195–97
Peristiany, J. G., 6
Peters, Karl, 52
Pitt-Rivers, Julian, 43
Polish question, 78, 89
post-World War II, 193–94, 207–09
Privatklage, 9–10, 25, 32, 35–36 (see also defamation
lawsuits)
comparative law, 34ﬀ.
and daily life in Kaiserreich, 9, 37ﬀ.
historical development, 19, 25ﬀ.
and liberalism, 25ﬀ., 123–24, 127, 209–10
mechanics, 35–36, 38–39, 41, 104
as political tool, 74ﬀ., 104
premodern, 25

Index
“principal”, 27
“subsidiary”, 27–28
in Third Reich, 202–07
in view of Whitman, 209
women, 67ﬀ.
Progressive Party, 29, 153–54, 155
Prussian Ministry of State, 16, 83, 88ﬀ.

Stewart, Frank H., 11
Stöcker, Adolf, 118–19
Stuart, Kathy, 7
Szasz, Thomas, 169

Querulantenwahnsinn, 186

Verband Deutscher Journalisten- und
Schriftstellervereine (VDJS),
62–63
Vietnam War, 193
Vincke, Freiherr von, 28

Rathenau, Walther, 195
Reichsgericht (Supreme Court), 17, 83, 107ﬀ., 167
1881 ruling on “legitimate interests,” 108ﬀ
in Third Reich, 204
in Weimar Republic, 199
religious politics, 15, 29, 75, 79–80 (see also
Kulturkampf)
Revolution (1848), 22, 23
Richter, Eugen, 74
Ruge, Arnold, 42
Schiﬀer, Eugen, 122
Sonderweg, 8, 211–12
SPD, 15–16, 84, 86, 87, 88, 92ﬀ., 145ﬀ., 147–48,
150ﬀ., 152
and lunatics’ rights, 188
and political debates, 117ﬀ
subject to defamation prosecutions, 101, 102–06
in Weimar Republic, 194–96
Sperber, Jonathan, 56
state attorney’s oﬃce, 30
development of, 23, 24ﬀ.
prosecutorial monopoly controversy, 24ﬀ.
Steakley, James, 137

Third Reich, 200ﬀ., 209, 210
Twesten, Karl, 22, 84

Wagner, Edward, 155
Wahrheitsbeweis, 87, 88, 95, 115ﬀ., 131
and the Eulenburg Aﬀair, 137
in European comparison, 145
legislation to restrict it, 140ﬀ.
Waldeck, Benedikt, 28
Warburg, Max, 196, 199
Weber, Marianne, 42
Weber, Max, 5–6, 42
Weimar Republic, 18, 190, 194–200
Wendorﬀ, Hugo, 75
Whitman, James, 8, 208–09
Windthorst, Ludwig, 29
women, 10, 67ﬀ.
and chastity, 66ﬀ.
as “mad” pamphlet writers, 178–79
post-World War Two, 208
and sexual harassment, 68ﬀ.
Zweig, Arnold, 199

215

