Absolute Destruction

Absolute
Destruction
Military Culture and the Practices of War
in Imperial Germany

11
I S A B E L V . H U L L

Cornell University Press
  

Copyright © 2005 by Cornell University
All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in a review, this book, or parts thereof, must not be reproduced
in any form without permission in writing from the publisher. For information, address Cornell University
Press, Sage House, 512 East State Street, Ithaca, New York 14850.
First published 2005 by Cornell University Press
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-inPublication Data
Hull, Isabel V.
Absolute destruction : military culture and the practices of war in Imperial Germany / Isabel V. Hull.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0–8014–4258–3 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. Germany—History, Military—19th century. 2. Germany—History, Military—20th century. 3.
Militarism—Germany—History. I. Title.
DD103.H85 2005
355.02'13'094309034—dc22
2004013387
Cornell University Press strives to use environmentally responsible suppliers and materials to the fullest
extent possible in the publishing of its books. Such materials include vegetable-based, low VOC inks and acidfree papers that are recycled, totally chlorine-free, or partly composed of nonwood ﬁbers. For further
information, visit our website at www.cornellpress.cornell.edu.
Clothing printing
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For George,
whom I loved and admired equally

Contents

List of Maps

viii

Acknowledgments

ix

List of Abbreviations

xi

Introduction

1

I Suppression Becomes Annihilation: Southwest Africa, 1904–1907

5

1.

Waterberg

7

2.

Pursuit and Annihilation

44

3.

Death by Imprisonment

70

II Military Culture

91

4.

National Politics and Military Culture

93

5.

Lessons of 1870–71: Institutions and Law

110

6.

Standard Practices

131

7.

Doctrines of Fear and Force

159

8.

Stopping the Process

182

III The First World War

197

9.

Waging War, 1914–1916: Risk, Extremes, and Limits

199

10.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity

226

11.

The Armenian Genocide

263

12.

Repetition and Self-Destruction

291

Conclusions and Implications

324

Bibliography

335

Index

369

vii

Maps

German Southwest Africa, 1904
The Battle of Waterberg
Areas occupied by Germany during World War I
General-Gouvernement (German civil administration) in occupied
Belgium, 1914–1917, and occupied zone in northern France, 1914–1918
Routes of deportations of Armenians in Turkey, 1914–1918

viii

9
38
229
250
264

Acknowledgments

I am grateful for the assistance of archivists in the Bundesarchiv Koblenz (Berlin), the
Bundesarchiv-Militärarchiv (Freiburg), the Politisches Archiv des Auswärtigen Amts, and
the Archiv- und Museumsstiftung Wuppertal (formerly the Archiv der Vereinigten Evangelischen Mission), as well as the cheerful help of the librarians at the Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen and the Niedersächsisches Landesbibliothek Hannover.
I am particularly indebted to the von Trotha family for permission to use the papers
of Lothar v. Trotha, to Herr Minister Klaus v. Trotha and Herr Gustav-Adolf v. Trotha for
their help, and especially to Herr Thilo v. Trotha for his generosity and hospitality. This is
also the place to thank the late Mariann Steegman for her interest and intercession.
I thank David Wyatt for his early help with the maps.
For their thoughtful editorial comments, and most of all for their continuing friendship, I thank John Ackerman, Lynn Eden, Laura Engelstein, and Michael Geyer. I could
not have written this book without them.
Finally, I am especially grateful to the late Wilhelm Deist for so generously offering
me his attention, unsurpassed knowledge of the Imperial German military, and critical
insights at a time when he was unwell. I appreciate his support more than I can say.

ix

Abbreviations

AKO
BA-Berlin
BA-Koblenz
BA-MA Freiburg
Col. Dept.
Col. Office
KEO
Msg. 2
N
PA-AA
Ober-Ost
OHL
Sten. Ber.
SWA
UA

USW
VEM

Allerhöchste Kabinetts-Ordre
Bundesarchiv (Berlin-Lichterfelde)
Bundesarchiv (Koblenz)
Bundesarchiv-Militärarchiv (Freiburg i. Br.)
Colonial Department of the Foreign Office (in charge of colonies
until May 1907)
Imperial Colonial Office (in charge of colonies after its establishment
in May 1907)
Prussia, War Ministry, Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung (12 March 1914)
(D.V.E. Nr. 90) (Berlin, 1914) (regulations for the rear echelon)
Militärgeschichtliche Sammlung
Nachlass
Politisches Archiv des Auswärtigen Amtes (Bonn)
Supreme Command on the eastern front
Supreme Command (Oberste Heeresleitung)
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Reichstages
(Berlin, 1904–1907) (protocols of Reichstag sessions)
German Southwest Africa
Germany, Parliament, Das Werk des Untersuchungsausschusses der Verfassungsgebenden Deutschen Nationalversammlung und des Deutschen
Reichstages 1919–1928, Verhandlungen, Gutachten, Urkunden, ed. Eugen
Fischer et al. (Berlin, 1921–1930) (documents of the postwar
Reichstag investigating committees)
Unrestricted submarine warfare
Vereinigte Evangelische Mission (Wuppertal)

xi

Absolute Destruction

1
Introduction

T

his is a study of institutional extremism. It examines the German conduct of war
from 1870 through 1918. In engagements large and small, in Europe and in the
colonies, the Imperial German military repeatedly resorted to terriﬁc violence
and destruction in excess of Germany’s own security requirements or political
goals, in contravention of international norms, and even contrary to ultimate military effectiveness. Routine German military operations developed a dynamic of extremism that
could, and did, lead to extermination of civilian populations in the colonies and that characterized German practices in occupied Europe during the First World War.
Military extremism is the repeated and unlimited application of the military’s expertise, that is, the use of violence. As Hannah Arendt has written, “Violence, being instrumental in nature, is rational to the extent that it is effective in reaching the end that must
justify it.”1 Extremism occurs when the means overwhelms the end, when violence is pursued because the institution keeps on generating violence according to quasi-automatic
mechanisms. Following necessary-seeming routines, military extremism gravitates
toward ﬁnal, or total, solutions. In combat, such a solution would mean the utter annihilation of the enemy’s armed forces; in occupation, it would mean the establishment of
perfect order and complete obedience by the enemy population; in the occupied zones, it
would mean the total instrumentalization of all resources for one’s own troops, that is, no
limits to requisitions and expropriation. Extremism understood as “ﬁnal solutions” aims
at total, unambiguous, permanent results.2
1. Hannah Arendt, On Violence (New York, 1970), 79.
2. In this book, “ﬁnal solutions” refers to the practices or policies produced by the military as these develop
out of military routines. Final Solution (in capital letters) refers to the National Socialist genocide of the European Jews.

1

absolute destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
2

We usually think of the extremism of “ﬁnal solutions,” especially when they end in
genocide, as the result of ideology. Indeed, in modern times ideology has been responsible for most genocides. But, as we shall see, it has been possible to destroy whole peoples
without ideological motives. Genocide can also happen as the by-product of institutional
routines and organizational dynamics as they operate during wartime and generate “ﬁnal
solutions” to all sorts of perceived problems.
I have found that the ends, the “ﬁnal solutions,” were in fact expectations and habits
that resulted from the means itself, violence, and from the institutional measures taken to
wield or control it. This book is the story of how the means overwhelmed the ends, indeed, became the ends. Its focus is therefore not on ideology but on military practices and
the basic assumptions behind them. These habitual practices, default programs, hidden
assumptions, and unreﬂected cognitive frames I understand in an anthropological and
organizational-cultural sense as military culture.
This book has three parts. The ﬁrst reveals the pattern of extreme, even genocidal,
conduct of war as it developed in the course of one engagement, in Southwest Africa. The
second analyzes that pattern as the result of Germany’s military culture. The third shows
how the pattern continued to intensify in the First World War.
Let me begin with an overview of part 2, which deﬁnes military culture in general and
distinguishes the German variant of it in the late nineteenth century. Chapter 5 locates the
immediate origins of military culture in the wars of uniﬁcation (1864–70) and explains
how lessons learned then became institutionalized and internalized by its members. Other
chapters analyze standard operating procedures and developing doctrine on how best to
ﬁght wars; in both, one can identify the tendency toward extreme warfare (Kriegführung)
produced by military culture. Part 2 is also comparative. Britain’s actions in the Boer War
(1899–1902) show how similar most late nineteenth-century Western armies were in their
tendency to go to extremes. However, other armies’ descents into dysfunctional, pure violence were sooner or later halted by intervention from outside the military, either by
civilian government and/or by public opinion. Not in Germany—Bismarck’s constitution
isolated the army sufficiently from external criticism and feedback that its military culture reinforced itself and became ever stronger. Germany’s political structure thus profoundly affected the functioning of its military. This process is not nearly so well studied
as its reverse, the “militarism” resulting from the penetration of military values into society and government.
Germany’s military culture developed a constellation of mutually reinforcing characteristics that enhanced tactical efficacy. Unleashed in war, however, these characteristics
propelled the army to ever greater, and in the end, dysfunctional extremes of violence.
Part 2 analyzes these interactive and self-generating characteristics, which include risktaking; the dogmatic conviction that annihilation was the sole goal of war (Vernichtungskrieg); resulting prescriptions for correct ﬁghting (the offensive, concentration of
force, use of reserves, hectic speed) that all greatly increased casualties; minutely technical
planning; focus on the tactical and operative rather than the strategic; disregard of logistics and thus growing unrealism; the conviction (indeed requirement) of one’s qualitative
superiority over one’s enemies; a romantic ruthlessness and actionism (exaggerated drive

Introduction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
for action [Aktionismus]) on the part of officers in order to bridge the gap between risk 3
and reality; and ﬁnally the acceptance of self-destruction (and thus the willingness to destroy everyone else, as well). Some of these qualities were expressed as doctrine, but many
more were buried inside organizational routines and the unexamined expectations of the
officer corps.
Rather than plunging directly into the analysis of military organizational culture, it
seems better to begin with an extended example of military culture in action. The reader
can then see for herself the patterns of conduct and spirals of escalation that actually developed in wartime. Part 1, therefore, describes the suppression of the Herero Revolt in
Southwest Africa (1904–7) in which two African peoples were almost wiped out. Later, in
part 2, I compare these actions to those in two other colonial encounters: the suppression
of the Maji-Maji Revolt in German East Africa (1905–7), which resulted in even greater
loss of life, and the German intervention in China in 1901.
It might seem surprising that a study of German military culture should begin with
colonial wars to establish its habitual pattern of action. After all, contemporaries insisted
that “small wars” were of an entirely different character from “real,” European conﬂicts;
one could learn nothing about one from looking at the other. Too many historians have
accepted this point of view. In fact, for Germany at least, colonial engagements were remarkably European in the operational assumptions about how wars should be fought and
won, how enemy populations should be treated, how technology should be used to increase one’s power, and how far military necessity reduced limits on total combat. Colonial history is much more central to European history than is often believed. The military
history of German imperialism shows clearly and early how the First World War would be
fought. The continuities between colonial and European warfare are not due, as I thought
at the beginning of this project, to Europeans learning evil lessons in the colonies and
then applying them at home (though many an evil lesson was doubtless learned). Rather,
Germans approached colonial wars from inside the frames of their military culture as it
had developed in Europe. The colonial situation merely provided the opportunity to
practice on Africans or Chinese what the military experts took to be the immutable precepts of warfare.
The sociologist Barry Turner has noted that “small-scale failures can be produced
very rapidly, but large-scale failures can only be produced if time and resources are devoted to them.”3 We will be examining a series of large-scale failures in the military realm,
not just in the colonial sphere but also in Germany’s conduct of the First World War,
which forms part 3. Some of these engagements deserve the label “failure” because of the
enormous imbalance between ostensible goal and means employed; all of them developed
a disproportionate, dysfunctional level of death and destruction produced routinely by
the military institution; and of course World War I ended in defeat for Germany. One of
the great strengths of organizational-cultural analysis is that it can discover the historical
and institutional rationality behind seemingly irrational acts of (self-) destruction. We
3. Barry A. Turner, “The Organizational and Interorganizational Development of Disasters,” Administrative Science Quarterly 21:3 (1976): 378–97, here 395.

absolute destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
4 shall see that in Germany’s military culture a great deal of time and resources had indeed
been devoted to produce institutional failure this large and this repetitive.
Rather than a narrative of the world war, part 3 offers instead an analysis of three of
the most deﬁning characteristics of Germany’s military culture at war: its immediate
propensity for extreme violence, its deadly instrumentalization of civilians, and its tendency when thwarted to repeat its scripts of violence to the point of self-destruction.
Chapter 9 therefore examines the conduct of the war in the ﬁrst two years, before the radicalization that Ludendorff and Hindenburg are supposed to have inaugurated after August 1916. In fact, many of the radical features associated with them were well under way
in the ﬁrst months of the war, some, indeed, in the ﬁrst week. The treatment of occupied
civilians, the subject of chapter 10, is an important measure of institutional extremism.
Europeans were instrumentalized for military purposes in ways astonishingly similar to
those used against rebellious Africans. Perceived “military necessity” removed one protective limit after another. Ubiquitous forced labor, deportation, and widespread death
spread across occupied Europe. In the Ottoman Empire, Germany’s Turkish ally claimed
“military necessity” as it exterminated its Armenian civilians. Chapter 11 analyzes how
putative military necessity paralyzed German policy, silencing objections and rendering
Germany impotent to intervene even when genocide actually harmed the Turkish war effort. Finally, chapter 12 analyzes the inability of German military leaders to recognize defeat. Imprisoned in their solipsistic mental world, they launched instead a cycle of unrealistic, costly offensives; they threatened to destroy utterly all occupied lands, and, in the
autumn of 1918, even Germany itself, in pursuit of an illusory victory of pure force.
The terrible violence, immense destruction, and mass death caused by the operation
of military culture were indeed large-scale disasters, but they had small, literally routine
beginnings. Seemingly goal-irrational, the practices of military culture were eminently
institutional-rational; they were the product of intelligent professionals working in the
ﬁnest army of its time. We will now enter their world, a place where, in the words of Norman Maclean, writing about a small forest ﬁre that suddenly turned deadly, “the ordinary
can suddenly become monstrous.”4
4. Norman Maclean, Young Men and Fire: A True Story of the Mann Gulch Fire (Chicago, 1992), 217.
Maclean is better known as the author of A River Runs through It.

PA RT I

 

Southwest Africa, 1904–1907

11
The suppression of the Herero and Nama Revolts in German Southwest Africa
(SWA) from 1904 to 1907 is a striking example of how military practices can
escalate according to an internal logic of operations and basic assumptions until
they end in annihilation. The purpose of part 1 is to let the reader see this
dynamic in detail.
There are many puzzling aspects to the SWA story, but the most vexing is
the question of intentionality. Was the extermination of the Herero planned,
and if so by whom? Was it policy from Berlin, from the Kaiser, or from the
General Staff? Was it intended from the beginning by the commander, Lt. Gen.
Lothar von Trotha, a natural product of his racism? Was it inherent in colonial
dynamics? Or did it, as I think, develop from military-institutional culture as
this unfolded in an unsuccessful and difficult war?
Answering these questions requires a detailed reassessment of events based
on archival sources. One must pay close attention to the characteristics of
ﬁghting: What methods were typically used and which were ordered and which
simply “customary”? Were prisoners taken? How were they and noncombatants
treated? What were the patterns of executions, of massacres? Establishing the
chronological order of these events is critical to uncovering developmental
processes. One of the strangest facts about SWA, for example, is that the “order”
for extermination came after the genocide had already occurred.
5

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
6

Another important matter is the relation of the internment phase to the
actual ﬁghting. Why were prison camps so lethal? And, ﬁnally, what tended to
hinder the logic of extremes? Who or which institutions resisted the pull toward
ever more violence and destruction, and why?
The following three chapters present an analytical narrative that offers the
raw material to address these questions. The pattern that emerges from these
data is analyzed in part 2, using more information about SWA and comparing
it with other German and European colonial campaigns.

11
Waterberg

O

n 14 January 1904 District Judge Richter wired the German Foreign Office: “All
farms in the vicinity of Windhuk [Windhoek, the capital of German Southwest
Africa] plundered by Herero. Whites living on isolated farms murdered. Situation very grave.”1 Richter’s news was shocking. Few in the colony, or in Germany,
had foreseen an uprising. Gov. Col. Theodor Leutwein and most of the seven-hundred-man
defense force, the Schutztruppe, were in the southern part of the colony suppressing a minor
revolt. Their absence left 4,640 German colonists amid an estimated sixty thousand to eighty
thousand Herero, who had now apparently determined to throw off German rule.2

1. District Judge (Bezirksrichter) Richter Windhuk, 14 Jan. 1904, Bundesarchiv Berlin, Reichskolonialamt (R
1001), Nr. 2111, p. 22 (hereafter BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr.).
2. Germans: Jon M. Bridgman, The Revolt of the Herero (Berkeley, 1981), 50. The indigenous population,
which consisted of at least six different peoples, has been hard to estimate (Bridgman, 8–29). The lowest contemporary estimate was 30–40,000, by Alfred v. François, “Der Herero-Aufstand,” Militär-Wochenblatt, vol. 1,
Heft 54 (4 May 1905), col. 1284. His estimate was immediately challenged as far too low by an anonymous reporter using military and civilian sources: “Der Verbleib der Herero seit dem Gefecht von Waterberg,” MilitärWochenblatt, vol. 2, Heft 96 (8 Aug. 1905), cols. 2211–18. Paul Rohrbach also noted 40,000 as the lowest estimate,
without subscribing to it himself: Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen (Berlin, 1909), 160. Gov.
Leutwein vacillated: in 1899 he numbered the Herero at 100,000; in 1904 at 60–70,000; and in 1906 he reckoned
that at the start of the uprising they had numbered 80,000. Theodor Leutwein, “Die Kämpfe der Kaiserlichen
Schutztruppe in Deutsch-Südwestafrika in den Jahren 1894–1896,” Beiheft zum Militär-Wochenblatt 1 (1899), 2;
Leutwein to Colonial Department (hereafter Col. Dept.), Nr. 73, 23 Feb. 1904, Windhuk, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr.
2113, pp. 54–55; Leutwein, Elf Jahre Gouverneur in Deutsch-Südwestafrika (Berlin, 1906), 11. The missionaries’ estimates ranged from 35,000 to 70–85,000 prewar Herero: Nicolai Mossolow, Waterberg (Windhuk, [1976]), 41,
cited by Gunter Spraul, “Der ‘Völkermord’ an den Herero,” in Geschichte in Wissenschaft und Unterricht 39:12
(1988), 725, 739n106; Gerd Sudholt, Die deutsche Eingeborenenpolitik in Südwestafrika (Hildesheim, 1975), 40. The
highest contemporary estimates were 100,000: General Berthold Deimling, Südwestafrika (Berlin, 1906), 14;
Gustav Noske, Kolonialpolitik und Sozialdemokratie (Stuttgart, 1914), 120. Knowledgeable military participants

7

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
8

German rule was only partly established, in any event. Acquired in April 1884 not as a
colony but as a protectorate, German Southwest Africa (now known as Namibia) was
580,000 square kilometers of arid, thornbush-studded landscape. Few colonists were attracted to it, and their numbers were dwarfed by two hundred thousand Africans of
roughly three main groups: the Ovambo and Herero, who made up about 80 percent of
the indigenous population; and the less populous Nama (whom the Germans called “Hottentots” in imitation of their clicking language). The best land was owned by the German
Colonial Society of Southwest Africa, which refused to sell to settlers. The colony made
no proﬁt. German administration rested on a series of “protective treaties” concluded in
the 1890s between Governor Leutwein and the various indigenous peoples. Isolated military stations maintained a German presence in the middle (Hereroland) and the south
(Namaland), but not in the north (Ovamboland), where the Germans had barely penetrated. Neither the government nor the private sector was willing to invest much in the
unpromising territory.3 Germans called SWA the “problem child” of its colonies, and now
it was in revolt.4
The Herero were seminomadic cattle herders recently organized into chieftaincies.5
The white settlers coveted their cattle, their potential labor, and their grazing land, which
the settlers regarded as “property,” but the Herero interpreted as common land with
usufruct rights. The Herero recognized that their power was slipping. A recent cattle
plague had diminished their herds; settlers fenced off land, and they and the colonial police and judicial administration treated the Herero with demeaning brutality. These were
the main reasons the Herero united in rebellion, apparently after another incident of
provocation by a junior military officer.6
In the absence of the governor, and before receiving the ﬁscal appropriation from the
Reichstag, Kaiser Wilhelm II used his extraconstitutional military power of command to
order immediate reinforcements. He also directed Captain Gudewill, commander of the
Habicht, to land in SWA and take over military operations until the governor arrived back
in Windhuk.
On 18 January 1904, four days after Richter’s telegram arrived in Berlin, Chancellor
Bernhard von Bülow asked the Reichstag for a special appropriation to cover sending reestimated between 60,000 (staff officer Maximilian Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier in Südwestafrika [Berlin,
1909], 62) and 80,000 (Schutztrüppler Kurd Schwabe, Der Krieg in Deutsch-Südwestafrika [Berlin, 1907], 37), and
historians have accepted this range as the most probable: Helmut Bley, South-West Africa under German Rule
(Evanston, Ill., 1971), 150 (60–80,000); Horst Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” trans. Bernd Zollner (London,
1980; orig. 1966), 17, 214 (80,000). Only writers who wish to minimize the demographic catastrophe assume the
lowest estimates: Gerd Sudholt cites 40,000 Herero in 1904: Deutsche Eingeborenenpolitik, 44; Spraul, “ ‘Völkermord,’ ” 725, 739n106, and Brigitte Lau, “Uncertain Certainties,” Migabus 2 (April 1989), 4–5, 8, estimate 35,000.
3. Horst Gründer, Geschichte der deutschen Kolonien, 3rd ed. (Paderborn, 1995), 80–81, 118; Bley, South-West
Africa, 129–32.
4. V. Gädke, “Die militärische Lage in Deutsch-Südwestafrika,” Berliner Zeitung 63 (4 Feb. 1904), 1; L.
Sander, Zur Lage in Südwest-Afrika (Berlin, 1904), 1; Conrad Rust, “Der deutsche Reichstag und das südwestafrikanische Schmerzenskind,” Deutsch-Südwestafrikanische Zeitung 19 (11 May 1904).
5. Jan-Bart Gewald, Herero Heroes (Oxford, 1999), chs. 1–3; Gesine Krüger, Kriegsbewältigung und
Geschichtsbewusstsein (Göttingen, 1999), 30–62; Bridgman, Revolt of the Herero, ch. 1.
6. Gewald, Herero Heroes, 142–56.

German Southwest Africa, 1904. Source: Berthold Deimling, Aus der alten in die neue Zeit, 59.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
10 inforcements. The director of the Colonial Section of the Foreign Office, Oscar W. Stübel,
read from Richter’s dispatch, alluded to the “atrocities” (Greuel) Africans committed during such revolts, and set the government’s goal: “to end the quasi-independence the natives still enjoyed in politics and in any case to disarm them.”7 The Reichstag reluctantly
approved the funds, but representative Müller (Left Liberal Party) was not alone in wondering whether it was worth it, given “the minimal cultural [colonizing] interest in SWA.”
He concluded that Germany had assumed the duty to protect the colonists and “to
reestablish the disturbed order.”8 August Bebel, the Social Democrats’ leading spokesman,
warned that German troops usually put down colonial revolts “in the most bloody and
brutal way conceivable”; he hoped this one would be pursued “with the greatest possible
humanity.”9 Christian Storz of the People’s Party assumed he spoke for the Reichstag
when he concluded: “We urgently insist that the ﬁght be conducted humanely.”10

The Behavior of the Herero in War and the Initial Military Situation
The prospects for a humane war were not improved by persistent reports of alleged
Herero atrocities. Colonial Director Stübel had mentioned these when he ﬁrst presented
the government’s case to the Reichstag. Two weeks later, Captain Gudewill, the commander in charge until Governor Leutwein’s return, telegraphed the “conﬁrmed losses—
murdered and mostly mutilated: 44 settlers, women and children; 26 [soldiers] fallen; 50
others dead.”11 These ﬁgures were wrong. The Herero people’s paramount chief, Samuel
Maherero, had ordered that only German males be killed. German women and children
were gathered up and gradually released to white outposts. German missionaries and all
non-Germans, male and female, were also spared. Conrad Rust, no friend of the Herero
people, tallied the dead of the ﬁrst weeks of the revolt at 158, of whom ﬁve were women
and none children.12 However, these facts became available to the German newspaperreading public only at the end of March 1904.13 It is typical of the wartime atmosphere
that the military memoir (1906) that reprinted Samuel Maherero’s order simultaneously
reveled in stories of alleged Herero cruelty, so that most readers would have discounted
the order’s authenticity.14 Long after everyone knew better, many memoirs—and even the
official General Staff account of the campaign—continued to insist that women and children, or simply that “all Germans,” had been brutally murdered.15 So widespread was this
7. Stübel, in Germany, Parliament, Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Reichstages, XI. legislative period, 1st session, 14th meeting, 19 Jan. 1904, vol. 197, p. 364 (hereafter Sten. Ber.).
8. Müller (Sagan), ibid., p. 369.
9. Bebel, ibid., 366, 368.
10. Storz, ibid., 370.
11. Gudewill to Col. Dept., tel. Nr. 26, 3 Feb. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2111, p. 177.
12. Conrad Rust, Krieg und Frieden im Hererolande (Leipzig, 1905), 140, 145–47. Gov. Leutwein later reported that only three women had been killed: Leutwein to Col. Dept., tel. Nr. 112, Windhuk, 2 May 1904, BABerlin, R 1001, Nr. 2114, p. 114.
13. “Noch ein Wort zum Herero-Aufstand,” Reichsbote, 22 March 1904.
14. Max Belwe, Gegen die Herero 1904–05 (Berlin, 1906), 41.
15. Deimling, Südwestafrika, 12–13; Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 32; Rust, Krieg und Frieden, 142–43; Germany, General Staff, Die Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen in Südwestafrika, vol. 1: Der Feldzug gegen die Herero
(Berlin, 1906), 24, 26, 43 (hereafter General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:page).

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
belief that officers on the spot were “astonished that the Herero had let us go and thereby 11
betrayed their whereabouts,” as the wife of one dead settler reported.16
Although the Herero were innocent of the charge of wanton killing, their traditional
manner of warfare appeared to Germans as cruel and dishonoring. They took no prisoners. They used large knives or clubs (kirris) to kill wounded enemy soldiers.17 When they
lacked bullets, they made their own out of bits of scrap metal and glass, which left jagged,
often fatal, wounds. They ritually mutilated enemy corpses, which caused the Germans to
surmise (probably incorrectly) that they had tortured the wounded. They stripped the
dead of their uniforms and wore these themselves. Herero women hid in the thornbushes
and encouraged their menfolk with chants, which German soldiers found chilling and
which fed the myth that Herero women participated in killing.18
The Germans reckoned the Herero, nonetheless, as good ﬁghters. They numbered six
to eight thousand warriors and were well armed, with modern riﬂes.19 In the ﬁrst two
weeks of the revolt, they dominated all of Hereroland, penning German troops and survivors in the isolated military outposts. But despite their success, the Herero failed to establish strategic superiority.20 They did not sufficiently appreciate the importance of the
feeble railroad as the main supply line for German troops. Their disruption of the telegraph lines was serious but not systematic enough to interrupt communication signiﬁcantly, and the heliograph (which operated by reﬂected sunlight) lessened the Germans’
reliance on telegraphy. And they did not consider attacking the capital or other strongholds, which, had they fallen, would have dealt a crushing blow to colonial self-esteem
and given encouragement to the many voices in the Reichstag who wanted Germany to
abandon the colony.
This is not the wisdom of hindsight. Already on 4 February, a week before Leutwein
ﬁnally made it back to Windhuk, Capt. Viktor Franke achieved the only outstanding German victory of the war. He relieved the central outpost at Omaruru and thereby reestablished a German presence in a strategically important district and, above all, made it possible for the marines from the Habicht to secure the railway lines. Captain Gudewill
reported that “the war has entered a second phase.”21 These German successes ought to
have laid the foundation for a systematic suppression of the revolt in the usual fashion.
That is, after the arrival of reinforcements, the governor, who in all German colonies was
16. Else Sonnenberg, Wie es am Waterberg zuging (Berlin, 1905), 111.
17. Leutwein to Col. Dept., Nr. 395, Windhuk, 17 May 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2115, p. 68.
18. On Herero war practices: missionary August Kuhlmann to inspector of missions, Karibib, 2 June 1904,
Archive of the Vereinigte Evangelische Mission, Wuppertal, Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72, pp. 100–101 (hereafter
VEM-Wuppertal). On hostile German interpretation of these: Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 87, 183; Capt. Viktor Franke, diary entries of 8–9 Aug. 1904, Bundesarchiv Koblenz, Nachlass Franke, Nr. 3, p. 90 (hereafter BAKoblenz, Nl. Franke); Rust, Krieg und Frieden, 141; Chief of the General Staff Alfred v. Schlieffen to Bülow, Nr.
13297, Berlin, 16 Dec. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, p. 107. Also, Bridgman, Revolt, 20.
19. Leutwein, Elf Jahre, 436; Deimling, Südwestafrika, 11; Berthold Karl Adolf von Deimling, Aus der alten in
die neue Zeit (Berlin, 1930), 62; Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 62.
20. On Herero military errors: Major Maercker, Unsere Kriegführung in Deutsch-Südwestafrika (Berlin,
1907), 30, 45; Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 2, 27, 38, 42, 47, 122, 129–30; Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 62, 64,
74; Bridgman, Revolt, 80, 106–9, 115–17. Cf. Gewald, Herero Heroes, 154.
21. Lt. Cdr. (later chief of the admiralty) Magnus v. Levetzow to Col. Dept., Nr. B. 706 IV., Berlin, 4 Feb.
1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2111, pp. 167–68.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
12 also the commander-in-chief of the Schutztruppe, would use his technological advantages
to inﬂict serious casualties and then begin negotiations. Surrender terms were always
harsh toward the leaders and those who had laid hands on whites; normally, they would
have been court-martialed (that is, tried by a military court) and executed. The rest of the
population would have been interned for a while and then released. The size of this revolt
and the public consternation it had aroused required harsher negotiation terms: disarmament and the end of the Africans’ political organization had already been set as the government’s goals, and Leutwein accepted these terms.22 But he remained true to the maxims he had explained in 1899: After one had destroyed the Africans’ military capacity, “one
must build the well-known ‘golden bridge’ necessary for those who want to surrender, as
Major [Hermann] v. Wissmann [then governor of German East Africa] stresses in his
book on African warfare. In Africa, the diplomat must always stand next to the soldier.”23
The Herero Revolt was not going to follow this path, however. Three days before
Leutwein’s return, the ﬁrst reinforcements arrived. Kaiser Wilhelm placed them and the
entire conduct of the war directly under the General Staff and its chief, Gen. Alfred von
Schlieffen.24 The General Staff was the institution charged with operational planning for
the next (European) war. After the success of its then chief, Gen. Helmuth von Moltke,
against the Austrians in 1866, it had been elevated to a position directly beneath the
Kaiser. It was thus independent of the political scrutiny, criticism, or even advice of the
chancellor, who, as chief administrator of the colonies and superior of the governor, normally supervised the Schutztruppe. The Kaiser’s decision of 8 February meant that the
war against the Herero would be conducted like a European war, according to military
criteria as interpreted by the General Staff.25 Military criteria could become paramount
because Wilhelminian government was not integrated under civilian leadership but was
instead “polycratic.” That is, it consisted of separate, vertical units, integrated, if at all, by
the Kaiser, who could choose which unit would dominate policy in a given situation. The
ﬁrst stage in the process of military extremism was thus the identiﬁcation of the revolt in
SWA as a national security issue, which encouraged the Kaiser to entrust it to the military
experts, the General Staff, rather than to the civilian leadership.
Governor Leutwein arrived back in Windhuk on 11 February. There, he discovered
that various forces operating in Berlin had thwarted his freedom of action. Apparently at
the Kaiser’s urging, the Colonial Department forbade Leutwein from engaging in “negotiations” with Samuel Maherero.26 The exchange of letters between the governor and his
foes was a normal procedure of colonial warfare, which, Leutwein explained, “even if they
are only for appearance’s sake, make the conduct of war considerably easier and save
blood.” Only after consulting with the General Staff was the Colonial Department able to
22. Leutwein to Col. Dept., Nr. 73, Windhuk, 23 Feb. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2113, pp. 54–55, partly cited
in Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 148.
23. Leutwein, “Kämpfe der Kaiserlichen Schutztruppe,” 5.
24. Admiralty to Habicht, tel. Nr. 19, Berlin, 8 Feb. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2111, pp. 197–98.
25. For the unsuccessful efforts of the Colonial Department consequently to shift the entire responsibility
for the war onto the Prussian War Ministry, see Bley, South-West Africa, 155–56.
26. Ibid., 157; Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 147–48.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
assent to “fake negotiations.”27 But Leutwein’s leash was very short. In April, when the 13
Colonial Department tried to win more negotiating room for the governor, the General
Staff categorically refused.28 “Negotiations” were a sore point with public opinion, too.
When word of Leutwein’s letter contact with Samuel Maherero reached the Berlin newspapers, the Tägliche Rundschau expressed the widespread indignation at such an idea:
Humanity belongs in the right place—for the moment, however, the national
honor and the future of the colony require punishment and suppression of the
rebels via force of weapons and the superiority of the white man, but not via
peace negotiations, which would recognize the mutineers as legitimate combatants [kriegführende Partei].29
Public opinion, the Kaiser, and General Staff were of one mind in demanding a clear victory of weapons.
They also demanded a quick victory. It is understandable that the newspaper-reading
public could not appreciate the difficulties that desert, climate, lack of transportation and
communication, lack of water and European food, unfamiliarity with the region, and the
other myriad hurdles typical of colonial warfare presented to metropolitan troops. In
fact, the Herero war showed that most Germans were entirely ignorant of the most basic
facts concerning the colony. It is more surprising that the General Staff overlooked all
these factors as well. Whereas Leutwein wanted to await further reinforcements and then
prepare a careful offensive in which technical superiority would work to his advantage,
Schlieffen pressed for immediate operations.30

The Conduct of War under Leutwein
An analysis of the movement from regular warfare to extermination must determine
exactly how German troops conducted themselves and what orders they received early in
the war under Governor Leutwein’s command. The destruction of the Army Archives in
1945, before any historians had used them to research the Herero Revolt, does not make
our task easier. Let us begin with the contemporary debate launched by August Bebel on
14 March 1904 in the Reichstag.
Before German troops had taken any action at all, Bebel worried that the war would
be conducted “in the most bloody and brutal way.” Bebel and most Social Democrats reasoned by analogy with the suppression of the Boxer Uprising in China (1900–1901), other
colonial “punitive expeditions,” and the domestic repression of labor unrest. Going to ex27. Leutwein to Col. Dept., tel. Nr. 41, Windhuk, 22 Feb. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2112, p. 55. Marginal
note: “Die Sache ist mit Gen. Stab besprochen.”
28. Bley, South-West Africa, 157–58.
29. “Koloniales,” Tägliche Rundschau 111 (6 Mar. 1904). Similar comments: “Aus den Kolonian,” NationalZeitung, 9 Mar. 1904. The semiofficial Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung thought it necessary to issue a public denial, saying that Leutwein had been instructed on his arrival that real negotiations were out of the question.
30. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:62.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
14 tremes was the Wilhelminian way, as Bebel observed: “Acting so that one hinders an outrage at any cost and for all time is simply the method with which such things are done
these days.”31 Bebel was therefore not surprised to discover his fears conﬁrmed when in
early March letters from Schutztruppler describing German atrocities began showing up
in newspapers.32 On 14 March he read several excerpts aloud to the Reichstag. From a soldier in Karibib: “Here rebels are daily caught and either hanged or shot. The latest order,
however, is not to bring in any more prisoners, but simply to shoot everything dead.” Another reported: “We’re not permitted to take prisoners. Everything alive with black skin is
shot down.”33 Bebel therefore asked the government directly if there were such an order
and if women and children were indeed being shot.
Colonial Director Stübel denied that orders not to take prisoners or to shoot women
and children had been given. “In any event, we have no authentic information in this connection, and in my opinion, our German character does not tend to cruelty and brutality.
Even if a temptation to trespass against the laws of humanity might have arisen, the
troops in question would not in fact have contravened the laws of humanity.”34 Bebel welcomed this news but wondered if local commanders might not have issued such orders on
their own.35
Two days later, Bebel weighed in with more evidence from the published letters of a
veterinarian, Dr. Baumgart, who had accompanied troops in January 1904: “Bitterness is
very great. No one gives quarter; everything is shot down.”36 Bebel now interpellated the
government to direct the governor to answer his questions.37
Leutwein answered with a quick telegram, followed by a longer report. The report is
noteworthy because Leutwein agreed with most of the criticisms Bebel had made before
the Reichstag: that the settlers had forgotten that Africans enjoyed political rights guaranteed by the treaties of protection; that many settlers were “wayward sons” sloughed off
from the motherland; that the Herero had spared women, children, and missionaries; that
the settlers’ brutal behavior toward the Herero had helped cause the uprising; that legal
injustice was another cause; that many German press reports of Herero atrocities were
wildly inaccurate; and so on. But Leutwein rejected Bebel’s assertions about the conduct
of the war:
Orders to kill women and children or to take no prisoners at all have nowhere
been given. However, after everything that has happened, it is only natural that
our soldiers have not proceeded with particular leniency. It is equally natural that
no commander has ordered such leniency. If Mr. Bebel apparently believes that one
is obliged to take prisoners in war, then he doesn’t know international law. The his31. Bebel, Sten. Ber., XI legis. per., 1st session, 60th meeting, 17 Mar. 1904, vol. 199, p. 1903.
32. It took an average of six weeks for mail to reach Germany from the colony.
33. Bebel, Sten. Ber., XI legis. per., 1st session, 60th meeting, 17 Mar. 1904, vol. 199, p. 1891.
34. Stübel, ibid., p. 1896.
35. Bebel, ibid., p. 1901.
36. Bebel, ibid., 62nd meeting, 19 Mar. 1904, p. 1967.
37. Stübel was therefore constitutionally obligated to do so. Cf. Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 151.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
tory of war tells of enough battles in which pardon was not given or received. International law requires only that one treat the prisoners one has in fact taken, or
otherwise unarmed enemies, leniently. And I have always personally acted such
that this would happen. However, since in this war the enemy himself expects no
leniency, even the wounded defend themselves as long as they are able. I know of
an officer, searching a battleﬁeld, whose revolver jammed and who was saved only
by the quick action of a subordinate from an attack by a wounded Herero. Under
these circumstances it is no wonder that the opportunity to take nonwounded
prisoners has not presented itself. To be lenient toward [prisoners] and thus to encourage desertion is necessary [anyway], merely from political motives.38
Leutwein then turned to the fate of a different sort of prisoner, those “captured” by
settlers, “as cattle thieves or plunderers.”
In accordance with the chancellor’s regulation of 26 April 1896, these people are
brought to trial and regularly condemned to death by the white jurors
[Beisitzern]. It would have been impossible for the governor to oppose the execution of these judgments, especially at the beginning of the disturbances. . . . Most
of these executions took place in my absence, in the south, in Karibib.39
Leutwein summed up the war so far:
In battle nonwounded Herero have not been taken at all. I know of only two
wounded prisoners, both near Ongangira on 9 April. One died shortly thereafter.
The other one, who was lightly wounded, was bandaged and cared for. He was
caught later that evening with a hatchet, apparently in an escape attempt. Consequently, he was brought before a court-martial and condemned to death.40
By the time Leutwein’s report reached the Colonial Department on 25 June, the governor had been relieved of his military duties. For a while the public discussion of the conduct of the war died down. We shall return to consider some of his statements in detail in
a later chapter. For now, however, it is necessary to point out that the governor was
wrong. His report has misled historians into believing that no prisoners were taken until
May, or even until August.41 But some prisoners, wounded and not, were taken. Who were
they, and what happened to them?
38. Leutwein to Col. Dept., Nr. 395, Windhuk, 17 May 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2115, 64. I have reproduced the entire quotation because Drechsler’s partial citation is misleading; Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,”
151.
39. The missionary August Kuhlmann gives details of these executions in his letter to Inspector Spiecker, 18
May 1904, VEM-Wuppertal, Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72, reprinted in Johannes Lucas de Vries, Namibia
(Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1980), 282.
40. Leutwein to Col. Dept., Nr. 395, Windhuk, 17 May 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2115, 68.
41. May: Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 150–51; Horst Drechsler, Aufstände in Südwestafrika (Berlin, 1984),
73. August: Bridgman, Revolt of the Herero, 103n9.

15

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
16

The gist of the governor’s report, that it was extremely difficult for German troops to
capture Herero warriors, is certainly true. The Herero used cover so expertly that soldiers
rarely glimpsed them, even in battle. Afterward, the Herero melted away into the landscape, taking their dead and wounded with them, so that the Germans rarely knew how
many casualties they had inﬂicted. Of the thirty-ﬁve skirmishes that occurred before June
1904, only one, Franke’s relief of Omaruru, was an unalloyed German success; none of
these engagements was followed by a successful pursuit that might have netted larger
numbers of prisoners.42 The official battle reports, on which Governor Leutwein would
have relied, do not mention prisoners being taken.
However, the surviving handwritten war diaries of naval units43 and the personal diaries and some memoirs of participants sporadically refer to prisoners. Even Baumgart’s
letter, which Bebel cited, was based on prisoner testimony. In reply to Governor
Leutwein’s inquiry about the letter, Baumgart denied that he had ever written that no
prisoners were taken.
Had Bebel read my entire letter [which might not have been possible, since the
published version, in the Leipziger Neueste Nachrichten, was an unauthorized, perhaps incomplete, copy], he would have discovered that we had the false information about Mrs. Pilet from “prisoners.” Having written this myself, I can hardly
have said in the same letter that all Herero, even those incapable of ﬁghting, were
being ruthlessly shot down. Furthermore, I know that Nevilecki delivered ﬁve
Herero women and Kirsten one Herero man to the jail in Windhuk.44
The war diary of the 2nd Field Company of the Naval Infantry Battalion for 4 February
concurs with Baumgart that “Herero men and women are being held prisoner in the jail
[in Okahandja].”45 More often, one ﬁnds in these sources reports that one or two prisoners have given information, or simply that one or several prisoners have been taken, or
that wounded prisoners have been taken.46
The numbers are small, but the reports are regular enough to indicate that even before Leutwein issued his general order about the conduct of the war (15 Feb. 1904), German troops tried and occasionally succeeded in taking prisoners. Leutwein’s order laid
42. List of engagements: Germany, General Staff, Die Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen in Südwestafrika, vol.
2: Der Hottentottenkrieg (Berlin, 1907), appendix 3 (hereafter General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen,
2:page).
43. The naval records survived World War II, and because the marines were typically the ﬁrst troops sent to
quell colonial disturbances, these records are invaluable.
44. Copy of Dr. Baumgart to governor, Okahandja, 1 May 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2115, p. 71.
45. War diary, 4 Feb. 1904, 2nd Field Company, Naval Infantry Battalion, Bundesarchiv-Militärarchiv,
Freiburg im Breisgau, RM 121 I (Landstreitkräfte der Kaiserlichen Marine), Nr. 431, p. 7 (hereafter BA-MA
Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr.).
46. Information: War diary of 2nd Field Comp., 6 Feb. 1904, ibid., p. 10; Lt. v. Winkler to Col. Leutwein, 14
Feb. 1904, ibid., RM 121 I, Nr. 422, p. 168; report of 4 Mar. 1904, ibid., RM 121 I, Nr. 423, p. 6; Leutwein to
Oberkommando der Schutztruppe, 2 April 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2113, p. 81; war diary of 2nd Field Comp.,
14 June 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 431, p. 49; idem., 6 July 1904, ibid., p. 65. Prisoners taken: War diary
of 3rd Field Comp., 18 Feb. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 434; Deutsch Südwest-Afrikanische Zeitung 11 (15

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
down no guidelines for handling prisoners, except to say that “prisoners of any impor- 17
tance are always to be questioned about the causes of the uprising. The protocols of their
answers are to be sent to me.”47 As Leutwein later explained in answer to Bebel’s charges,
he assumed that prisoners would be taken and treated in the “usual fashion”
(naturgemäss); it was not necessary to order leniency, or indeed to order anything, since
the usual procedures would apply.
Once the debate about war conduct broke out in the Reichstag, Chancellor Bülow cabled Leutwein (28 March 1904): “Press reports of letters from the protectorate cause me to
point out that steps are to be taken to prevent violations against humanity, against enemies incapable of ﬁghting, and against women and children. Orders in this sense are to be
issued.”48 Nevertheless, neither the surviving war diaries nor the personal diaries and
memoirs of participants mention receiving Bülow’s order; it was probably never transmitted.49 The taking and treatment of prisoners in the ﬁrst phase of the war remained
governed by the unwritten rules of military custom, subject to the interpretation of the
individual commander. From the same sources we may discover what custom dictated.
First, by “prisoner” or “prisoner of war” the Germans understood all Herero, combatant and noncombatant alike, women and children included. This usage is typically colonial, but we shall see that it had ﬁrm European precedents as well. When the reports use
the phrase “prisoner testimony” or “prisoner’s report” it is thus impossible to tell the sex
or status of the prisoner(s) in question. Some reports do distinguish women and children
from men, but all Herero were subject to being made prisoner. The conﬂation of combatants with noncombatants had serious repercussions for the later conduct of this war.
Second, adult male Herero prisoners, those who, if they had been Europeans, would
have fallen under the protected status of prisoners of war, were subject to harsh treatment
in several respects. At the very least, they could expect rough questioning. One of the most
humane and fair officers of the Schutztruppe, the “old African” Capt. Viktor Franke, captured a Herero warrior on 10 June 1904. The next day, Franke noted in his diary, “The
Herero is still lying; I’ll question him tomorrow, after he’s fasted a bit.”50
The main thing male prisoners had to fear, however, was execution. Governor
Leutwein’s general order of 15 February set the usual parameters for handling “enemy”
Africans in colonial uprisings:

Mar. 1904); war diary, 2nd Field Comp. (Estorff), 9 May 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 431, p. 30; idem.,
11 May 1904, ibid., p. 31; idem., 15 May 1904, ibid., p. 35; Viktor Franke, diary entry of 10 June 1904, BA-Koblenz,
Nl. Franke, Nr. 3. For period before Aug. 1904, but without speciﬁc dates: Schwabe, Krieg in Deutsch-Südwestafrika, 284; Erich von Salzmann, Im Kampfe gegen die Herero, 2nd ed. (Berlin, 1905), 119; v. François, “HereroAufstand,” col. 2362. Wounded prisoners: Viktor Franke, diary entry, 27 Feb. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr.
3, p. 20; “March 1904,” Belwe, Gegen die Herero, 11; “before June,” idem., 38; missionary August Kuhlmann to Inspector Spiecker, 18 May 1904 (referring to 1st Lt. Kuhn on 8 May 1904), in de Vries, Namibia, 282.
47. Theodor Leutwein, “Truppenbefehl,” handwritten draft, Karibib, 15 Feb. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, RM 121
I, Nr. 422, p. 122.
48. Stübel, Sten. Ber., XI legis. per., 1st session, 87th meeting, 9 May 1904, vol. 200, p. 2790.
49. Gov. Leutwein’s son mentions Bülow’s order, but it is unclear whether he learned of it in the ﬁeld or
from the Reichstag debates, where it was announced. Paul Leutwein, Afrikanerschicksal (Stuttgart, 1929), 121.
50. Franke diary entry of 11 June 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 67.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
18

Villages [Werften] that voluntarily surrender their weapons can be spared. No
mercy will be shown to the ringleaders or to those who are proved to have murdered unarmed men, women, or children, or to have robbed or vandalized farms.
Insofar as their identities can be ascertained, they are immediately to be tried according to martial law. Trial procedure will be according to the chancellor’s decree of 26 April 1896.51
The court-martial of rebel leaders and those guilty of major crimes was a standard feature
in the suppression of colonial uprisings. However, the addition of robbery and vandalism
meant that a very large percentage of Herero men (and possibly women) would now be
subject to summary proceedings.
The demand for punishment reﬂected widespread public opinion in the colony and
in Germany. The Berliner Zeitung was typical: “We must make a repeat of this uprising
impossible under all circumstances by sharp and ruthless punishment.”52 Captain
Gudewill used the same language: “The utmost punishment of the enemy is necessary as
atonement for the countless brutal murders and as guarantee for a peaceful future.”53
“Exemplary punishment” remained a nonnegotiable, ﬁxed foundation of government
policy throughout the war. In his early struggle with the Colonial Department in February over the right to pursue negotiations, Leutwein declared that courts-martial would
always follow capitulation.54 This remained his position. As Leutwein handed over the
military reins to his successor, Lt. Gen. Lothar von Trotha, in June 1904, he gave him a
proposed proclamation for the surrender of the Herero, which promised that Germany
would spare the lives of the innocent, “but those who have killed or robbed whites, or destroyed their property or possessions will receive no mercy; they must appear before a
court and be punished for their guilt.”55 Chancellor Bülow also clung to “exemplary
punishment” as imperative to the negotiations he tried (unsuccessfully) to persuade
Trotha to conduct in late October 1904.56 In short, punishment was what moderates
demanded. As Adolf Stoecker (Christian Social Party) argued before the Reichstag in
December 1904, in a speech opposing Trotha’s later policy of annihilation: “One accomplishes nothing through mere harshness. I believe severe punishment [strenge Bestrafung] is necessary, but when that is accomplished, then the only proper thing is to show
the natives, especially the prisoners of war, kindness, so that they will want to become
German subjects.”57
The problem with a policy of exemplary punishment was that it consisted chieﬂy of
the death penalty. As Leutwein had explained to the Colonial Department in February,
“Prisoners of war will all be called before courts-martial, and, if they are found guilty of
51. Leutwein, “Truppenbefehl.”
52. V. Gädke, “Die militärische Lage in Deutsch-Südwestafrika,” Berliner Zeitung 63 (4 Feb. 1904), 1.
53. V. Levetzow to Col. Dept., Nr. B. 706 IV, 4 Feb. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2111, pp. 167–68.
54. Leutwein to Col. Dept., Nr. 73, Windhuk, 23 Feb. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2113, pp. 54–55.
55. Leutwein, draft proclamation to the Herero, 30 May 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, p. 141.
56. Bülow to Trotha, tel., Berlin, 28 Oct. 1904, ibid., Nr. 2116, pp. 92–93.
57. Stoecker, Sten. Ber., XI legis. per., 1st session, 108th meeting, 9 Dec. 1904, vol. 201, p. 3453.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
plundering farms, much less of murdering peaceful inhabitants, they will always receive 19
the death penalty.”58 Leutwein’s letter was forwarded to the General Staff, and neither it
nor the Colonial Department suggested tempering its sweep or vehemence.59
Courts-martial were conducted on the spot by ﬁeld courts consisting of three officers,
who were empowered to proceed with executions of African “rebels” without ﬁrst getting
permission from the governor. Regulations thus gave great latitude to individual officers
and to their interpretation of military necessity and the customs of war. Some units followed Leutwein’s orders and collected eyewitness testimony identifying speciﬁc people.60
That kind of investigation permitted differentiated verdicts, such as one from a ﬁeld court
in June that tried seven Herero and sentenced two to death, three to prison and forced
labor, but acquitted two others; or another that occurred sometime before May, in which
an Ovambo prisoner was acquitted.61 But the likelihood that summary proceedings
would end in widespread executions was great. The intimate connection between captivity and execution is suggested by the “Excerpt from the Order-Book” of the Naval Expedition Corps (March 1904): “According to higher orders, those persons in charge of leading troops of prisoners or responsible for carrying out executions are to make sure that
no photographs are taken.”62 I have discovered in the archives no statistics on how many
Herero prisoners were executed by military courts-martial.
In addition to courts-martial conducted by regular troops, there were punitive sweeps
carried out by “military patrols,” consisting of perhaps one or two Schutztruppler leading
deputized male settlers. Paul Rohrbach’s published diary gives a good account of their activities. Rohrbach was a political economist charged by the government with surveying
the economic potential of SWA. The uprising trapped him along with other whites in the
northeast of the colony, in Grootfontein. Although he could barely shoot a gun, Rohrbach
felt compelled to volunteer with the other men to ride out on patrol, because “the situation here is such that one can barely get out of it, since, as a man and a government official I’m sort of responsible for the honor of my profession.”63 These patrols operated on
their own, out of Leutwein’s control. They shot at any Africans they imagined were
thieves; if they caught Africans with goods, that was sufficient cause to execute them on
the spot. Rohrbach estimated that by the end of March 1904 their patrols had killed twenty
men, most of them Bergdamaras and Bushmen, not even Herero.64
Spying provided the major justiﬁcation for regular troops to shoot Africans without
trial. This elastic term expanded with anxiety. It covered natives of both sexes, those who
did not “belong” in a place, who seemed curious, or who simply tried to run away when
58. Leutwein to Col. Dept., Nr. 73, Windhuk, 23 Feb. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2113, pp. 54–55.
59. Schlieffen to Col. Dept., Nr. 3482, Berlin, 10 Apr. 1904, explicitly agreed with Leutwein’s policy. BABerlin, R 1001, Nr. 2113, p. 122.
60. Report, signed by Rickmann, 14 Feb. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 422, p. 131.
61. Belwe, Gegen die Herero, 80; Kuhlmann to Inspector, 18 May 1904, in de Vries, Namibia, 282. The military used some captured Herero for labor from the beginning: Jan-Bart Gewald, Towards Redemption (Leiden,
1996), 221.
62. “Auszug aus dem Parolebuch!” Nr. 729, Windhuk, 7 Mar. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 423, p. 47.
63. Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 79.
64. Ibid., 113, 127, 132.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
20 they saw troops. The standard procedure for handling “spies” was to shoot them immediately. Not every officer complied, of course, but Captain Franke’s scruples, which he
noted in his diary, testify to the expectation that he was supposed to do so. “I am still
ﬁghting with myself,” he wrote on 26 June 1904, “whether I should have a Herero shot,
who was brought in and who is clearly a spy. And then I am freed from my doubts: the
prisoner dies [anyway].”65 Maj. Ludwig von Estorff, another experienced “African,” apparently shared Franke’s scruples. It is indicative of the cleft between officers with African
experience and newcomers from Germany that Paul Leutwein, the governor’s son, who
came brieﬂy to SWA and fought under Estorff ’s command, unhesitatingly shot an old
Herero woman for spying because he knew Estorff would not.66
Thanks to Franke’s diary we can conﬁrm another customary military practice: executing the wounded. Franke was an experienced Africa hand. He knew African customs
and had good personal relations with a number of Africans. Deeply religious, free-thinking, practical, and hypersensitive, Franke was horriﬁed by gratuitous brutality. He is one
of the few whites whom the missionaries singled out as having behaved fairly toward
Africans.67 His diary for 27 February reads:
A wounded [Herero] is brought in with a horribly mutilated leg. The man does
not even brush the ﬂies away from the dreadful ragged ﬂesh. He is questioned and
then shot. V[on] Bonin does it well. He had him shot from the back at a moment
when the unfortunate man suspected nothing.68
Clearly, Franke did not relish this task, nor did he condemn it; it was a regrettable part of
colonial warfare. In May the activist Protestant missionary August Kuhlmann sent a blistering report to his superiors about German military conduct, in which he listed nine separate incidents of brutality, three of which, including the one reported by Franke, involved killing wounded prisoners. One of the other executioners he named was First
Lieutenant Kuhn, whom Kuhlmann and his fellow missionaries later recalled as fair and
just in his treatment of Africans.69 These executions were therefore not random atrocities
but accepted methods of warfare that experienced and decent men employed. Nonetheless, Franke’s use of the word “unfortunate” and the protest of a militiaman against the
third incident that Kuhlmann cited, indicate that shooting the wounded was right on the
boundary of the acceptable. For the present, at least.
65. Franke, diary entry of 26 June 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 70.
66. Leutwein, Afrikanerschicksal, 121–22.
67. Missionaries Bernsmann, Danner, Kuhlmann, Elder, Vedder, Brockmann, Eich, and Diehl to Inspector
Spiecker, Karibib, 5 May 1904, VEM-Wuppertal, Diehl papers, B/c II 35, 3, p. 87.
68. Franke, diary entry of 27 Feb. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 20. The missionary August
Kuhlmann mentions this incident and says Franke’s troops bayoneted another Herero at the same time. Franke’s
diary entry for 26 Feb. mentions ﬁnding two wounded Herero, so it is possible that this is what Kuhlmann witnessed. Kuhlmann to Inspector Spiecker, 18 May 1904, reprinted in de Vries, Namibia, 282.
69. Kuhlmann to Inspector Spiecker, 18 May 1904; and Bernsmann, Danner, Kuhlmann, Elder, Vedder,
Brockmann, Eich, and Diehl to Inspector Spiecker, Karibib, 5 May 1904, VEM-Wuppertal, Diehl papers, B/c II
35, 3, p. 87. For another account of killing the wounded, see the testimony of D. E. Dixon in Union of South
Africa, Report on the Natives of South West Africa and Their Treatment by Germany (London, 1918), 66.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
In the same letter Kuhlmann also reported that around Easter, transport troops had 21
told him that they had received orders to take no prisoners. We have already seen that no
such order came from Leutwein. But Bebel’s surmise that some local commanders might
have been less restrained is possible, above all because Kuhlmann is a highly reliable
source. He was punctilious with facts, and where other sources are available, they corroborate his testimonies. Surviving archival documents contain no record of underlings ordering “no quarter,” but because records are so spotty and because such an order is likely
to have been verbal, no ﬁrm conclusion is possible. A number of factors might have encouraged some officers to shed their scruples: the fear and vindictiveness of the settlers,
which sanctioned retaliation; the Hereros’ own practice of taking no prisoners and of
killing wounded enemy soldiers; the difficulty of ﬁghting a canny enemy in an unfamiliar
place, especially given the assumption that Europeans were superior to Africans in all
things, including warfare.
But above all, the actual, undeniable practices of the early months of warfare contained a dangerous potential to drift further in the direction of more complete destruction. These practices included the identiﬁcation of the entire people, not just the combatants, as the enemy; the duty to “punish” the enemy, not just for murder but for theft and
property destruction; the conviction that such “punishment” merited the death penalty;
the swiftness and irrevocability of the court-martial; the custom of shooting “spies”; and
the acceptability of executing the wounded. These practices gravitated toward mass death.
But they had not reached it. For all of Kuhlmann’s justiﬁable outrage at German military
methods in the beginning, when the real campaign of annihilation was later loosed upon
the Herero, he recognized that “if [Berlin] had retained Leutwein and given him carte
blanche in ending the war, the country today [Feb. 1905] would be in better condition,
from the human standpoint.”70

The Wilhelminian Conception of Defeat and the
Appointment of Lothar von Trotha
Although the German strategic situation was sound after Franke’s relief of Omaruru
and the securing of the railroad in early February, Leutwein’s campaign disappointed the
public and the General Staff. The Herero fought well; the German reinforcements did
not.71 The naval troops lacked every quality necessary to the colonial soldier. They were indifferent marksmen, unpracticed marchers, and, worst of all, unmounted. These factors
and their inexperience combined to produce the greatest disaster of the war, at Owikokorero on 13 March 1904, where seven out of eleven officers and nineteen out of thirty-eight

70. Kuhlmann, “Report on the Attempts to Negotiate Peace in Otjimbingue,” 16 Feb. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal, Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72. Many of Leutwein’s earlier critics from the other side, those who found his conduct of the war too hesitant, also changed their minds when they experienced his successor’s policy of total destruction: Rust, Krieg und Frieden, 331; Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, passim; and the
mouthpiece of the settlers, the Deutsch-Südwestafrikanische Zeitung, Nr. 50, 14 Dec. 1904.
71. By the end of July, just over 6,000 reinforcements had arrived in SWA; 1,500 Germans fought at Waterberg. For a list of reinforcements: Kommando der Schutztruppen im Reichs-Kolonialamt, Sanitäts-Bericht über
die Kaiserliche Schutztruppe für Südwestafrika (Berlin, 1909), Beilage 4, pp. 438–40.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
22 men died.72 Compounding the problems the Germans encountered when ﬁghting were the
even worse burdens of supply and sanitation. The more reinforcements there were the
greater their needs in food, water (which of all things was in shortest supply), ammunition,
and medical service. Apart from the frail railroad, SWA lacked infrastructure; the Germans
had to provide everything themselves. Here they failed utterly. The survivors of Owikokorero and their other mates in the so-called eastern units swiftly fell prey to typhus, which
was brought on by undernourishment and contaminated water and aggravated by nonexistent medical care. By mid-April, Leutwein’s troops had been reduced by a third.73
It is a tribute to Leutwein’s military abilities that he was nonetheless able to overcome
these disasters and, using his remaining troops, push the Herero back. Leutwein aimed, as
always, at inﬂicting enough damage to force a negotiated surrender. The Herero, and
therefore Leutwein, calculated damage on two registers: loss of warriors and loss of cattle,
the chief source of tribal wealth. According to these measures, the Germans scored important victories in several difficult battles: at Otjihinamaparero (25 February) the Herero
lost two thousand head of cattle; and at Onganjira (9 April) and Oviumbo (13 April)
Africans later reported that the Herero had suffered major casualties, causing them to retreat to the Waterberg [“Water Mountain”], the last great water source before the Omaheke Desert to the east-southeast.74 According to Wilhelminian military reckoning, however, Oviumbo, where Leutwein himself led the troops, was a major defeat.
After a day of very hard ﬁghting, the governor faced the choice of trying a last, desperate charge or assuring his troops’ safety by pulling back. Not until later did the Germans learn that the Herero had also retreated. Only one experienced “old African,” Major
Estorff, urged attack. “[Attack] with what?” Franke asked in his diary. “Without ammunition, without food, with an exhausted train. . . . Thank God the colonel [Leutwein] listened to [Maj. Joachim von] Heydebreck, me, and the others and decided on an orderly
retreat.”75 Five thousand miles away the desk soldiers were shocked and ashamed that
German troops had retreated before Africans. By 1904 German military doctrine had so
thoroughly succumbed to the “cult of the offensive” that military writers had difficulty
defending the idea of defensive tactics, including tactical retreat, even in European warfare.76 The conviction of racial superiority, based not least on technical military prowess,
made tactical retreat vis-à-vis blacks simply unacceptable. The General Staff criticized
Leutwein’s leadership so sharply that the governor offered to resign in favor of “a senior
officer who possesses the complete conﬁdence of the General Staff.”77 That officer was Lt.
Gen. Lothar von Trotha.
72. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:68.
73. Ibid., 1:118.
74. Cattle: Leutwein, Elf Jahre, 500. Casualties: Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck diary entry of 8 Dec. 1904, BA-MA
Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 34. Retreat: General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:122. Gewald calls
Oviumbo a “stand-off”; Herero Heroes, 170.
75. Franke, diary entry of 13 Apr. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 4.
76. Jehuda Wallach, Das Dogma der Vernichtungsschlacht (Frankfurt, 1967), 43–44; Jack Snyder, “Civil-Military Relations and the Cult of the Offensive, 1914 and 1984,” International Security 9:1 (summer 1984), 108–46,
here 122–29; Bley, South-West Africa, 158.
77. Leutwein to General Staff, Okahandja, 25 Apr. 1904, cited in Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 149.

Marine in torn uniform “after four weeks’ march in the bush.” Kurd Schwabe, Der Krieg in DeutschSüdwestafrika, 1904–1906 (Berlin: C. A. Weller, 1907), 184.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
24

Lt. Gen. Lothar von Trotha in colonial uniform. Kurd Schwabe, Der Krieg in
Deutsch-Südwestafrika, 1904–1906 (Berlin: C. A. Weller, 1907), 280.

Trotha’s appointment was a stinging defeat for civilian, political authority. Chancellor Bülow and Colonial Director Stübel defended Leutwein and opposed Trotha, whom
the experienced colonial expert Heinrich Schnee characterized as “a man capable of
thinking only in ‘purely military terms.’ ”78 That is doubtless what recommended him to
Chief of Staff Schlieffen and the chief of the Military Cabinet, Gen. Dietrich von Hülsen78. Bley, South-West Africa, 159. My discussion follows Bley’s analysis of Trotha’s appointment, 158–60.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Häseler.79 Trotha’s “friends in high places” arranged for him to be consulted as rein- 25
forcements were ﬁrst being assembled, and newspapers named him as a possible successor to Leutwein as early as March 1904.80 After the “defeat” at Oviumbo, the Kaiser overrode civilian objections and chose Trotha as military commander. Because the military
commander and the governor were normally the same person, Trotha’s appointment
raised the question, Who would rule in Windhuk? Colonial Director Stübel argued that
the governor’s political decisions must set policy. Wilhelm overruled him: Trotha received supreme command. On arrival in SWA on 11 June 1904, Trotha declared martial
law, thereby transferring supreme authority from civilian government to the military
commander, following the model of Germany in wartime.81 Surprisingly, Leutwein did
not resign. He remained governor, overseeing administration but not policy until he was
forced out of office in November 1904 because he challenged Trotha’s policy of extermination. Thus, from 11 June 1904 to Trotha’s recall in November 1905, the war in SWA was
conducted entirely according to military calculations, and the administration functioned as a military dictatorship. Although nominally Chief of Staff Schlieffen was in
charge, in fact, the commander of the Schutztruppe on the spot determined the conduct
of war.82
What was it reasonable to expect from a soldier like Trotha? His career had been unusual. As the son of a noble and an officer, Trotha had entered the army in the prestigious 2nd Foot Guards.83 But he remained there less than a year before being transferred
to a mundane infantry regiment, in which he saw action in the Franco-Prussian War.
Thereafter he made his name in the colonies. From 1894 to 1897 he served in German
East Africa as a lieutenant colonel and, brieﬂy, as deputy governor. Years later, Trotha
claimed that he had learned the inevitability of “racial war” in East Africa. Yet, his career
there was not unlike that of other commanders of the countless punitive expeditions sent
out to quell rebellions. Trotha’s troops pursued Sultan Hassan bin Omar (in late 1895)
and then engaged in a long expedition into the ill-explored interior of the colony, pro-

79. Schlieffen: ibid., 159. Hülsen: Paul Leutwein, Afrikanerschicksal, 172. Hülsen was Trotha’s main supporter: Trotha to Hülsen, 7 Dec. 1904, Archive of the von Trotha Family, Nr. 315, Anhang 1, Nr. 14 (hereafter
Trotha Papers).
80. “Friends”: Ledebour, Sten. Ber., XI legis. per., 2nd session, 5th meeting, 2 Dec. 1905, vol. 214, 92. Successor: “Der Aufstand in SWA,” Berliner Zeitung 148 (21 Mar. 1904), 1; “Der Aufstand,” Deutsch-Südwestafrikanische
Zeitung 19 (11 May 1904). Eugen Zimmermann, editor of the Berliner Lokalanzeiger, asked the Colonial Department only a week after the revolt started whether Trotha would lead the expedition: Zimmermann to Stübel,
Berlin, 22 Jan. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2111, p. 87.
81. Allerhöchste Kabinetts-Ordre (AKO) of 19 May 1904; Lothar v. Trotha, “Kriegszustands-Bestimmungen,” in Kaiserliche Schutztruppe für Südwestafrika, “Bestimmungen für das Militärgerichts-Verfahren
etc.,” Swakopmund, 11 June 1904, reprinted in Rust, Krieg und Frieden, 344–45. See discussion in Bley, SouthWest Africa, 159.
82. Trotha disagreed with and ignored most of Schlieffen’s military recommendations. See Trotha diary, 25
June 1904, 22 July 1904, 20 Jan. 1905, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, pp. 12, 22, 70. Also, Kirsten Zirkel, “Military Power
in German Colonial Policy,” in Guardians of Empire, ed. David Killingray and David Omissi (New York, 1999),
91–113, here 101.
83. Deutsches Biographisches Archiv, Neue Folge, ﬁche 375.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
26 voking various battles along the way, ending in the surrender of the Waha’s Sultan Mtau
in early 1897.84
Trotha described his methods:
The punishment [of villages that had greeted the expedition with poisoned arrows] consisted of sending small units . . . to the villages, which after a short ﬁght
are then taken and burnt down. We cannot determine enemy losses, because
most [of the dead and wounded] will have been taken with the people as they retreat, and many will probably have died in the ﬂames. This method of conducting
war, through burning, was hardly congenial to me at the beginning. But then and
now I cannot help but conclude from later conﬂicts that any kindness in this regard is interpreted by the natives as weakness.85
Trotha understood himself as merely copying the customary war methods of East Africa.
He described dealing with one recalcitrant sultan, whom “I punished in the manner customary to the land by burning his residence and taking his cows.”86
There were other “customary” or at least usual methods of warfare with which Trotha
came into contact in East Africa and which he later used in SWA. Governor Wissmann
placed bounties (Kopfgeld) on the heads of rebel leaders.87 A local military station master
recommended threatening uncooperative populations with starvation by preventing crop
cultivation, but Trotha disapproved.88 However, he did adopt a way of lowering the costs
of maintaining prisoners: “I’m going to chase away the rest of those prisoners, who are
mostly women and children [anyway], whom we have captured or who have come voluntarily into the camp.”89
Trotha also relied heavily on execution by court-martial. “Of those we took prisoner,”
he reported after one episode, “there were two men caught with weapons who were condemned to death the next day by court-martial and hanged, and the fort was consigned to
ﬁre.”90 Altogether, Trotha emerged as a conﬁrmed believer in exemplary punishment.
After capturing Hassan, he informed Governor Wissmann that “I have not opened courtmartial proceedings against him, because I think it more promising if he and the other
guilty parties ascend the scaffold in Kilwa before the eyes of his secret followers.”91
Trotha’s devotion to exemplary punishment had slid over into “terrorism,” as he called it.

84. Ernst Nigmann, Geschichte der Kaiserlichen Schutztruppe für Deutsch-Ostafrika (Berlin, 1911), 54.
85. Trotha, “Report on the battles in Ururi,” Dar es Salaam, 16 Mar. 1897, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 288,
pp. 71–74.
86. Trotha, “Report on the Punishment of the Waha in November 1896,” ibid.
87. Wissmann to Chancellor Chlodwig zu Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst, Nr. 976, Dar es Salaam, 1 Oct. 1895,
BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 286, pp. 86–89.
88. Trotha to Wissmann, Lager am Mavuji, 15 Nov. 1895, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 286, pp. 139–42.
89. Ibid.
90. Trotha, “Report on the Punishment of the Waha in November 1896,” BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 288.
91. Trotha to Wissmann, Lager am Mavuji, 15 Nov. 1895, ibid., Nr. 286, pp. 139–42.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
When a local population failed to deliver up rebel leaders, Trotha recommended “hanging 27
one prisoner every month” until they complied. “Terrorism can only help.”92
If Trotha’s general proﬁle as a colonial commander was not far out of the ordinary, he
nonetheless had begun to distinguish himself as a man prepared to go to extremes, if necessary. He made political minds uneasy. The Colonial Department routinely published
excerpts from military leaders’ reports as propaganda for the colonies. Trotha’s reports
were vetted for this purpose. Citing “peculiar circumstances,” colonial officials unanimously declared them unﬁt for publication.93 Governor Wissmann cancelled sixteen
death sentences levied by Trotha’s courts-martial during the Hassan bin Omar expedition
“because the number of those condemned to death is so great that it would probably lead
to unpleasant utterances in our press.”94 When Wissmann learned in 1904 that Trotha was
being considered as commander in SWA, he tried to prevent the appointment. He called
Trotha “a bad leader, a bad African, and a bad comrade.”95
After East Africa, Trotha resumed his career in Germany, but as soon as the opportunity arose he volunteered for service in China, as part of the international force to quell
the Boxer Uprising. He was present at the public execution of the assassins of German
Ambassador Ketteler in Peking, and he led the punitive expedition to the Ming graves to
punish Boxers for murdering Chinese Christians in the vicinity.96 But China offered few
opportunities to add luster to his career, so it was probably his reputation in East Africa,
plus his dramatic, soldierly bearing that brought him to the attention of Military Cabinet
Chief Hülsen and Chief of Staff Schlieffen.97

Trotha’s Plans at the Waterberg
When Trotha arrived in SWA on 11 June 1904, he inherited a situation and a plan of attack. Virtually the entire Herero people and all their own and the settlers’ cattle had retreated to the Waterberg. Leutwein and the “old Africans” had planned a concentric attack at the Waterberg, where they hoped to inﬂict enough damage to move the Herero to
accept a negotiated surrender. Leutwein and most experienced military hands believed a
sharp attack with even small forces would be sufficient, but Trotha forbade any engagements in his absence. Leutwein and Estorff contemplated proceeding anyway, as they
were sure they could end the war. But Leutwein explained to Estorff that “in Germany
92. Ibid.
93. Internal notice to K 8161, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 288, p. 82.
94. Wissmann to Chancellor Hohenlohe, Nr. 1271, Dar es Salaam, 23 Dec. 1895, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 287,
pp. 14–16.
95. Ludwig v. Estorff, Wanderungen und Kämpfe in Südwestafrika, Ostafrika und Südafrika (Wiesbaden,
1968), 117.
96. Execution: Justus Scheibert, Der Krieg in China (Berlin, 1909), 381; Ming graves: General Alfred v.
Waldersee to General Staff, Nr. 121, Peking, 31 Jan. 1901, and Nr. 134, 13 Feb. 1901, BA-MA Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr.
399, pp. 71, 72.
97. Estorff, Wanderungen, 117. Franke heard of Trotha’s reputation as a “Theater-General,” diary entry of 5
May 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, pp. 48–49.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
28 [meaning the General Staff] what counts as a success is not a simple victory but only the
destruction [Vernichtung] of the enemy.” Under those conditions, Estorff advised against
an attack, and it was left to Trotha to achieve the kind of success “Germany” wanted.98
The paramountcy of the General Staff thus dictated a particular kind of victory, the pure
victory of military force, the Vernichtungssieg.
The word “destruction” and the phrase “policy of destruction” (Vernichtungspolitik),
used to describe Trotha’s later annihilation of the Herero people, have raised the question
of whether Trotha planned on annihilation from the beginning. Helmut Bley, author of
the best political analysis of the colony, has recognized that annihilation developed out of
less drastic military policies.99 Jon Bridgman, however, interprets Trotha’s disposition
of forces at the Waterberg as proof that Trotha intended mass death. This viewpoint follows
Horst Drechsler, whose account was the ﬁrst based on archival sources and continues to
be inﬂuential.100 Drechsler maintains that Trotha pursued a clear “aim of annihilating the
Herero [people],” which he accomplished through the “well-thought-out plan” of battle
at the Waterberg.101 To assess Drechsler’s claim we must answer three questions: Did
Trotha receive orders to annihilate the Herero? Are there other indications that he pursued annihilation from the beginning on his own? Did his battle plan aim to destroy the
entire people?
Trotha himself answered the ﬁrst question in the negative. At two different points the
general came under heavy attack for his Vernichtungspolitik: once in late 1904–early 1905
from Chancellor Bülow and Governor Leutwein; and again after the war was over, when
tempers had cooled and war costs had been toted up. By then, many public voices excoriated Trotha’s policies. Both times the general defended himself vociferously, but he never
claimed his superiors had ordered mass destruction. A loyal, self-sacriﬁcing soldier might
have hidden such an order from the public, but he would have had no reason to do so in
conﬁdential correspondence with the Kaiser’s other servants, the chancellor and the governor. To Leutwein, Trotha explained (5 November 1904) that “when I was appointed
commander in SWA I received no instructions or directives. His Majesty simply told me
that he expected I would defeat the uprising by all means [mit allen Mitteln] and explain
later why the uprising had begun.”102 Such vagueness was typical of orders commanders
received under these circumstances. For example, the “Order for the Leader of the Naval
Expedition Corps” at the beginning of the uprising in January 1904 simply told him that,
98. Leutwein to Estorff, heliogram from Owikokorero, 16 June 1904; Estorff to Leutwein, Otjosondu, 16
June 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 431, pp. 50–51.
99. Bley, South-West Africa, 162–64. Two other recent studies agree: Zirkel, “Military Power in German
Colonial Policy,” 100; and Gewald, Towards Redemption, 205–9. Gewald, without analyzing the military developments, intimates that Trotha adopted Vernichtung at Waterberg: ibid., 209, also Herero Heroes, 174–75.
100. The best recent social, not military, history of the Herero follows Drechsler’s interpretation: Krüger,
Kriegsbewältigung, 50, 62. Similarly, John Horne and Alan Kramer, German Atrocities, 1914 (New Haven, 2001),
169. Jürgen Zimmerer vacillates on this question: Deutsche Herrschaft über Afrikaner (Hamburg, 2001), 31, 54–55.
101. Bley, South-West Africa, 162–63; Bridgman, Revolt, 122; Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 155, repeated in
Drechsler, Aufstände, 77–78; and reprinted in Drechsler, “The Hereros of South-West Africa (Namibia),” in The
History and Sociology of Genocide, ed. Frank Chalk and Kurt Jonassohn (New Haven, 1990), 241–42.
102. Trotha to Leutwein, copy, Windhuk, 5 Nov. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 101–3.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
unless he received other instructions from the governor, he was “to reestablish order in 29
the protectorate independently by all means at your disposal [mit allen Ihnen zu Gebote
stehenden Mitteln].”103 The phrase “by all means” was standard.
In January 1905 Trotha explained to Bülow why he had rejected mediation and instead continued pursuing the Herero people to their deaths: “I asked the General Staff
chief several months ago [vor Monaten] whether His Majesty agreed with my harsh stance.
I never received an answer. Qui tacet, consentire videtur. I had to assume that my position
was approved at the highest level.”104 If Trotha had received direct orders to proceed as he
did, he would surely have told Bülow at this time. Four years later, in a letter to a newspaper editor, Trotha speciﬁed when he had decided on annihilation and when he had begun
asking his superiors for their ex post facto approval: “Already in September 1904 I had
made no bones about how I intended to end the uprising, and numerous times I offered
my resignation [if this policy was rejected].”105 The battle of Waterberg occurred on 11 August 1904. Trotha’s decision to annihilate occurred a month later. Neither then nor earlier
did he receive an order to this effect; otherwise he would hardly have had to inform the
General Staff of his new policy, or to ask its blessing.
It is, of course, possible that Trotha received a verbal order from the Kaiser. Bebel
speculated along these lines after the annihilation had become fact:
I don’t know whether Mr. v. Trotha acted on his own or according to a similar
slogan [Parole] to the one made in 1900, “Take no quarter, behave so that no Chinese will dare to look askance at a German for a thousand years.” Probably he did
take with him from Germany a similar slogan, which one did not want to express
publicly a second time.106
The “slogan” in question was Wilhelm’s speech to troops departing to put down the Boxer
Uprising in 1900. If Bebel’s point was that a commander could count on Wilhelm’s admiration for what he saw as soldierly ruthlessness, then it was a point well taken. But a slogan is not an order.
Nevertheless, Trotha’s importunate pleas in the fall of 1904 that the Kaiser approve his
Vernichtungspolitik suggest he thought Wilhelm would do so. Wilhelm’s tough stand
against negotiations announced at the beginning of the uprising made clear that he
wanted a decision by force. When Trotha left Germany, the Kaiser’s chief of the Militaire
103. “Befehl für den Führer des Marine-Expeditionskorps,” signed Wilhelm II, Berlin, 20 Jan. 1904, BA-MA
Freiburg, RM 2 (Imperial Naval Cabinet), Nr. 1867, p. 66. Similarly, when Chancellor Leo v. Caprivi sent Kurt v.
François to SWA in 1893 to quell disturbances “the only instructions given were to uphold German authority
[Herrschaft] under all circumstances”; Leutwein, Elf Jahre, 15.
104. Trotha to Bülow, Windhuk, 6 Jan. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 138–39, emphasis in original.
105. Lothar v. Trotha, “Die Erwiderung des Staatssekretärs Dernburg am 2. März” (letter dated 9 Mar.
1909) (Berliner Neueste Nachrichten), in BA-MA Freiburg, Militärgeschichtliche Sammlung (hereafter MSg. 2),
Nr. 3039 (Baron v. Welck). Trotha’s ﬁrst letter to Schlieffen explaining his new policy and threatening resignation if the Kaiser did not approve was 3 Oct. 1904: cf. Trotha diary entries for August and September, and Anhang 1, containing his letters to Schlieffen, Trotha Papers.
106. Bebel, Sten. Ber., XI legis. per., 2nd session, 131st meeting, 1 Dec. 1906, vol. 218, p. 4060.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
30 Maison, Gen. Hans von Plessen, told him, “Just don’t lose your nerve,” which in military
parlance meant to hew to the tough military line, regardless of obstacles; and that is how
Trotha interpreted it.107 When Wilhelm ﬁnally rescinded Trotha’s explicit policy in December 1904 at the chancellor’s urging, he responded to practical arguments while rejecting humanitarian and moral ones; universal principles, therefore, would not have hindered the Kaiser from championing harsh action.108 Finally, pressured by Trotha’s
military intermediaries to respond to the commander’s pleas (and threat of resignation),
Wilhelm came close to sanctioning annihilation once it had happened. On 19 January
1905 the Kaiser wrote, “You have entirely fulﬁlled my expectations when I named you to
commander of the Schutztruppe, and it is a pleasure to express to you again my complete
recognition for your accomplishments so far.”109 If Trotha had received a verbal order, he
would surely have cited it when asking for royal conﬁrmation. Still, the surviving correspondence shows the atmosphere of military hardness at court that Trotha believed
backed his extreme policies.
If Trotha did not receive an actual order to annihilate, he still might have arrived in
SWA intent on doing so on his own. Trotha had been an outspoken racist since his time in
East Africa. He believed the Herero people were expendable. Indeed, he conﬁded to his
diary on 1 July 1904 that all colonies had to be conquered with blood.110 “The natives must
give way [weichen]—look at America. Either via the bullet or the mission, with alcohol.”111 The Kaiser had forbidden negotiations without his approval, and Trotha was more
than happy to pursue a policy of pure force. On 16 July Trotha quashed negotiation feelers from Salatiel, one of the Herero subchiefs. “In my dying hour I will take responsibility
for the black blood that is shed,” he wrote in his diary, alluding at the end of the entry to
the Herero practice of mutilation.112 Trotha was therefore personally ready to continue
the policy of pure force to the end.
The main source for the speculation that Trotha planned annihilation from the beginning is the governor’s son, Paul Leutwein, who served as a volunteer officer with the
Schutztruppe in the opening months of the war, but who had left the colony before
Trotha arrived. Years later he described the meeting between Governor Leutwein and the
newly arrived general (23 June 1904) in Okahandja: “From the governor’s papers I gather
107. Trotha to Dietrich v. Hülsen-Häseler, 7 Dec. 1904, Nr. 315, Anhang 1, Nr. 14, Trotha Papers. “I have always held my head high in the most difficult moments.”
108. Bernhard von Bülow, Denkwürdigkeiten, 4 vols. (Berlin, 1920), 2:21.
109. Wilhelm to Trotha, tel., 19 Jan. 1905, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, p. 70. Helmut Otto interprets Schlieffen’s
congratulation as his approval of extermination, but he praised “the extraordinarily energetic and successful
pursuit under such difficult circumstances”: Schlieffen und der Generalstab (Berlin, 1966), 214.
110. The handwritten original of Trotha’s diary has been lost. The von Trotha family archive possesses an
original typewritten transcript from 1930, made by Trotha’s second wife, Lucy, and another, a bound typescript,
made later. I have used the 1930 version (Nr. 315). It appears to have been typed from the original by a professional secretary (the keystrokes are quite regular). The retention of small geographical details and numbers and
the inclusion of damning statements make it appear that little, if anything, was omitted. The ms. was reread several times, each reading leaving a trace in colored crayon or pencil of passages the reader(s) apparently wished
to omit from a possible published version. I thank the von Trotha family for allowing me to use this material.
111. Trotha, diary entry, 1 July 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, p. 15.
112. Trotha, diary entry, 16 July 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, p. 20.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
that he urged the commander to conduct the war so that the people would survive. Gen- 31
eral v. Trotha listened to this statement quietly and then replied, ‘Your arguments interest
me very much, but you must allow me to lead the campaign in my own way.’ ” Paul
Leutwein then maintains that later that evening his father told a public gathering of settlers in Okahandja of Trotha’s intentions, and that a report of the governor’s exposé, written by military correspondent retired Capt. Otto Dannhauer, appeared in the Berliner
Lokalanzeiger shortly thereafter. “If those in high office or if public opinion in Germany
had wanted to,” Paul Leutwein concluded, “one could have stopped Trotha’s annihilation
strategy in time.”113
Trotha and Leutwein did meet on 23 June, and Trotha later explained to Chancellor
Bülow what they discussed:
When I took over command, Governor Leutwein gave me a ﬁnished proclamation to the Herero, ready for printing, . . . which promised them clemency if they
admitted their wrongdoing and came back remorsefully. I immediately declared
that I opposed on principle handling the uprising in this way, and that in my
opinion, such treatment contradicted the intentions of His Majesty. Nothing further happened.114
The discussion concerned negotiations, which, as the Colonial Department had reminded
Leutwein in February, could be initiated only on the Kaiser’s orders. Trotha’s tough stand
on negotiations increased the probability of more bloodshed, but it does not necessarily
indicate that he already intended wholesale annihilation. And it is not at all clear that
Leutwein interpreted the discussion that way. On the contrary, he telegraphed Berlin that
he had “reached full agreement with Mr. v. Trotha in Okahandja.”115 He continued to
serve as governor alongside the general and broke with him only in October, when Trotha
openly embraced the policy of annihilation. In his frank memoirs, which lambasted
Trotha’s Vernichtungspolitik, Leutwein did not mention their June meeting.116 As for correspondent Dannhauer’s account in the Berliner Lokalanzeiger, he reported on 23 June
1904: “The result of thorough talks between Excellency Trotha and the governor appear to
have reached complete agreement.”117
Paul Leutwein’s memory appears to have amalgamated and elaborated on two separate articles. The most damning of these did not appear “long before the battle of Waterberg,”118 as he recalled, but on 2 August 1904, just nine days before. It was dated 26 June,

113. Leutwein, Afrikanerschicksal, 156–57.
114. Trotha to Bülow, Windhuk, 6 Jan. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 138–39.
115. Leutwein to Col. Dept., tel. Nr. 147, Windhuk, arr. in Berlin 25 June 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2115,
p. 79. Drechsler cites this telegram but concludes nothing from it: “Let Us Die Fighting,” 172n90.
116. Leutwein, Elf Jahre.
117. Special correspondent [Dannhauer], “Zum Aufstand in Südwestafrika,” Berliner Lokalanzeiger 289 (23
June 1904), 1.
118. Leutwein, Afrikanerschicksal, 156.

Gov. Col. Theodor Leutwein (middle) and Lt. Gen. Lothar von Trotha (far right) at Command
Headquarters, Windhuk, July 1904. Helmut Bley, South-West Africa under German Rule, 1894–1914
(Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1971), ﬁg. 22.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
however, and describes a ride Dannhauer had taken with Governor Leutwein to Oka- 33
handja on the way to meet with Trotha. They discussed, among other things, the Herero
practice of mutilating bodies and killing wounded German soldiers. Dannhauer concluded, in his own voice:
Forbearance and leniency toward such an enemy is simply a crime committed
against one’s own soldiers. That is also the opinion of the new commander, Lt.
Gen. v. Trotha, who recently declared while discussing this subject, “Against
‘nonhumans’ [Unmenschen] one cannot conduct war ‘humanely.’ ” And he allowed me to publish his words.119
This chilling remark is conﬁrmed by Trotha’s diary entry of 16 July, cited above. We shall
see that this attitude probably contributed to atrocities committed in the immediate aftermath of the battle. But it is not a declaration of annihilation, nor is it an order. Trotha’s
opinion, buried on the second page of a rather leisurely reminiscence, was not picked up
by any critics in Berlin, then or later.
The only other article that Paul Leutwein might have had in mind appeared in midJuly, but was dated 4 July. It did indeed report a “recent” discussion among “a small circle” in Okahandja, in which Leutwein criticized the new military policies. But all he is reported as saying is that a long guerilla war was inevitable unless Germany negotiated with
the Herero. The governor admitted this was unlikely, because “public opinion” rejected
negotiations. He did not mention Trotha.120 Neither article remotely hinted that Trotha
planned mass annihilation, nor could one expect anyone to have read them that way.121

The Battle of Waterberg
It remains, then, to consider the plan of attack at the Waterberg. It was supposed to be
the decisive battle that would end the war, by forcing a negotiated surrender (according to
Leutwein) or by “destroying” the enemy militarily (according to Trotha). German military doctrine was so clear about how to conduct a decisive battle that Governor Leutwein
had already sketched out its contours and moved some troops into place by the time
Trotha arrived on the scene. The concentric battle was to be accomplished by splitting the
troops and loosely surrounding the Waterberg. That assured that the enemy would have
to ﬁght, instead of avoiding the decisive blow by slipping away. At the signal, the units
would attack together. The general simply took over this plan, but instead of striking at
119. Otto Dannhauer, “Brief aus Deutsch-Südwestafrika,” Berliner Lokalanzeiger 358 (2 Aug. 1904), 1–2,
here 2.
120. Dannhauer, “Brief aus Südwest-Afrika,” Berliner Lokalanzeiger 321 (12 July 1904), 1–2.
121. Paul Leutwein is unreliable on many accounts. For example, he gives the wrong date for the battle of
Waterberg (Afrikanerschicksal, 158–59); he confuses the pursuit of August and September with Trotha’s extermination proclamation of October 1904 (128); he believes Berlin “immediately” cancelled the proclamation, when
in fact that process was protracted (128); and he believes most of the Herero escaped (128).

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
34 once, as the “old Africans” desired, he waited for two months in order to bring up as
many troops and supplies as possible.122
The Waterberg lay over one hundred kilometers from the railroad, and supplies had to be
moved by oxcart on indistinct, unmapped paths, as there were no regular roads. The more
men Trotha moved in, the more supplies they required; more supplies required more oxen to
bring them; and more oxen consumed more scarce water and grass that the men and horses
needed to stay alive. That was the vicious cycle that ﬁghting a classic, European-style, decisive, concentric battle brought with it. Throughout June, July, and the ﬁrst week of August,
the inexperienced German reinforcements labored to encircle the Waterberg. By the time
they had done so, they were exhausted and ill; their horses were dying of hunger and thirst.123
Meanwhile, the united clans of the Herero waited at the Waterberg. That sixty thousand or more people and their cattle could stay there so long was thanks to the unusually
heavy rainfall in recent months.124 But with each passing day, the once plentiful springs
diminished, while the herds consumed the last wild grass. Typhus was reported, the ﬁrst
sign of bad water.125 The Herero were eating the cattle they had taken from the settlers,
which reduced the burden on water and grass supplies, but by August their own herds had
begun to succumb to thirst. It was these half-dead animals that the Germans reported
capturing by the thousands in the ﬁrst postbattle reports.126
No one knows why the Herero did not slip off north into Ovamboland, or northwest
into British Bechuanaland, or north again into Portuguese Angola, or simply ﬁlter back
west and south into the colony. Perhaps they felt conﬁdent of victory against the still
much smaller, palpably inexperienced German troops; perhaps the Herero people’s despair at the prospect of losing land and cattle left them no choice; perhaps they expected
an offer of negotiation; perhaps their leadership was divided and uncertain.127 The one

122. Leutwein to Bülow, tel. Windhuk, 18 May 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2114, p. 204; Trotha to General
Staff, tel. Okahandja, 25 June 1904, ibid., Nr. 2115, p. 80; Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 121–24; v. François,
“Herero-Aufstand,” Mil. Wochenblatt 98 (16 Aug. 1904), col. 2370. Trotha ultimately assembled 1,500 troops and
officers, 30 artillery pieces, and 14 machine guns at Waterberg: General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:157.
123. Viktor Franke, “Der Aufstand in Deutsch Südwest Afrika und die nachfolgenden Jahre, 1903–1906,”
BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 21, 34.
124. Rohrbach, Aus Südwest-Afrikas schweren Tagen, 147.
125. “Der Aufstand,” Deutsch Südwest-Afrikanische Zeitung 27 (6 July 1904).
126. Rohrbach, Aus Südwest-Afrikas schweren Tagen, 159, 170. Sudholt, who wants to deny the genocide
(Völkermord), argues that limited water could not have sustained 60,000–80,000 people and large animal herds,
and therefore, the number of Herero must have been much smaller (he estimates 40,000, but gives no reason for
settling on that number). However, both the unusually plentiful water (and grass) in 1904 and the fact that the
Herero were close to exhausting their resources argue strongly against Sudholt’s surmise. Sudholt, Deutsche
Eingeborenenpolitik, 41–44, 185–86.
127. V. François, “Herero-Aufstand,” Mil. Wochenblatt 109, col. 2626; Schwabe, Krieg in Deutsch-Südwestafrika, 200, 220; General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:89, 136; August Kuhlmann, “Was die Hereros
über einen etwaigen Frieden sagten” (6 June 1904), in de Vries, Namibia, 287–88; Franke diary entry, 26 June
1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 70; Lettow-Vorbeck, diary entry, 8 Dec. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 34; Arnold Lequis, diary entry, 23 July 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lequis, Nr. 17, p. 9; Bayer,
Mit dem Hauptquartier, 129–30; Gewald, Herero Heroes, 170; Bridgman, Revolt, 109, 113–17; Drechsler, “Let Us Die
Fighting,” 142–44, 150; Jürgen Zimmerer, “Kriegsgefangene im Kolonialkrieg,” in In der Hand des Feindes, ed.
Rüdiger Overmans (Cologne, 1999), 277–94, here 283.

Waterberg
35

Mountain battery on the march in SWA, 1904. Courtesy of Stadt- und Universitatsbibliothek, Afrikaabteilung, Frankfurt am Main, Nr. 011-0116 - 06 .
thing no one expected them to do, however, was to retreat to thc east, into the unmapped
and, to whitc people, unknown Omaheke Desert. m "Would [the enemy] want to escape
to the east," asked one officer on Trotha's staff, "into the arid, deathly Omaheke? An old
soldier's principle says that one should always count on the enemy doing the most intelli128. Trotha enumerated all the alternatives once more shortly before the ool11c. He was satisfied Estorff's
troops blocked a breakthrough to the cast; he nevcr even mentioned the southeast as a consideration: Trotha to
General Staff, tel. an. lIeriin 20 July 1904, SA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. l115, p. 124. No con tcmporJry writing before the
baule seriously considered this a possibility: leutwe in to SGlow, Windhuk, l5 May 19<14, SA-Serlin, R 1001, Nr.
2114; Franke. diary entry. 6 Aug. 1904. SA -Koblenz. Nt. FrJnke. Nr. 3, PI'. 85-87; Capt. Schering to Headquarters.
Otjisondusu. 23 JUlie 1904. SA -MA Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 431. p. 55: ~l lsl. Lt.l Winkler thinks a H.'rero escape

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
36

2nd Field Company of the Naval Infantry Battalion in Omaruru, SWA, preparing to go into the
ﬁeld. Courtesy of Stadt- und Universitätsbibliothek, Afrikaabteilung, Frankfurt am Main, Nr. 0020054-15.

gent thing, always assume he will do what is most unpleasant for us.”129 Most unpleasant
would have been an escape west, back into the territory from which the German troops
had already expelled them. That is why Trotha overloaded the western unit commanded
by Col. Berthold von Deimling. The next strongest unit (Estorff ’s) faced Deimling’s on
the east. The units to the north and northwest were smaller, but they could rely on favorable geography (the Waterberg and Klein-Waterberg) to strengthen them. Trotha had
placed his own headquarters directly to the south, with moderate strength. By far the
weakest unit in troop numbers lay to its right, to the southeast (under Colonel von der
Heyde). Heyde and Estorff together could have prevented an eastward escape. To make up
for numerical weakness, Trotha had given Heyde eight artillery pieces and more officers,
but no machine guns.130

in large numbers to the southeast is impossible because of lack of water”; Trotha to General Staff, tel. Okahandja, arr. 21 July 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2115, p. 124; Schwabe, Krieg in Deutsch-Südwestafrika, 235; General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:132–33; Dannhauer’s reports in Berliner Lokalanzeiger 351 (29 July
1904), 1, and 392 (22 Aug. 1904), 1. None of the “Old Africans” thought it a possibility: Trotha to Schlieffen, Report, repeated in diary entry of 27 Aug. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, Anhang 1, Nr. 2, p. 4. Only Salzmann, writing with the beneﬁt of hindsight, claims that “everybody” had suspected the Herero would try to break through
to the east. Salzmann, Im Kampfe, 151.
129. Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 134.
130. See the information by Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 136.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Paul Leutwein claims that both Estorff and Governor Leutwein warned Trotha that 37
Heyde’s unit was too small.131 Although I have located no archival conﬁrmation and neither man mentions such a warning in his published accounts, it is possible they did so.132
Certainly, Trotha’s adjutant, Capt. Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, who helped draft the troop
dispositions, saw the danger, though late. On 5 August (six days before Trotha launched
the battle), Lettow-Vorbeck noted his disagreement with the orders Trotha had just dispatched for the coming battle. The main Herero forces stood south of the Waterberg, by
the waterhole Hamakari. “In my draft, I intended the main attack to come at Hamakari
and wanted to apply part of Deimling[’s troops] here and had therefore ordered a tighter
encirclement. I think that the troops that [Trotha’s] directive sets against Hamakari are
very weak.”133 The day before the battle, Lettow-Vorbeck may have tried to alter Trotha’s
plans. In the back of one of his diary books is a draft telegram, dated 10 August 1904, with
new instructions to the encircling units. These instructions “borrow” some of Deimling’s
troops for the attack in the south against Hamakari, thus plugging the hole there. The rest
of Deimling’s troops in the west are ordered not to attack unless the Herero attempt to
break out. That would have prevented Deimling’s larger numbers from driving the
Herero from west to east or southeast, into the desert. But Lettow-Vorbeck’s telegram was
never sent.134
Drechsler interprets Trotha’s asymmetrical troop disposition not as “incompetence
on the part of the general . . . ; rather it was a well-thought-out plan that the Herero
should break through toward the south [sic] and perish in the desert there.”135 One of the
most tenacious myths of modern military history is that of German military omnicompetence. Even the staunchest critics prefer to believe that military disasters happen by design, rather than to imagine that structural dysfunction, or just plain mistakes, could have
riddled the premier institution of the Kaiserreich. But that was precisely what was so embarrassing about the war in SWA: it displayed German military incompetence.
Trotha had indeed set up unbalanced forces, which provided extra insurance in the
west, where from his standpoint the greatest danger lay, at the cost of exposing the southeast, where a breakthrough was least harmful, or potentially even helpful, because the
desert might force the escaping enemy to turn and ﬁght again. But that was only a secondbest outcome. Trotha wanted Waterberg to end the war. His order for the battle stated: “I
will attack the enemy simultaneously with all units, in order to destroy [vernichten]
him.”136 However, the exhaustion of his own troops, the poor condition of their horses,
the unavailability of supplies, the lopsided troop arrangement (all things falling under

131. Leutwein, Afrikanserschicksal, 157–58.
132. Estorff, Wanderungen; Ludwig v. Estorff, “Kriegserlebnisse in Südwestafrika,” Beiheft zum MilitärWochenblatt 3 (1911), 79–101; Leutwein, Elf Jahre.
133. Lettow-Vorbeck, diary entry, 5 Aug. 1904, Erindi-Ongoahere, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck,
Nr. 73.
134. Draft telegram, 10 Aug. 1904, Otjerontjondjo, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 73.
135. Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 155.
136. Trotha, “Directive for the attack against the Herero,” 4 Aug. 1904, cited in General Staff, Kämpfe der
deutschen Truppen, 1:153.

The Battle of Waterberg. Source: Germany, General Staff, Die Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen in Südwestafrika, vol. 1, maps 8, 9.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
39

Maj.-Gen. Berthold von Deimling (middle) gives command to Col. Ludwig von Estorff (right),
Windhuk, 1907. Courtesy of Stadt- und Universitätsbibliothek, Afrikaabteilung, Frankfurt am
Main, Nr. 011-0116-02.

Trotha’s and his unit commanders’ responsibilities), plus the inevitable friction of battle
and the mistakes of two commanders, thwarted the decisive victory.
The battle began on the morning of 11 August. The two units to the north and northwest were supposed to become active only if the Herero tried to break through there;
Deimling coming from the west and Estorff from the east were to move toward each
other, parallel with the Waterberg, but to hold positions there without forcing the Herero
south. Meanwhile, the southern unit (under Lieutenant Colonel Mueller) and Heyde to
the southeast were supposed to engage in a concentric attack on Hamakari. Only on the
second day were Estorff and Deimling supposed to continue their movement, thus trapping the Herero between themselves and Mueller and Heyde in the south. Unfortunately,
Heyde, who had earlier displayed a lack of appreciation for communication and a certain
sluggishness, now demonstrated the full range of his incapacity.137 Hearing gunﬁre, he
rushed his troops off in the wrong direction, later retracing his steps, only to become
pinned down by heavy Herero ﬁre. Throughout the day, he failed to contact headquarters,
reporting in by radio telephone for the ﬁrst time at 7 pm, and then again at midnight with
the news that not only would he not reach Hamakari that day, but he probably would not

137. Hellmuth Auer von Herrenkirchen, Meine Erlebnisse während des Feldzuges gegen die Hereros und Witbois nach meinem Tagebuch (Berlin, 1907), 22, 23, 44; Franke, diary entry, 18 Aug. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke,
Nr. 3, p. 97.

Capt. Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck. Courtesy of Stadt- und Universitätsbibliothek, Afrikaabteilung,
Frankfurt am Main, Nr. 023-1388-06.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
the following morning (the 12th), either.138 Meanwhile, Deimling had had a relatively easy 41
time of it. He had reached Waterberg Station, and, not pausing as Trotha had planned, he
moved swiftly on to Hamakari, driving the Herero before him and through the gap that
Heyde’s immobility had created.139 The entire Herero people and those animals not already dying of thirst spilled out into the desert and escaped. Their warriors had suffered
relatively light casualties.140
Trotha was livid. He wanted to stand Heyde before a court-martial for disobeying battle orders and failing to establish radio contact, but he must have thought better of it.141 Instead, he dispatched a “lying report,” as Franke called it, which began, “The attack started
on the morning of 11 August with a complete victory.”142 And newspapers duly reported it
as such. But soldiers and observers knew better. In fact, nothing shows more convincingly
that Trotha and his troops had aimed not to let the Herero escape but to end the war with
one decisive victory than the intense disappointment, indeed the paralysis, that everybody
felt afterward. Capt. Heinrich von Welck, whose unit in the north had been part of the plan
but had not participated in the ﬁghting, later described the situation to his father:
Headquarters was not prepared for the eventuality that a people of sixty thousand
and perhaps as many cattle, could escape wholesale after so many months of careful preparation. The ﬁrst order came ﬁve days after the breakthrough; until then
complete planlessness reigned, and an unbelievable lack of supplies. Medical facilities were not remotely up to the large requirements. Wounded officers lay for
weeks on the ground and lacked the barest necessities. Horses died like ﬂies, because the Herero had left not a blade of grass. And then came typhus with its
dreadful victims, the result of the concentration of men and animals, of bad water
and little food.143
Trotha’s chief of staff, Lt. Col. Martin Chales de Beaulieu, was crushed. He called the
experienced Captain Franke for advice. Franke told him that “only a rapid retreat into
pastureland near the railroad could stop catastrophe. The chief of staff said quite openly
that the new directives [ordering pursuit of the Herero] were only intended for Berlin,
and his only goal was to hinder the complete collapse of the troops. He said convincingly
that he was completely surprised by the enemy, whom he had vastly underestimated.”144
German military doctrine called for energetic pursuit of the enemy in cases like this, and
138. Schwabe, Krieg in Deutsch-Südwestafrika, 279–80.
139. Ibid., 286; Auer v. Herrenkirchen, Meine Erlebnisse, 45.
140. Franke, diary entry, 20 Aug. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, pp. 99–100; Lettow-Vorbeck, diary
entry, 8 Dec. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 34; Rust, Krieg und Frieden, 381; Drechsler, “Let Us
Die Fighting,” 154.
141. Lequis, diary entry, 30 Aug. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lequis, Nr. 17, p. 40.
142. Franke, diary entry, 18 Aug. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 98; Trotha tel., 12 Aug. 1904,
Hamakari, reprinted in Rust, Krieg und Frieden, 376–77.
143. Heinrich v. Welck to his father, Waterberg, 16 Dec. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, MSg. 2, Nr. 3039 (Baron v.
Welck).
144. Franke, diary entry, 16 Aug. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, pp. 95–96.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
42 that is what the “new directives” dictated.145 Because of the exhaustion of troops and
horses, and the hope that the Herero might stop and permit a “real battle,” Trotha ordered the pursuit to begin only on the 13th.146 But the war diary for Deimling’s unit for
that day reads tersely: “Men are very exhausted”; it noted that there was no water or feed
for the horses.147 And Deimling’s had been the most successful unit at Waterberg. Trotha
was thunderstruck. “I think I’ll collapse,” he noted in his diary.
This 30 km pursuit only makes sense if we can catch the Herero who have a 24
hour head start. . . . I thought they [Deimling, etc.] had 3 days’ oats and rations,
which I would have stretched to 4. . . . So, we’ve just frittered away 48 hours just
to be able to report back home that we pursued them for 30 km and can’t go any
further. Ha. . . . Now we can or must start from the beginning, or else it’s ﬁnished.
We must above all stop them from coming back into the territory.148
He broke off the pursuit immediately.149
The official history of the campaign, written by the historical section of the General
Staff, subsequently took pains to deny that Trotha had ever intended “to encircle the
Herero and force them to surrender à la Sedan.”150 Deimling and staff officer Schwabe
loyally tried to uphold this line, but neither they nor the official history could manage to
dissemble consistently.151 Everyone knew that Waterberg was supposed to be a textbook
concentric battle ending in complete victory.152 Trotha wrote later to Schlieffen, “The operations plan I made originally and held fast to was to surround the majority of Herero at
the Waterberg and to destroy them with a simultaneous blow, then to build stations to
search out and disarm the ones who escaped, and using bounties on the heads of the cap145. Trotha tel., 12 Aug. 1904, Hamakari, reprinted in Rust, Krieg und Frieden, 376–77.
146. Schwabe, Krieg in Deutsch-Südwestafrika, 293.
147. Entry of 13 Aug. 1904, “Nordfeldzug: Kriegstagebuch des Regimentsstabes des 2. Feldregiments für
SWA,” BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Deimling, Nr. 7.
148. Trotha diary, 13 Aug. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, 29–30.
149. Franke, diary entries, 13–14 Aug. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, pp. 93–94; Auer v. Herrenkirchen, Meine Erlebnisse, 45; Lequis, diary entry, 30 Aug. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lequis, Nr. 17, p. 40.
Bridgman’s claim that “no attempt was made to stop the escaping Hereros nor were they harassed,” so that they
would escape further into the desert to their doom, is simply incorrect. Bridgman, Revolt, 124–25, 122.
150. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:134. Trotha later claimed that, because he could not
concentrate the entire 4,000-man force in the colony, Waterberg was not meant to be the classic “decisive battle”: Trotha to Schlieffen, 27 Aug. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, Anhang 1, Nr. 2.
151. Cf. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:170–71, 185, where it admits the breakthrough was a
mistake. Cf. also Deimling, Südwestafrika, 30, with Deimling, Aus der alten in die neue Zeit, 66; and Schwabe,
Krieg in Deutsch-Südwestafrika, 235–36, where he begins by denying the intent to provoke a decisive battle by encirclement and ends by admitting it.
152. Apart from Trotha’s own clear description of his intentions in the “Directive for the attack against the
Herero,” 4 Aug. 1904, General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:153, see Arnold Lequis: “Waterberg was
planned as a great concentric battle à la Sedan,” BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lequis, Nr. 35, p. 343; Franke, diary entry,
5 Aug. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 85; Rohrbach, diary entry, 10 Aug. 1904, Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 167; Rust, Krieg und Frieden, 365; Estorff, Kriegserlebnisse, 92; Auer v. Herrenkirchen, Erlebnisse, 14; Dannhauer’s reports in the Berliner Lokalanzeiger 310 (5 July 1904), 1; 319 (10 July 1904), 1; 331 (17 July
1904), 1; and 343 (24 July 1904), 1, among others.

Waterberg
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
tains to bring them into my control and punish them with death.”153 The shock was all the 43
greater because of Trotha’s overconﬁdence. The commander had telegraphed the General
Staff at the end of July that “I believe I will have a complete success.”154 He had ordered a
huge detention area erected of thorn branches and barbed wire in Okahandja—large
enough to imprison eight thousand men, the highest German estimate of the warrior
strength of the Herero at the battle of Waterberg.155 Franke reported Trotha had even ordered one thousand chains from Berlin, for the Herero prisoners he expected to take.156
For his part, Governor Leutwein had invited the missionaries to meet with Commissioner
Rohrbach on 9 and 10 August to decide how to feed, house, and then distribute the prisoners.157 Private companies had even begun to place bids for prisoner-workers.158 Instead, after months of expensive and difficult preparations, the Herero had vanished and
the war was not over. The question now was, What to do after Waterberg?
153. Trotha to Schlieffen, 27 Aug. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, Anhang 1, Nr. 2, p. 2; also cited in Gewald, Towards Redemption, 206, following Gerhardus Pool, Samuel Maherero (Windhuk, 1991), 251.
154. Trotha to General Staff, tel. arr. Berlin 20 July 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2115, p. 124.
155. Paul Rohrbach, Deutsche Kolonialwirtschaft, 2 vols. (Berlin, 1907), 1:342; Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas
schweren Tagen (diary entry of 10 Aug. 1904), 167, 169.
156. Franke, diary entry, 16 Aug. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 96.
157. Dannert, Lang, Hanefeld, Elger, Brockmann, and Wandres to Rohrbach, Karibib, 1 Aug. 1904, VEMWuppertal, “Care” (Fürsorge), C/o 5; Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 167.
158. District Administrator (Bezirksamtmann) Burgsdorff to Governor, Nr. 1364, Gibeon, 18 Aug. 1904, BABerlin, Kaiserliches Gouvernement Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika, Zentralbureau Windhoek (R 151 F), D.IV.L.3., vol.
1, p. 1 (hereafter BA-Berlin, R 151 F, etc.).

21
Pursuit and Annihilation

T

he “failure” of Waterberg was a disaster only because the expectations for victory
were so unreasonably high. In fact, the German troops had defeated the Herero,
who thereafter offered no systematic resistance. This was the kind of victory that
Governor Leutwein had thought the Germans might have achieved in June, and
now that it had come in August, he encouraged missionaries to contact General v. Trotha
and offer to mediate a negotiated end to the war.1 Herero clans began indicating from August onward that they were prepared to surrender.2 Trotha later maintained that he never
learned, either from the missionaries or indirectly from the Herero, that a surrender might
be possible.3 Trotha’s denial is probably disingenuous, for even in November when he
learned deﬁnitely that some Herero leaders wished to capitulate, he refused to treat with
them.4 He later (1909) explained why. If Heyde’s unit had been in the right place, the Herero
would not have broken through.
1. Leutwein to Conferenzvorstand, Windhuk, 17 Aug. 1904, copy, VEM-Wuppertal, Diehl papers, B/c II 35,
3, p. 107.
2. Actually, the ﬁrst attempt to surrender occurred in mid-July, before Waterberg (see ch. 1). The clans offering surrender after Waterberg were those at Waterberg (under Salatiel), at Omaruru (under Mutate), and at
Ojimbingue: Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 178; Schwabe, Krieg in Südwestafrika, 298; testimony
of Daniel and Samuel Kariko, in Union of South Africa, Report on the Natives, 63; the 1st Field Regt., 8th Comp.
(Welck) to the father of their commander, Waterberg, 5 Feb. 1905, BA-MA Freiburg, MSg. 2, Nr. 3039 (Welck).
3. Trotha to Bülow, Windhuk, 6 Jan. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 138–39; Bley, South-West Africa, 162.
4. Trotha to Bülow, Windhuk, 6 Jan. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 138–39; and Trotha to Leutwein,
Windhuk, 5 Nov. 1904, ibid., pp. 101–3. Trotha also forgot Salatiel’s offer to negotiate in July 1904. Cf. Trotha,
diary entries, 13 and 17 July 1904, with entries of 10 Dec. 1904 and 17 Nov. 1904, and Estorff to Trotha, Owinana,
12 Dec. 1904, Böttlin to Salatiel, Oruinjoroujombonde, 12 July 1904, Estorff to Trotha, tel. Otjatjingene, 16 July
1904, Trotha to Estorff, Funkentel. Headquarters, 17 July 1904, Leutwein to Foreign Office, copy K. 3862, Auf Erlass vom 28 Feb. 1905, Nr. K 1714/8049, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, pp. 19, 20, 55, 66, and Anhang 1, Nrs. 23a–e.

44

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
If this had been the case, then the possibility of negotiation would have existed,
and a regular court would have brought the murderers and ringleaders to the gallows; the weapons and cows would have gone to the government, and the rest of
the tribes would have returned to the sunshine of the All-Highest [i.e., His
Majesty’s] mercy. As the situation was, however, there could be no question of negotiations on the 12th and 13th [of August], if one did not want to testify to one’s
own weakness and embarrassment [Ohnmacht und Verlegenheit]. This would
have been immediately clear to the enemy and would have meant a renewal of the
war as soon as the band had recovered from the ﬁrst shock.5
To Trotha, then, anything less than a total military victory was evidence of weakness,
which, if not rectiﬁed, encouraged aggression on the part of one’s enemies, and thus endangered security. The logic of this situation required that he continue to try to achieve
total military victory. And this is exactly what he did. The ﬁrst default method for doing
so was the decisive, concentric battle; when that failed, the second default method of German military doctrine called for a relentless pursuit of the enemy, forcing them to turn
and ﬁght, thus giving the technologically superior force the edge and bringing the war victoriously to a close.
“Pursuit” (Verfolgung) was thus what Trotha ordered in his ﬁrst telegram after Waterberg. The parlous condition of the German troops and their mounts in the end dictated
that only two smaller, relatively resilient units chased the Herero people from waterhole
to waterhole along the riverbeds Eiseb and Epukiro, harrying them farther and farther
into the Omaheke Desert. When pursuit was no longer possible, Trotha ordered the desert
“sealed off,” so that survivors could not trickle back into the colony. This action killed a
majority of the Herero population. The slide from pursuit to outright annihilation is what
we must next examine.

Pursuit
“Pursuit” was represented in the military telegrams, and at least partly experienced by
the German participants, as a normal military procedure. The official history lists twentysix further “battles,” “patrol engagements,” or “pursuit-battles” in its battle calendar from
15 August to 22 December.6 Only one of these, the ﬁrst, might have rated that description,
however; for here (at Omatupa), the Herero attacked the pursuing Germans. They were
quickly thrown back, and “thereafter, their last systematic resistance was broken,”7 or, as
Colonel Deimling later summarized, “There were no real battles during the pursuit—the
Herero’s resistance was completely broken.”8

5. Lothar v. Trotha, “Politik und Kriegführung,” Berliner Neueste Nachrichten 60 (3 Feb. 1909), 1.
6. “Gefecht,” “Patrouillengefecht,” “Verfolgungsgefecht”; General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen,
1:338–39.
7. Estorff, “Kriegserlebnisse,” 92.
8. Deimling, Südwestafrika, 30.

45

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
46

Nonetheless, the pursuit continued. Its ostensible aim was “to force the enemy to do
battle,” as Trotha repeated to his commanders on 26 August.9 This remained the aim until
the end of September, when Trotha made a last effort “to try to surround the enemy.”10
The division chaplain accompanying the exhausted troopers noted on 24 September:
“Today at 5 am begins the march to what will hopefully be the last battle.”11 This was supposed to take place at “the last waterholes, so that further escape without ﬁghting will no
longer be possible.”12 But the desperation of the surviving Herero made them move
quickly; they escaped again, and the “last” battle ﬁzzled out.
While August and September thus brought frustration to the Germans, they brought
mass death to the Herero. A great number, especially the old, ill, and women and children, died of starvation and thirst as they ran for their lives through the desert. But a great
many were also shot to death, for the conduct of the war changed with Waterberg. The
brutal potential of colonial warfare, sporadically evident even under Governor Leutwein,
now burgeoned into methodical regularity.
Witnesses, whose testimony we will examine momentarily, describe the wholesale
shooting of civilians and captured Herero immediately after the battle of Waterberg. We
must again ask whether Trotha ordered this. One witness says he did. During the First
World War, Trotha’s former African groom in SWA, Manuel Timbu, told British authorities that “when leaving Okahandja [on 9 July 1904], General von Trotha issued orders to
his troops that no quarter was to be given to the enemy. No prisoners were to be taken,
but all, regardless of age or sex, were to be killed. General v. Trotha said, ‘We must exterminate them, so that we won’t be bothered with rebellions in the future.’ ”13
Timbu’s testimony says two separate things: all Herero, combatants and civilians,
were immediately to be shot (not ﬁrst taken prisoner and then shot); and this action was
meant to exterminate the entire people (not just to deliver a message of “terrorism,” in
Trotha’s earlier phrase, or to relieve troops of the burden of taking prisoners). Although
the mass shootings he witnessed are undeniable, there is reason to believe that in the intervening years Timbu’s memory had elided two separate events: the sharpening of the
war to the point of massacre at Waterberg and the intent to exterminate.
Archival records, diaries, and memoirs mention no order of either kind, even when
they record the events themselves and/or condemn Trotha’s leadership and policies.
Moreover, the huge kraal for prisoners that Trotha had built would have been nonsensical
had he already ordered extermination. There are many accounts of prisoners taken or giving information, even in the period from August to October.14 Finally, there is evidence
that Trotha was dismayed by the troops’ behavior, and acted to limit the massacres.
9. Kommando der Schutztruppe to all commanders, Owikokorero, 26 Aug. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl.
Deimling, Nr. 7; also Anonymous, “Patrouillenritte in Südwestafrika,” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und
Heereskunde 2, no. 3 (1905): 452.
10. Trotha to Bülow, tel., Okahandja, 25 Sept. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2116, p. 25.
11. Max Schmidt, Aus unserem Kriegsleben in Südwestafrika (Berlin, 1907), 50.
12. Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 192, emphasis in original.
13. Testimony of Manuel Timbu, Union of South Africa, Report on the Natives, 63.
14. References to prisoners between 11 Aug. and the beginning of Oct. 1904: Lettow-Vorbeck’s diary entries
for Aug. and Sept. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 34; war diary of the regimental staff of the
2nd Field Regiment, entries of 6 Sept., 28 Sept., 3 Oct., 4 Oct. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Deimling, Nr. 7;

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
It seems likely that over ten years after the event, when he gave his testimony, Timbu’s 47
memory had elided Trotha’s infamous “extermination order” of 2 October 1904, which
ordered something close to “no quarter” and which we will analyze presently, with the
bloody scenes he had seen during the pursuit.15 Knowing that the pursuit annihilated the
Herero, and knowing that Trotha issued an order to this effect, it was logical to “remember” that the extermination order preceded the events. Other, later accounts make the
identical chronological error.16
Let us consider the evidence for the conduct of the troops directly after Waterberg.
Despite the preparations for great numbers of prisoners, none in fact were taken at the
battle.17 The unexpected escape of the Herero is the main reason, but indiscriminate
shooting massacred stragglers who ought to have become prisoners. Capt. Viktor Franke,
who fought with Deimling’s unit at Waterberg, has left us the most candid account,
recorded immediately in his diary. He ridiculed the overwrought atmosphere among the
German soldiers. “We come across a strong Herero clan [on 12 August] with several hundred cattle, we deploy against it and—shoot a woman dead.” Later that day he noted with
disgust: “In the camp a Herero woman and child are shot dead; the former requires two
shots, the latter one. Vile group.”18 The camp in question was Trotha’s, whose diary entry
for that date says he ordered an old Herero woman hanged; he does not mention a child.19
Altogether, Franke excoriated the behavior of officers and men:
I have contempt for this whole society, because I see only egotistical ends being
followed and to those ends only the worst means being used. I continuously observe traits that make me appalled at the lack of discipline of these new, young
soldiers. This kind of incompetence on the part of the leadership in combination
with such poorly disciplined soldiers must lead to a catastrophe in a war against
Germany’s enemies at home.20

Anonymous, “Patrouillenritte,” refers to prisoners on four occasions, 480, 481, 484; war diary of 3rd Field
Comp., Naval Infantry Battalion, entries of 26 Sept., 1 Oct., 5 Oct.; Trotha to Bülow, tel., northeast of Epata, 1
Oct. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2116, pp. 35–36; Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 195–96; Estorff, Wanderungen,
117; Auer v. Herrenkirchen, Erlebnisse, 62.
15. Accompanying Trotha, Timbu could not have seen such things much later, because Trotha left the
“front” in mid-October 1904 and thereafter managed the war from the rear. Another African witness who testiﬁed to Trotha extolling “extermination” placed his statement after Waterberg, in September. Hendrik Campbell, in Union of South Africa, Report of the Natives, 65.
16. Paul Leutwein, Afrikanerschicksal, 128; Union of South Africa, Report on the Natives, 59–67, which makes
it appear that the eyewitness testimonies of Africans refer to events after Trotha’s proclamation. Cf. Helmut W.
Smith, “The Talk of Genocide, the Rhetoric of Miscegenation,” in The Imperialist Imagination, ed. Sara
Friedrichsmeyer, Sara Lennox, and Susanne Zantop (Ann Arbor, 1998), pp. 107–23, here 109–10. Even Drechsler,
who knows the chronology very well, bows to the logic by beginning his account of “Von Trotha’s Conduct of
the War” with the proclamation: Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 156–62.
17. Leutwein to Burgsdorff, answer to Nr. 1364, Windhuk, 27 Aug. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 151 F, D.IV.L.3., vol. 1,
p. 1; Salzmann, Im Kampfe, 119.
18. Franke, diary entry, 12 Aug. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, pp. 92–93, emphasis in original.
19. Trotha, diary, 12 Aug. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, 29. Trotha gave no reason. Manuel Timbu testiﬁed to
two incidents shortly after Waterberg, the bayoneting of a woman and the shooting of two old Herero women,
both allegedly in Trotha’s presence. Union of South Africa, Report of the Natives, 64, 63.
20. Franke, diary entry, 15 Aug. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 95.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
48 Franke had a latitudinarian understanding of discipline, which included simple decorum
and orderliness; nevertheless, from the context and from the phrase “worst means,” it is
clear that he was referring to atrocities, like the shooting of captured women. The leadership’s “incompetence” in this case must refer to Trotha’s gratuitously ruthless hanging
order; Franke worried that such incompetence fed wider “indiscipline” among troops
whom officers would then be incapable of controlling.
Another of Franke’s diary entries (20 August) indicates what had become the expected manner of dealing with Herero of both sexes: “On the way I took a few prisoners,
a man and several women. I couldn’t bring myself to shoot the miserable creatures.”21
Whether Franke meant he took them prisoner because he couldn’t bring himself to shoot
them, or whether he couldn’t bring himself to shoot them after he had taken them prisoner, is not clear from his terseness. Either way, it is obvious that the troops were expected
to dispatch the Herero, men and women, whom they found. Franke’s account does not
tell us whether this expectation was official (ordered), quasi-official (by example, as with
Trotha’s behavior in camp), or had grown out of the practice of the troops in the nine days
since the nondecisive “decisive” battle.
African testimony tells us how widespread indiscriminate shooting was directly after
Waterberg. We owe these accounts to the British seizure of SWA during the First World
War. The occupation government collected testimonies under oath from Africans and
some whites who had witnessed German conduct during the uprising. The British were
intent on proving the Germans incapable of running a colony humanely and thus bolstering their case for administering SWA themselves. The original affidavits have apparently been lost, but excerpts were published in 1918.22 The overtly propagandistic motive
for collecting the testimonies has led some people to discount them entirely.23 That is unfortunate, as the motive clearly distorted the accompanying narrative, which is replete
with errors, but not necessarily the witnesses’ statements, which are reprinted verbatim.
Two different groups of witnesses gave testimony: one on German conduct during the
war and another on conditions in the prison camps (three witnesses overlapped). Detailed archival records on the camps make it possible to check those testimonies, and they
turn out to be reliable. Eleven men, all nonwhite, gave statements about war conduct. Five
were people of high social status (an underchief, a headman, a son of an underchief, an
appointed chief, and one war commandant). Only four of the eleven were Herero. The
difficulty in assessing their testimony does not come from British propaganda but from
the length of time separating them from what they had witnessed. Date and place are
sometimes difficult to establish, and one must be wary of the tendency of memory to rearrange events into a more logical-seeming ex post facto order, as we have seen with
21. Franke, diary entry, 20 Aug. 1904, Ojianjondju, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 99.
22. The national archives of South Africa, Namibia, and Great Britain have been unable to locate the originals: L. Coetzee (head, National Archives Repository) to I. V. Hull, Pretoria, 27 Jan. 1997; J. Kutzner (acting head
of Archives) to I. V. Hull, Windhuk, 6 Dec. 1996; and M. K. Banton (Public Record Office) to I. V. Hull, Kew, 29
Nov. 1996. Union of South Africa, Report on the Natives.
23. Sudholt, who denies both genocide and atrocity, does not mention them, once he brands their source
“war propaganda”: Sudholt, Eingeborenenpolitik, 40–41, 185–89, 219n2.

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Manuel Timbu. But there is no reason to assume that the Africans’ memories were any 49
faultier than the Germans’. If the testimonies are used critically, they present rare evidence independent of that of the white Schutztruppler.
Three witnesses described systematic practices (as opposed to isolated atrocities) that
occurred directly after the battle of Waterberg. Manuel Timbu, General v. Trotha’s
groom, “saw the bleeding bodies of hundreds of men, women and children, old and
young, lying along the roads as we passed. . . . I know of no instance in which prisoners
were spared.”24 Another witness was Jan Cloete, a “Bastard” (which in the parlance of
SWA meant a member of a recognized and loyal group of Africans of “mixed blood”)
from Omaruru who served under Captain Richard in the 4th Field Company (Deimling)
at Waterberg. “After the battle, all men, women and children, wounded and unwounded,
who fell into the hands of the Germans were killed without mercy. The Germans then pursued the others, and all stragglers on the roadside and in the veld were shot down and bayoneted. The great majority of the Herero men were unarmed and could make no ﬁght.”25
A third witness, Jan Kubas from Grootfontein, also reported that at Waterberg and immediately afterward “the Germans took no prisoners. They killed thousands and thousands of women and children along the roadsides. . . . I saw this every day; I was with
them.”26
These statements conﬁrm that Franke’s account was not idiosyncratic; the indiscriminate shooting of civilians had become common practice. To empathetic observers, especially years later, it seemed ubiquitous. They experienced the bloodshed as so massive that
they described it as “taking no prisoners,” although we know that some prisoners were
taken. Nonetheless, their subjective reality tallied with the general scope of the disaster.
Finally, conﬁrmation of the massacres comes from General v. Trotha himself. His
chief of staff, Lieutenant Colonel de Beaulieu, reported to the General Staff that directly
after Waterberg “the general had forbidden killing women and children, but all armed
men who were captured had seen their last hour.”27 Because killing women and children
was one of the strongest taboos operating in modern armies, an order explicitly forbidding it would only be necessary if the taboo had already been massively broken. Trotha’s
order therefore attempted to reestablish control—Franke would have said “discipline”—
among the troops.
Trotha’s post-Waterberg order extended to troops what he had already ordered for ofﬁcers in June 1904: that “following the customs of war officers are permitted to shoot
without trial black inhabitants who are caught committing treasonous acts against German troops, for example, all rebels who are found armed and with warlike intent.” Other
Africans suspected of “criminal acts” were to be handed over to ﬁeld courts-martial.28
24. Union of South Africa, Report on the Natives, 64.
25. Ibid. The Report misspells Richard’s name.
26. Ibid., 65.
27. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:186; also Schlieffen to Bülow, Nr. 13297, Berlin, 16 Dec.
1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, p. 107.
28. Trotha order of June 1904, Namibian National Archives, Windhuk, ZBU Geheimakten IX.Z. Bd. 1, B. 1b,
cited in Zimmerer, “Kriegsgefangene,” 282.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
50 From the moment of his arrival, Trotha had thus raised the level of violence by effectively
ordering all armed males shot. Under Leutwein, captured warriors were supposed to be
court-martialed, and only after the appropriate verdict, executed. We have seen that the
pressure to “punish” the rebels had encouraged the tendency to shoot warriors within a
day or two of their capture. (Until they rose up against the Germans themselves, Witbooi
[Nama] soldiers allied with the Schutztruppe often performed the executions.)29 Now the
legal niceties were openly dispensed with. Trotha’s order was ambivalent, for it undermined one taboo (shooting those who surrender) while trying to keep another (not
harming women or children, or, presumably, unarmed males). Furthermore, the phrases
“treasonous acts” and “warlike intent” easily expanded from armed males to all males,
and even beyond, in that the whole people was in revolt. Even without an explicit directive
to take no quarter (and none has surfaced in the records), Trotha’s order of June 1904 already headed dangerously in that direction. Beaulieu’s ﬂip phrase “had seen their last
hour” conﬁrmed the atmosphere of casual violence that Trotha had emboldened under
his command.
Trotha’s directive in June to shoot armed males might explain Manuel Timbu’s memory of a sharp order in early July (which he later conﬂated with the exterminatory practices of October and November). Like most German officers, Trotha often used “Herero”
to refer to male warriors, as in the phrase from his diary about a patrol that “shot two
Herero, who were standing there with women and cattle.”30 That usage, together with
Trotha’s vocal racism, could easily have been interpreted to mean he intended harsher
measures to apply to the whole society.
Trotha’s June order would also explain Paul Rohrbach’s repeated emphasis on
Trotha’s goal, “the absolute destruction of the enemy” (14 July), and his “officially proclaimed program of destruction” (16 August) to characterize methods of warfare that
Rohrbach rejected as wasteful.31 That Rohrbach did not interpret these methods as exterminatory we know from his personal observation of the great prisoner kraal at Okahandja
and from his participation in the pre-Waterberg meetings to distribute prisoners. But he
was obviously uneasy about Trotha’s sharper means. And there are indications that Governor Leutwein interpreted troop behavior at the Waterberg as Trotha’s fault. The day
after the “victory” of Waterberg was ﬁrst reported in the Berliner Lokalanzeiger,
Dannhauer, who enjoyed excellent relations with Leutwein, wrote that the governor was
contemplating returning to Germany, allegedly to regain his health.32 It took a great deal
to pry Leutwein loose from his office; the mere breakthrough at the Waterberg would not
have accounted for his reaction. Only months later did Leutwein “regain his health” in
29. Krüger, Kriegsbewältigung, 86–87. Colonial powers often used indigenous collaborators to kill members
of other clans, even to the point of near genocide, as in Australia. See Alison Palmer, Colonial Genocide (Adelaide, 2000), 48–49.
30. Trotha, diary entry, 19 Aug. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, p. 32.
31. Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 165, 168. Rohrbach, like most economists, assumed males
were superior to female workers.
32. Berliner Lokalanzeiger, Nr. 386, 18 Aug. 1904, p. 1.

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
this way, his departure precipitated precisely by his disagreement with Trotha’s by then 51
open and actual policy of extermination.
Finally, Trotha’s order to intensify violence against Herero men helps explain why all
of a sudden German troops unleashed their potential for massacre. Most of the German
troops at the Waterberg were recent reinforcements; they were inexperienced, poorly led,
tired, frustrated, hungry, but haughty. Such troops, encouraged to break some taboos,
were unlikely to observe others. Trotha’s open statements approving inhumane warfare
and his gaudy trumpeting of the goal of “destruction of the enemy” created an atmosphere in which soldiers felt that massacre was approved, and even expected. Nonetheless,
the massacre at the Waterberg cannot be equated with extermination. Administrative
massacre is one of the way stations to that goal, but it is not identical with it, and in most
situations does not lead to it.
Whatever Trotha’s direct responsibility for troop behavior, his post-Waterberg order
tried to direct and therefore limit violence. Did he succeed? How did the Schutztruppe
conduct itself from mid-August until Trotha’s extermination proclamation of 2 October?
At least one trooper did not wait to ﬁnd out. On 21 August, Franke quit the pursuing
troops, whose goals and means he so abjured. As a hero, ill with malaria and with administrative experience to offer, that route was open to him. The troops Franke left behind in
the columns of Estorff and Deimling continued their work of pursuit. The surviving diary
accounts mostly note the number of dead Herero at the end of a “battle,” but not the
manner of their death, or their age, or their sex. Not all of the troops behaved badly, of
course. One anonymous reporter in Deimling’s unit describes seeing unarmed Herero
and not shooting at them, and, at another time, capturing twenty women and making efforts to provide them with water.33 But the pressure to kill the Herero, rather than to spare
them, continued to be very strong. The same reporter describes an incident from around
10 September. Their patrol spotted
ﬂeeing men and women, who made signs of wanting to surrender. As I was proceeding to take them prisoner, my guide, NCO Kutschke, started shooting against
my orders. That caused them to run. Now we all shot at them, but because we did
so from our horses, the results were naturally few, only two or three Herero
fell. . . . I gathered my people again and forbade further shooting without my
order.34
This episode reveals two strong tendencies in the practice of the pursuit troops. First,
that, even with orders to the contrary, ordinary soldiers thought it right to shoot at nonthreatening (i.e., surrendering or unarmed) Herero. Second, once Herero began to run
away, they became legitimate targets, even for the officer who had wanted to take them
prisoner. Shooting at all ﬂeeing Africans thus appears to have become or, after Waterberg,
33. Anonymous, “Patrouillenritte,” 457, 480.
34. Ibid., 462.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
52 to have remained customary practice; and ﬂeeing people were the most common targets
the soldiers encountered. The 3rd Field Company of the Naval Infantry Battalion, which
was still operating around the Waterberg, noted without embarrassment or extenuating
circumstance the following incident from 19 September: “Enemy, almost entirely without
weapons, ﬂees into the cliffs of the Waterberg, which we then partly climb. Three to four
of the hiding Herero are shot in the process. The company has no losses.”35 Obviously, the
official company diarist did not expect censure for these actions. These examples indicate
that the spiral of violence continued to envelop the entire Herero population as a legitimate target.
Despite the tendency to shoot at Herero, rather than to attempt to capture them,
some prisoners were taken. Their fate was not secure, however. Another African witness
questioned during World War I, Hendrik Campbell, commanded the “Bastard” unit that
accompanied Estorff ’s troops during the pursuit until October 1904. In the ﬁrst week of
September, his unit captured seventy Herero after a “battle.”
I handed them over to Oberleutnants Volkmann and Zelow [sic, actually Zülow].
I then went on patrol, and returned two days later, to ﬁnd the Herero all lying
dead in a kraal. My men reported to me that they had all been shot and bayoneted
by the German soldiers. Shortly afterwards, General von Trotha and his staff accompanied by two missionaries, visited the camp.
When Campbell and Zülow argued about what had happened in front of Trotha, Trotha
replied, “The entire Herero people must be exterminated.”36 Unfortunately, Campbell
does not tell us whether nonmales and noncombatants were among the seventy, so we
cannot tell if this mass shooting applied the courts-martial rule to males, or targeted
women and children, too. In any event, Campbell’s statement does conﬁrm Trotha’s recollection that the general had decided sometime in September to extend destruction to
the whole people.
Trotha’s diary chronicles how he arrived at that decision. On 27 August Trotha ended
his report to Schlieffen on the military situation since Waterberg with the words “it can
still come to a wearying guerilla war [Einzelkriegführung].”37 Trotha said nothing to indicate plans beyond pursuit. Two days later, Leutwein’s recommendation to negotiate
jogged him further. For the ﬁrst time Trotha laid out his radical alternative to negotiation:
“For the present I will stick with my idea to pursue and ﬁght them wherever I can, or to
drive them [through the desert] into English territory and then leave a strong border oc-

35. War diary, 3rd Field Comp., Naval Infantry Battalion, Waterberg, 19 Sept. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, RM
121 I, Nr. 434.
36. Union of South Africa, Report on the Natives, 65. The “battle” can be dated by Campbell’s reference to
Otjimbende, where he captured the Herero. The Herero quit Otjimbende on 5 Sept., when Estorff ’s troops
moved in: General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:194–95; 2:338.
37. Trotha to Schlieffen, 27 Aug. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, Anhang 1, Nr. 2, p. 4.

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
cupation there [so they could not return].”38 The only two possibilities were therefore 53
military victory or the permanent disappearance of the Herero across the border.
Throughout September Trotha pressed to corner the Herero in battle. On 2 September:
“They have only the hope for a battle that might go better for them or the hopeless escape
into the desert”; 3 September: “So, again pursuit”; 6 September: “After them until either
they or we can’t go on.” On the 23rd Trotha again rejected negotiations (Estorff ’s plea):
“No, my friend, nothing will come of that, so that we have to begin again at the beginning.
We will ﬁght as long as it takes.”39
However, neither water nor provisions were sufficient to carry out Trotha’s plan.
Noncombatant Africans (women, children, and the so-called Feldherero, the impoverished non-cattleowners who eeked out an existence on the veld) ﬂed the ﬁghting, seeking
water and food at the waterholes now occupied by German forces. Sharing provisions
meant stopping operations. Rather than give up the chimera of military victory by calling
off the pursuit, Trotha ordered these people driven back into the desert. On 13 September
Trotha’s diary reads: “Feldherero, women, and children come in droves asking for water.
I have given renewed orders to drive them all back with force.”40 That Trotha had to repeat the order meant that provisioning had been completely inadequate the entire time
and that at least some troops were reluctant to behave so brutally toward civilians.
The pursuit of military victory, the pure victory of superior force, under conditions in
which it was impossible to achieve ended in the mass death of noncombatants. That result
was compatible with Trotha’s racist views, but it actually evolved from standard military
doctrine and practices. If these practices were not limited by negotiations (or other
brakes), they spiraled into ever widening swaths of destruction. It remained only to declare the resulting extermination as policy, which was easy given Trotha’s racist worldview.
In February 1905 the missionary August Kuhlmann received information about the
pursuit from a surviving Herero named Victor. Victor described how the hunted Herero
disintegrated into smaller and smaller groups as the Germans pursued them, and how
they died of agonizing thirst in the desert. “As soon as the troops broke off pursuit for lack
of water, the people streamed back, driven by desperation. Many came upon the troops’
waterholes and were shot to death there.” Victor also was the source for Kuhlmann’s observation that “in general, most prisoners were shot to death during the pursuit.”41 Victor
describes shooting at noncombatants and killing prisoners (of unspeciﬁed sex and age)
already taken.
We should expect that there was a spectrum of behavior among soldiers during the
pursuit, which took place in small, isolated patrols, where much must have depended on
the particular persons involved. But these examples show that the slide from shooting
38. Trotha, diary, 29 Aug. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, p. 35.
39. Trotha, diary entries, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, pp. 36, 37, 38, 42; also cited in Gewald, Towards Redemption, 208, following Pool, Samuel Maherero, 270.
40. Trotha, diary, 13 Sept. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, p. 40.
41. August Kuhlmann, “Report on the attempts to negotiate peace in Otjimbingue,” 16 Feb. 1905, VEMWuppertal, Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72, 10–15, here 13, 15.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
54 warriors to shooting civilians, and from court-martialing to simply shooting all males,
continued to characterize the “ﬁghting” as a common, but perhaps not ubiquitous, practice after August.42 Trotha admitted as much when he told the chancellor on 1 October
1904 that “a part of the people would like to surrender, but fear being shot to death and
punished.”43 The targeting of males only, which was Trotha’s ostensible aim in the postWaterberg order, did have an effect, however. That is evident in the very uneven demographic ratio of women to men among the surviving Herero after the war (6 or 7:1), especially when one recalls how few Herero were killed in battle.44 Military practice thus
targeted adult males systematically, even when its violence often engulfed others.
The Herero Victor’s statement underscores that the overwhelming majority of deaths
came in the desert, as a result of the very conception of the pursuit, not from the manner
in which it was carried out. Most Herero died out of sight and earshot of their pursuers.
On 29 September the Germans received conﬁrmation of the destruction by an eyewitness,
the captured daughter of Herero leader Zacharias, who graphically described the disintegration and mass death of her people in the desert.45 Yet the officers could not quite believe her. One of the most astonishing aspects of the campaign of destruction is the cleft
between deed and recognition. Neither the evidence before their own eyes nor the implacable logic of the situation sufficed to convince the soldiers (or close, well-informed
observers) that the Schutztruppe had in fact annihilated the Herero. Trotha himself is the
best example of this disbelief. On 1 October, he reported to the chancellor the recent successes against Herero bands, the capture of cows and prisoners, and the information he
had received from Zacharias’s daughter:
Abandoned women and children conﬁrm the testimony of prisoners that the
enemy’s resistance is broken. There is supposed to be dissension among the captains; part of the people would like to surrender but fear being shot to death and
punished. The enemy is suffering badly for want of water; many people [zahlreiche Leute] including even those of high status are said to have died of thirst.
However, contrary to all previous information, the desert contains no lack of
pasturage and many freshly made waterholes. But it is impossible [for us] to operate with strong units there.46
Therefore, he was ordering the waterholes along the desert’s edge to be occupied, thus
sealing the Herero in the desert.
42. The testimonies in the Report of the Natives relate many examples of individual atrocities. These show a
high level of tolerance for violence against the unarmed and against civilians, and suggest an atmosphere of pervasive violence, but by their nature they cannot reveal how representative the episodes they describe were.
43. Trotha to Bülow, tel., northeast of Epata, 1 Oct. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2116, pp. 35–36.
44. Ratio: Medizinische Berichte über die deutschen Schutzgebiete, 1904–5 to 1908–9, cited in Karla Poewe,
The Namibian Herero (Lewiston, N.Y., 1985), 80. Casualties during war: the official history estimates “250?”—indicating their uncertainty. But the ﬁgure is still very small: General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:108.
45. Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 196.
46. Trotha to Bülow, tel. northeast of Epata, 1 Oct. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2116, pp. 35–36. The waterholes in question were dry: Estorff, Wanderungen, 117.

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
This unwillingness to believe their own success came from several sources. One was 55
the atmosphere of panic, frustration, and anxiety that the “failure” of Waterberg and then
especially the pursuit itself engendered. Major Lequis, in charge of provisioning, noted on
30 August that “the pursuit seems to have failed due to the complete exhaustion of the
troops, but above all due to the uncertainty of the guides about the landscape, waterholes,
and the lack of African informants. Such a guerilla war appears to make even the higher
staff [officers] hellishly nervous.”47 Trotha’s frustration was palpable in his reports to
Berlin.48 Many officers suspected the pursuit would turn out to be as equivocal as Waterberg had been.49 Altogether, the ignorance most officers shared about SWA and its people,
an ignorance that mightily fed their anxiety, was embodied in the unmapped Omaheke
Desert, whose fantastic, hidden sources of water and grass seemed as potentially believable as the equally fantastic idea that German troops had indeed destroyed an entire
people.
Surely, a second source of cognitive dissonance lay in the reluctance to take responsibility for wiping out masses of unarmed men, women, and children. The third source,
magniﬁed by the all-pervasive anxiety, was the fact that small groups of surviving Herero
did manage to slip through the cordon sanitaire back into the colony.50 Deprived of their
cattle, they resorted to theft and, thus, posed a continued threat to the vision of perfect
order the Schutztruppe were supposed to realize.
By the beginning of October, then, the post-Waterberg pursuit had reached a geographical limit. German troops, exhausted, lacking water and provisions, could go no further. The pursuit had long since turned into a program of annihilation. But officers vacillated between gloating over the destruction of the enemy and dreading that the Herero
still lurked somewhere in the desert, preparing to sneak back. It was under these circumstances that Trotha, on 2 October 1904, issued his extermination proclamation.

The Extermination Proclamation
Five days earlier, on 28 September, Trotha’s troops, still pursuing encirclement, had
attacked the last known waterhole in SWA, at Osombo-Windimbe along the dry Eiseb
riverbed. Trotha recorded the latest disappointment in his diary: “At 11 am we advanced
in a broad front against the waterhole. No enemy to be seen, and also no corpses from the
twenty artillery shots [with which they had prepared the attack]. . . . Geographically, the
battle was nicely military and it could have been a good one, if the band had not escaped.

47. Lequis, diary entry of 30 Aug. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lequis, Nr. 17, p. 40.
48. A good example: Trotha to General Staff, Oparakan, 14 Sept. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2116, p. 20.
49. For example: Franke, diary entries of 20 Aug. 1904, 27 Oct. 1904, BA-Koblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3,
pp. 99–100, 119–20; Lettow-Vorbeck, reporting the views of Lt. Nolte, 4 Dec. 1904, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. LettowVorbeck, Nr. 34; Salzmann (Nov. 1904), Im Kampfe, 170; Maercker, Unsere Kriegführung in Deutsch-Südwestafrika, 47; General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:212–13; Hermann v. François, Der Hottentotten-Aufstand (Berlin, 1905), 89; Belwe, Gegen die Herero, 110; also Rohrbach to parents, 2 Sept., Okahandja, BA-Koblenz,
Nl. Rohrbach, Nr. 67; and Rohrbach, 16 Aug. 1904, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 168.
50. Trotha to General Staff, tel., arr. Berlin 30 Oct. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2116, p. 98.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
56 The two units worked excellently together.”51 The next day they gathered a number of
surrendering Herero, some of whom they shot. On the 30th Trotha stopped the pursuit in
the Eiseb riverbed, where far ahead they could still glimpse the dust of the retreating
Herero. “If they want to stay here [in the desert], they can do so. I am not pursuing them
further. Basta.” Through the stench of dead cattle they dragged themselves back to the waterhole where they arrived at 5 pm Trotha wrote, “I am so tired [in English]. Our supplies
are at an end.”52
The following day Trotha recorded this diary entry: “In the afternoon worked up
proclamation to Herero with help from Kean and Philippus. Otherwise, nothing particular.”53 On 2 October Trotha ordered the prisoners to assemble. The men were hanged. To
the women he gave Herero translations of his proclamation, and then they were sent back
into the desert. The proclamation read:
I, the great general of the German soldiers, send this letter to the Herero people.
Herero are no longer German subjects. They have murdered, stolen, cut off the
ears and noses and other body parts from wounded soldiers, and now out of cowardice refuse to ﬁght. I say to the people: anyone delivering a captain to one of my
stations as a prisoner will receive one thousand marks; whoever brings in Samuel
Maherero will receive ﬁve thousand marks. The Herero people must leave this
land. If they do not, I will force them to do so by using the great gun [artillery].
Within the German border every male Herero, armed or unarmed, with or without cattle, will be shot to death. I will no longer receive women or children but
will drive them back to their people or have them shot at. These are my words to
the Herero people.54
To the German troops Trotha added the following explanation:
This proclamation is to be read to the troops at roll-call, with the addition that
the unit that catches a captain will also receive the appropriate reward, and that
shooting at women and children is to be understood as shooting above their
heads, so as to force them to run [away]. I assume absolutely that this proclamation will result in taking no more male prisoners, but will not degenerate into
atrocities against women and children. The latter will run away if one shoots at
them a couple of times. The troops will remain conscious of the good reputation
of the German soldier.

51. Trotha, diary, 28 Sept. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, p. 44.
52. Trotha, diary entries of 29 and 30 Sept. 1904, ibid., pp. 44–45.
53. Trotha, diary, 1 Oct. 1904, ibid., p. 45.
54. Trotha, Proclamation of 2 Oct. 1904, copy, J. Nr. 3737, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, p. 7; another copy in
“Kaiserliche Schutztruppen und sonstige deutsche Landstreitkräfte in Übersee” [RW 51], “Militärgeschichtliches
Forschungsamt: Dokumentenzentrale, Schutztruppe Südwestafrika” (vol. 2), BA-MA Freiburg. Reprinted in
Rust, Krieg und Frieden, 385; Vorwärts 294 (16 Dec. 1905); Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 243; Bridgman, Revolt,
128.

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Having issued these orders, Trotha left one unit, Estorff ’s, to continue harrying the 57
Herero, while the remaining, exhausted troops were simply to occupy the waterholes and
prevent the Herero from slipping back.
Not surprisingly, Trotha’s proclamation was the most controversial document of the
war. Before examining the controversies, however, it might be good to summarize what
the proclamation says. It begins by making a quasi-legal point, that the Herero are no
longer subjects (and thus are vogelfrei, that is, beyond the law and may be shot at). It suggests they have lost this status because of dishonorable military behavior (mutilation and
cowardice). It then offers rewards for further dishonorable behavior (selling out the leaders), but makes the conditions for fulﬁllment impossible (all Herero will be shot or shot
at, making it hard to see how they could deliver up their captains). The goal of the war is
the disappearance of all Herero. This can occur in two ways: by ﬂeeing to British territory,
or by dying.55 All adult men will be killed (this simply ratiﬁed ex post facto what was occurring anyway). Women and children will be driven by force back into the desert (where
most, having surrendered out of physical desperation anyway, would presumably die of
thirst or starvation). In the explanation to German troops, Trotha decreed that his proclamation was indeed an order and that soldiers could collect bounty, but he worried that
this manner of warfare could undermine discipline. So he warned that women and children must not be killed directly but simply driven away.
The three most controversial points surrounding the proclamation have been its context and thus Trotha’s aim; the extent to which it was put into practice; and the question
of who learned of it when. Concerning context, we must clear up one misunderstanding
at the outset. Some writers, noting the proximity of Trotha’s order to the Witbooi uprising in the colony’s south, have taken the logical-seeming path and interpreted the proclamation as Trotha’s desperate response to the news that he now had two revolts on his
hands.56 In fact, the Witbooi uprising broke out unexpectedly on the same day that Trotha
issued his proclamation, but over 500 km away. Trotha did not learn of the revolt until

55. With Trotha’s enunciation of intent to make all Herero disappear from SWA, together with his farreaching accomplishment in fulﬁlling this goal, he meets the qualiﬁcations that many authors have set for
“genocide.” Intended totality plus a real effort to achieve it, not the complete eradication of a people, are the
standards typically used to deﬁne a genocide. I believe historical analysis is better done freed of the fetters of this
legalistic and rather static deﬁnition and the typologies it has spawned, so that we can concentrate instead on
how genocide has sometimes developed from smaller causes in the absence of ideological motivation. Trotha’s
proclamation is interesting precisely because it was ex post facto: the annihilation had been occurring all along.
The “policy” followed and retroactively justiﬁed the actions that had spiraled from practices and doctrines as
they confronted an intractable situation. The following provide a good introduction to scholarly thinking on
“genocide”: Raphael Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe (Washington, D.C., 1944); Israel W. Charny,
“Toward a Generic Deﬁnition of Genocide,” in Genocide, ed. George J. Andreopoulos (Philadelphia, 1992),
65–94; Israel W. Charny, ed., Genocide (London, 1988); Chalk and Jonassohn, ed., History and Sociology of Genocide; Helen Fein, “Genocide, Terror, Life Integrity, and War Crimes,” in Genocide, ed. Andreopoulous, 95–107;
Zygmunt Bauman, Modernity and the Holocaust (Ithaca, N.Y., 1989); Yehuda Bauer, Rethinking the Holocaust
(New Haven, 2001); and Norman Naimark, Fires of Hatred (Cambridge, Mass., 2001).
56. Tilman Dedering, “The German-Herero War of 1904,” Journal of Southern African Studies 19:1 (March
1993), 80–88, here 83; Poewe, Namibian Herero, 65n14. The official history suggests the same thing: General Staff,
Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:207–8.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
58 8 or 9 October, almost a week afterward.57 The context therefore is the conclusion of the
ﬁrst phase of pursuit.
The timing of the order has suggested to nearly everyone that frustration was its main
motive. Trotha, having failed to end the war at Waterberg, had now again failed to do so
by a sharp pursuit; his troops, suffering greatly from thirst, hunger, and illness, were
physically incapable of achieving the absolute “success” the homeland demanded. But
what did such an order achieve? Those who wish to minimize the order’s seriousness represent it as merely psychological warfare with two aims. By driving the Herero away, it
was supposed to save troopers from more casualties inﬂicted by Herero sharpshooters.
And it was designed for domestic propaganda: if one could not actually defeat the Herero,
one could at least appear properly ﬁerce.58 The ﬁrst suggestion is simply not credible. The
suffering of the German troops had long been primarily due to lack of provisioning, exhaustion, and resultant illness; Trotha and his officers repeatedly stated that the military
capacity of the Herero was ended. The suggestion that Trotha wished to impress the
Kaiser or the General Staff chief with tough words is possible, but it seems unlikely as a
complete explanation for such an extraordinary document. Helmut Bley, who takes the
proclamation seriously (as did the governor, chancellor, director of the Colonial Department, and the Reichstag), believes that its aim was to prevent the Herero from inﬁltrating
back into the colony.59 That is surely true and had long been Trotha’s goal. But the violence and ﬁnality of the order seem out of proportion to such an aim.
If we ask what the order achieved from the military perspective, the answer is, not
much. It essentially sanctioned practices (the shooting of all men) that were already customary.60 It tried, as Trotha had done in August, to reassert disciplinary control relating
to the shooting of women and children, which had become widespread, while granting
explicitly the very objective that justiﬁed shooting: the “disappearance” of all Herero.
The order accomplished only one thing: it made negotiations practically impossible.
It did so by scaring the Herero away, and even more so by attempting to lock the military
leadership into the most drastic possible policy. That kept the war out of civilian hands
and entirely within the military’s bailiwick, which was the order’s major purpose. For a
negotiated settlement was the logical next step, now that the resistance of the Herero
people had been broken but while German troops were incapable of ending the war militarily. This is precisely what Trotha wanted to avoid, as he explained to the General Staff
chief in the cover letter (4 October) to the proclamation:
For me, it is merely a question of how to end the war with the Herero. My opinion is completely opposite to that of the governor and some “old Africans.” They
have wanted to negotiate for a long time and describe the Herero nation as a necessary labor force for the future use of the colony. I am of an entirely different
57. 8th: Auer v. Herrenkirchen, Erlebnisse, 62. 9th: v. François, “Hottentotten-Aufstand,” 44.
58. Sudholt, Deutsche Eingeborenenpolitik, 188–89; Poewe, Namibian Herero, 65–66.
59. Bley, South-West Africa, 163–64. Drechsler, who also takes the order seriously, never explains why Trotha
issued it. Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 156–57.
60. Gewald also reaches this conclusion: Towards Redemption, 216.

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
opinion. I believe that the nation must be destroyed as such, or since this was not
possible using tactical blows, it must be expelled from the land operatively and by
means of detailed actions.
Trotha continued that he believed it would be possible to dispose of small bands trying to
reenter the colony, though provisioning problems prevented him from capturing the captains. If Estorff did not succeed in forcing the Herero into British Bechuanaland, then it
only remained to be seen if they would go voluntarily,
or if they will try to regain possession of their old pastureland by force or by
complete submission. Because I neither can treat with these people, nor do I
want to, without the express direction of His Majesty, a certain rigorous treatment of all parts of the nation is absolutely necessary, a treatment that I have for
the present taken and executed on my own responsibility, and from which, as
long as I have command, I shall not detour without a direct order. My detailed
knowledge of many Central African tribes, Bantu and others, has taught me the
convincing certainty that Negroes never submit to a contract but only to raw
force. Yesterday before my departure, I had the warriors who were captured in
the last several days, [and who were] condemned by court-martial, hanged, and I
have chased all the women and children who had gathered here back into the
desert, taking with them the proclamation to the Herero people. This proclamation (enclosed), which will unavoidably become known, will be attacked. I only
ask that it be explained to His Majesty that these means are absolutely necessary,
and that my order to the troops (who are [still] excellently disciplined and with
three characters like Deimling, Estorff, and Mühlenfels will surely remain so)
gives the necessary instruction and guarantee for the execution of the order. On
the other hand [sic] accepting women and children, who are mostly ill, is an eminent danger to the troops, and taking care of them is impossible. Therefore, I
think it better that the nation perish rather than infect our troops and affect our
water and food. In addition, the Herero would interpret any kindness on my side
as weakness. They must now die in the desert or try to cross the Bechuanaland
border. This uprising is and remains the beginning of a race war, which I already
predicted in 1897 in my reports to the chancellor on East Africa. . . . Whether this
uprising was caused by poor treatment [of the Africans] remains irrelevant to its
suppression.61
I have quoted this letter at length because it clears up many questions. In it, Trotha
explains that he has elevated the tactic of destruction to an operative level and adopted
this (the destruction of the nation, rather than of its military force) as the goal of the war.
61. Trotha to Schlieffen, Okatarobaka, 4 Oct. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 5–6. Partly reprinted in
Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 160–61; Drechsler, Aufstände, 86–87; Drechsler, “Hereros,” 244–45; and Bley,
South-West Africa, 164.

59

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
60 Therefore, negotiations are out of the question. Instead, the solution to the war must be
military, violent, physical, and total. Even the “complete submission” of the Herero is no
longer acceptable to him. They must disappear. Believing that the deaths of women and
children needed more justifying, and because the principle of their “disappearance” actually developed out of the severe provisioning problems the troops faced, Trotha adds that
they, too, pose a physical danger to the German soldiers. Therefore, they too must die. Finally, Trotha makes clear that he has received no orders to exterminate. He has arrived at
this conclusion on his own, through the force of events, and now seeks All-Highest recognition of the logical necessity of his actions.
One of the “old Africans” Trotha must have meant was Major Estorff, whose unit now
was ordered to carry on the pursuit alone. Although he loyally carried out his order, Estorff believed “crushing the people like this was in equal measure cruel and insane
[töricht]. One could have saved many of them and their herds, if one had spared them and
given them refuge; they were punished enough. I suggested this to General von Trotha,
but he wanted their complete destruction [gänzliche Vernichtung].”62
So Estorff soldiered on against his better judgment, while the other units occupied the
waterholes and shot at Herero trying to break through the cordon, or conducted sweeps
nearby. Because Trotha’s order basically ratiﬁed existing practice, it will come as no surprise to learn that in the two months between the proclamation and its cancellation by
Berlin (8 December 1904), the method of “ﬁghting” continued much as before. The war
diary of the 3rd Field Company of the Naval Infantry Battalion gives a good idea of how
occupation units operated:
3 Nov. (Klein-Waterberg). They see thirty Herero searching for food. “After a difficult
descent we attack the latter in their camp and take 14 men and women prisoner. We
didn’t see animals or guns. 4 Herero are shot to death, we have no losses.”
4 Nov. They return to their own camp. “The 10 captured women and children are taken
along and in the afternoon transported by wagon to work in the typhus hospital at
Waterberg.”63
23 Nov. (near Klein-Waterberg). “We surprised Herero in the ﬂats, south of the hill; 2
men are shot to death, 1 boy captured. Pontoks [huts, where Herero lived] are burnt
down.”
27 Nov. (near Okateitei). “1 Klipp-Kaffern [i.e., not Herero, but members of another
tribe] pontok is attacked.”
6 Dec. (near Klein-Waterberg). They surprise a party of thirty Herero, of whom ﬁfteen
to twenty are shot to death, “including several well-armed warriors; 6 guns with ammunition are bagged [erbeutet].”64
These entries tell us that the accepted practice was to attack all groups of Herero and even
non-Herero blacks, armed and unarmed, warrior and civilian. All men were shot dead.
62. Estorff, Wanderungen, 117.
63. War diary of 3rd Field Comp., Naval Inf. Batt., BA-MA Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 434.
64. Diary entry, 3rd Field Comp., Naval Inf. Batt., ibid., Nr. 435.

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Women and children (contrary to Trotha’s order) were taken prisoner and put in work 61
details. The huts were burnt down.
Trotha’s own reports to Berlin tell us how the more active units along the desert’s edge
operated:
3 Nov. “[Captain] Klitzing [of Mühlenfels’s unit] conducts a successful battle east of
Okunjahi with a large Herero troop of 250 with 20 guns. Enemy leaves 6 dead behind; on our side cavalryman Urschech is lightly wounded on the knee.”
4 Nov. “Klitzing follows tracks leading north. Breaks up 2 small Herero bands. 4 Herero
shot dead. 1 gun bagged.”65
11. Nov. (Eiseb riverbed). “Several hundred Herero ﬂee as he [Estorff] approaches”; in
his pursuit, he kills nineteen.
12–13. Nov. Captain Wilhelmi at Otjosondjou-Okunjahi. “He met only women, children,
and old people and found a few discarded guns.”66
2 Dec. “Herero Werften [groups of huts] attacked near Onandowa north of Namutoni; 58
animals and 7 guns with ammunition bagged, several Herero shot to death.”67
6 Dec. Reports that First Lieutenant Brockdorff at Okasaberg meets thirty Herero and
kills twenty.68
11 Dec. “15 Herero dead, 1 gun bagged.”69
Here the noteworthy numbers relate to the discrepancy between the number of Herero
killed and the number of guns captured. This discrepancy makes clear that, at the very
least, unarmed men were routinely being shot down. The reports mention no prisoners,
so we do not know, for example, what Captain Wilhelmi did with the women, children,
and old men whom he encountered. Chief of Staff Schlieffen later claimed that in this period Estorff treated prisoners kindly and released them.70 (This is possible, because Estorff
disagreed with Trotha’s policies and, as we shall see, was quite capable of acting independently on Africans’ behalf.) Missionaries reported that Capt. Joachim von Heydebreck was also taking “quite a number of prisoners” in this period.71
Trotha’s reports never describe the dead Herero by sex or age, but it would be surprising if no women and children were killed in these attacks on whole groups of Herero, ﬂeeing or in Werften. The diary of the 3rd Field Company, above, suggests that the main targets of shooting were probably men, however. The widespread slaughter of women and
children by shooting may have been more characteristic of the period immediately after
Waterberg; it is hard to tell for certain.
One other event during the period after Trotha’s order deserves mention. Trotha reported to Berlin that “on 3 November, First Lieutenant v. Beesten lured Herero into a trap
65. Trotha to Bülow, copy, tel. arr. 7 Nov. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2133, p. 124.
66. Trotha to General Staff, tel., Windhuk, 16 Nov. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2116, p. 175.
67. Trotha to General Staff, tel. Nr. 21, Windhuk, 19 Dec. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2117, p. 51.
68. Trotha to General Staff, tel. Nr. 247, Windhuk, 2 Dec. 1904, ibid., p. 37.
69. Trotha to General Staff, tel. Nr. 28, Windhuk, 27 Dec. 1904, ibid., p. 55.
70. Schlieffen to Bülow, Berlin, 23 Nov. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 3–4.
71. Eich to Inspector, 16 Nov. 1904, cited in de Vries, Namibia, p. 305.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
62 at Ombakaha. 4 clan leaders [Grossleute] fell.”72 This action was entirely consonant with
Trotha’s policy to destroy the possibility of negotiations, for the Herero had come to
Beesten in order to negotiate a surrender, under the repeated assurance that they would
not be killed. When he demanded they surrender their guns, they began to run. Beesten’s
troops had meanwhile surrounded the Herero; they opened ﬁre and killed them.73 Ombakaha left a lasting impression on the Herero. As a colonial official noted over a year
later, “In light of this kind of behavior, it is no wonder that the Herero have no trust in
our assurances and therefore don’t turn themselves in.”74 Obviously, Trotha saw nothing
wrong with these methods, though he had not “engineered them,” as Drechsler claims.75
He described them matter-of-factly in his report to his superiors. The General Staff ordered an inquiry, but no disciplinary proceedings seem to have resulted.76 “Ombakaha”
continued to be listed as a genuine “battle.”77 The military’s satisfaction with these means
was also shared by the settlers.78
The last point of controversy surrounding Trotha’s proclamation concerns how
widely it was known. The instruction to the order said it was to be read at roll-call to the
German troops. The two surviving war diaries from this period do not mention the
proclamation.79 But it is hard to know how to interpret their silence, since, for example,
Captain v. Lettow-Vorbeck, who was with Trotha during those days and who notes the
hanging of the male Herero that accompanied the distribution of the proclamation, does
not mention the proclamation itself in his diary.80 Other military diarists, stationed elsewhere, say nothing about it. The proclamation also does not appear in the standard military reports sent to Berlin and now in the archives. As we have seen, Trotha did not intend
it to affect the method of ﬁghting, except possibly to limit the shooting of women and
children. It merely put a seal of approval on the methods already in use. The kind of ﬁghting and the goal of ﬁghting remained the same before and after the proclamation, regardless of its circulation.
Nonetheless, word of the proclamation began to spread, as Trotha predicted it would.
The extraordinarily well-informed Paul Rohrbach learned of it in Omaruru, ﬁve days
after it was drafted.81 He may have been the ﬁrst civilian to do so, since, with one possible
exception, Trotha informed only military leaders, because he intended the proclamation
to solidify a military policy before civilian policy makers could inaugurate a counterpol72. Trotha to Bülow, copy, tel. arr. 7 Nov. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2133, p. 124.
73. Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 159–60.
74. Marginalium, dated 25 Jan. 1906, to “Report on the events of 29.10—2.11 and on the battle near Ombakaha on 2 Nov.,” arr. Col. Dept., 25 Feb. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2117, pp. 113–17, here 113. Also, missionary
August Kuhlmann, “Report on the attempts to negotiate peace in Othimbingue,” 16 Feb. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal,
Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72; and Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 265.
75. Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 161.
76. Oberkommando of Schutztruppe to Col. Dept., Berlin, 22 May 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2118, p. 112.
77. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:339.
78. “Der Aufstand,” Deutsch-Südwestafrikanische Zeitung 45 (9 Nov. 1904).
79. War diary, 3rd Field Comp., Naval Inf. Batt., BA-MA Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 434; war diary, Regimental
Staff of the 2nd Field Regt. (Deimling), ibid., Nl. Deimling, Nr. 7.
80. Lettow-Vorbeck, diary, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 34.
81. Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 177–78.

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
icy of their own. The struggle between military and civilian policy makers was perhaps the 63
most important outcome of Trotha’s proclamation.

Canceling the Proclamation: Civilian versus Military Leadership
Trotha later claimed that he had sent a copy of his proclamation to Governor
Leutwein “immediately,” presumably meaning 4 October, when he also sent a copy to the
General Staff chief.82 However, Trotha never notiﬁed the Colonial Department or the
chancellor—and Leutwein always maintained that he had never received a copy “officially.”83 Indeed, it was not until 23 October that Leutwein, galvanized into action by the
proclamation (as he later explained),84 telegraphed the Colonial Department asking for
authority to begin negotiations. If Leutwein had known earlier, it is hard to see why he
would have waited so long. Only on the 28th did Leutwein send a copy of the proclamation (by ship) to the Colonial Department, which later told the General Staff historians
that the department ﬁrst learned of the proclamation in “late November.”85
The military worked faster. No sooner had Leutwein telegraphed the Colonial Department than Trotha sprang to his own defense, pretending to take umbrage at the suggestion that he had known of Herero peace-feelers and quashed them. Trotha next ordered Leutwein to cease any political activity, and ﬁnally, on 28 October, Trotha
threatened to resign if his complete authority over politics and military matters, including
negotiations, were not upheld.86 Two days later it was Leutwein who had to resign, despite
the fact that both the director of the Colonial Department and the chancellor supported
him and his policies.87 As long as Trotha was covered by the chief of the General Staff,
with his direct connections to the Kaiser, military rule would continue. Trotha had accepted command under the express condition that, as Wilhelm had told him, “you will
have nothing to do with the chancellor,” that is, Trotha would be completely inside the
military command chain (Kaiser–chief of the General Staff–commander), and that he,
not the governor, would determine politics in the colony.88 That is why Trotha insisted on
proclaiming a state of emergency even before he arrived in SWA.
Having lost the power struggle, Leutwein recommended that the Colonial Department and the chancellor let the “military dictatorship of Lt. Gen. v. Trotha” run its
course, which is almost what they did.89 For, once Leutwein resigned, the chancellor re82. Trotha to Leutwein, copy, Windhuk, 5 Nov. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 101–3.
83. Leutwein to Col. Dept., Nr. 437, 28 Oct. 1904, ibid., pp. 21–22.
84. Ibid.
85. Leutwein to Col. Dept., Nr. 437, Rehoboth, 28 Oct. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 21–22; Kellwig
notice of 3 Aug. 1905, ibid., Nr. 2118, p. 153. Surface mail normally required six weeks to arrive in Germany.
86. Leutwein to Trotha, tel., Rehoboth, 24 Oct. 1904; Trotha to Leutwein, tel., Windhuk, 27 Oct. 1904, ibid.,
Nr. 2089, pp. 24–25, 36; Trotha to General Staff, 28 Oct., Windhuk, ibid., Nr. 2116, p. 91.
87. Stübel report to Bülow, 26 Oct. 1904, and draft of telegram from Bülow to Trotha, 26 Oct. 1904, which
was approved by Bülow but stopped by Foreign Minister Baron Oswald v. Richthofen, after Trotha’s resignation
threat arrived: Richthofen note of 29 Oct. 1904, ibid., Nr. 2116, pp. 85–86, 92–93, 94.
88. Trotha to Hülsen-Häseler, 7 Dec. 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, Anhang 1, Nr. 14.
89. Leutwein to Bülow, Rehoboth, 28 Oct. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 21–22.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
64 fused to appoint another governor until Trotha had left and the new governor was guaranteed supreme political authority over the commander of the Schutztruppe.
In the meantime, three more weeks elapsed before the civilian leadership learned of
the proclamation. It did so through Chief of Staff Schlieffen, who, though he wanted to
keep Trotha in command and thus uphold military control, nonetheless judged Trotha’s
proclamation unworkable. Schlieffen sent the Colonial Department a copy of the proclamation, along with a cover letter in which he admitted that “the campaign against the
Herero has come to a standstill.”90 He agreed with Trotha’s assessment of the uprising as a
“race war [that] can be concluded only by the destruction or complete servitude of one of
the parties. . . . The intentions of General v. Trotha can only be commended. Only he does
not have the power to carry them out.” Therefore, only a “rapid concluding of peace”
would save Germany from a protracted guerilla war, “with all the horrors of typhus,
malaria, and heart disease.”91 Schlieffen recommended setting a higher bounty for Herero
leaders and issuing a new proclamation promising life to innocent Herero who chose to
surrender.
Bülow and the colonial officials saw things differently. They were appalled by both the
methods and the goals outlined in the proclamation. Colonial officials drafted, and Bülow
approved, a report for the chancellor to present to the Kaiser personally.92 The report immediately assumed a moral stance, describing its contents as “a matter of conscience.”
The shooting of all men and the driving away of women and children were “contrary to
the principles of Christianity and humanity.” Although the Herero deserved to be punished, “a complete and systematic annihilation [Ausrottung] of the Herero would exceed
all the demands of justice and of the reestablishment of authority.” Only as a third point
did the report use Schlieffen’s argument (citing him) that the plan was infeasible and
tremendously expensive. Fourth, the loss of the Herero to death or ﬂight would seriously
harm the colony’s economy. And ﬁnally, Bülow argued that the proclamation “will demolish Germany’s reputation among the civilized nations and feed foreign agitation
against us.” These were unusually powerful words, the kind one rarely sees in such official
documents. But Bülow obviously feared they were not powerful enough, for he ended the
report by saying, “For these reasons, I ask Your Majesty, in agreement with the chief of the
General Staff,” to order Trotha to issue a new proclamation offering life to those who surrender. The report made it seem that the military leadership made common cause with
the civilians. Because raising the bounty on the heads of African leaders contradicted the
purpose of encouraging surrender, Bülow left it out.
When the Kaiser made his decision, however, he was no longer in Berlin, but hunting
at Slawentzitz, surrounded by his mostly military entourage. Wilhelm chose Schlieffen’s
path: a new proclamation, but also increased bounty.93 Bülow was now obliged to meet
with Schlieffen. In protracted and difficult discussions he managed to get Schlieffen to
drop the bounty idea; it was even harder to get him to accept the missions as mediators.
90. Schlieffen to Col. Dept., Nr. 12383, Berlin, 23 Nov. 1904, ibid., pp. 3–4.
91. The high altitude and strenuous conditions led to dangerous enlargement of the heart in many soldiers.
92. Bülow report to the Kaiser, draft, Berlin, 24 Nov. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 8–11.
93. Friedrich v. Schoen to Foreign Office, tel. Nr. 204, Slawentzitz, 29 Nov. 1904, ibid., p. 13.

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
For it had ﬁnally dawned on Bülow that only the missionaries could overcome the Herero 65
people’s distrust of the soldiers, and only they could provide the care that sick and hungry
refugees required to survive. Like Trotha, Schlieffen found the idea repellent, and said the
Kaiser would never accept it. Eventually he relented, as did Trotha’s protector, Military
Cabinet Chief Hülsen, whom Schlieffen had called in to the meeting.94 Therefore, it was
only after Bülow had convinced the military leaders that he eventually received Wilhelm’s
approval of his policies. The telegram canceling Trotha’s proclamation went out through
the General Staff on 8 December. It said the German kaiser wanted “to treat mercifully
those Herero who voluntarily surrender and to spare their lives, except for those directly
guilty and their leaders.” It also put the missions in charge of the Herero people’s “immediate accommodation.”95 Bounty was not mentioned.
Just how precarious Bülow’s victory was became clear during the next month. Not
surprisingly, Trotha obstructed the order at every turn.96 He demanded (unsuccessfully)
that the Kaiser’s order be published, presumably to relieve himself of the odium of having
“negotiated.”97 And he insisted (again unsuccessfully) that a new civilian governor be appointed immediately to deal with the surrendering Herero, a problem for which he steadfastly refused responsibility.98
But it was Schlieffen, not Trotha, who determined how Wilhelm’s order would be carried out. Schlieffen set the narrowest possible parameters: Trotha was merely to accept
surrendering Herero; “negotiations are out of the question.”99 The bounty could be raised
later.100 Above all, military operations were to continue unchanged. Trotha wired his
(correct) understanding of Schlieffen’s orders: “Continuing the offensive against the mass
of Herero is not supposed to be hindered by the All-Highest order. Negotiations are not
to be begun, but voluntarily surrendering Herero are not to be shot down but accepted.”101 This is the wording the troops in the ﬁeld received.102
One of the most interesting aspects of the colloquy between civilian and military
leadership was the exchange on shooting at women and children. Shooting women and
children (not just shooting at them) had already erupted in March as a serious issue, after
Bebel raised his questions in the Reichstag. The government had explicitly denied that
German troops shot women and children, a practice that public opinion condemned as
utterly unthinkable. Apparently Schlieffen had neglected to send Bülow Trotha’s “instruction” directing troops to shoot above, not actually at, women and children. Trotha’s and
Schlieffen’s obstruction now moved Bülow to pursue this point. He wanted a precisely
94. Bülow notice, 3 Dec. 1904, ibid., pp. 17–18.
95. General Staff to Trotha, tel. in code, 8 Dec. 1904, ibid., p. 48.
96. Stübel to Bülow, memorandum of 12 Dec. 1904, ibid., pp. 64–65.
97. Trotha to Bülow, tel. Nr. 2, Windhuk, 9 Dec. 1904, ibid., p. 52; Trotha to General Staff, 11 Dec. 1904, ibid.,
p. 62.
98. Trotha to Bülow, tel. Nr. 2, Windhuk, 9 Dec. 1904, ibid, p 52.
99. Schlieffen to Trotha, Berlin, 10 Dec. 1904, ibid., p. 83; Bley, South-West Africa, 167–68.
100. Schlieffen to Trotha, tel., 8 Dec. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, p. 49.
101. Trotha to Schlieffen, copy, Nr. 16, Windhuk, 13 Dec. 1904; acknowledging Schlieffen to Trotha, tel.,
Berlin, 12 Dec. 1904, ibid., pp. 85, 87.
102. Trotha to Schlieffen, copy, Nr. 16, Windhuk, 13 Dec. 1904, ibid., p. 87.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
66 worded instruction to tie Trotha’s hands. He therefore asked Schlieffen to direct Trotha
“that in any event under no circumstances were women and children to be shot at any
longer,” and Trotha was to make actual efforts to get Herero to surrender, not just wait
for them to do so on their own.103 Schlieffen took umbrage at the words “any longer.”104
He denied that German troops had ever done so. Before the proclamation, Trotha had
forbidden shooting at women and children, Schlieffen assured Bülow, and afterward, the
proclamation was just for purposes of “intimidation.” But he continued:
If, in one or another exceptional case, women have been shot, then one must remember that women have not only participated in the ﬁghting, they have also
been the main originators of the cruel and horrible martyrdom that our wounded
have often been subjected to, and that the sight of these victims, who were displayed with bestial intention, provoked the comrades to forgivable fury.
Schlieffen was thus careful to represent the practice as an individual, regrettable, but understandable exception. Bülow, unmolliﬁed, returned to the matter two weeks later and
repeated that it was the civilian leadership’s assumption “that, apart from an actual military action, women and children will not be shot at.”105 The civilians were thus prepared
to grant “actual military action” as an exception but wanted the practice itself expressly
forbidden. Schlieffen replied that Trotha had assured him “his prohibition to shoot at
women and children has been repeated once more to the troops.”106

Trotha Continues the War
In accordance with Schlieffen’s instructions, “offensive” operations continued. Taking advantage of the rainy season in January and February 1905, German troops chased
two Herero leaders, Wilhelm Maherero and Traugott, and their followers across the border into Bechuanaland.107 A typical battle report during this pursuit claimed six Herero
had fallen, but no prisoners had been taken.108 On 23 February Trotha decreed “the operations in Hereroland ended.”109 Nevertheless, “cleansing actions” (Säuberungs-Aktionen)
continued in the occupied areas.110 These consisted of approaching Herero Werften and,

103. Bülow to Schlieffen, draft tel., 14 Dec. 1904, ibid., p. 89.
104. Schlieffen to Bülow, Nr. 13297, Berlin, 16 Dec. 1904, ibid., p. 107.
105. Bülow to Schlieffen, Berlin, 30 Dec. 1904, ibid., pp. 108–9.
106. Schlieffen to Bülow, Nr. 13752, Berlin, 5 Jan. 1905, ibid., p. 114. Cf. the account in Bridgman, Revolt,
126–27, and Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 158.
107. See Gewald’s account of the ﬂight of the Herero after Waterberg: Towards Redemption, 210–24.
108. Trotha to General Staff, tel. Nr. 86, Windhuk, 22 Feb. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2117, p. 111.
109. Lettow-Vorbeck, diary entry, 23 Feb. 1905, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 34; and Trotha to
General Staff, tel. Nr. 90, Windhuk, 7 Mar. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2117, pp. 134–35.
110. Trotha to General Staff, tel. Nr. 95, Windhuk, arr. Col. Dept. 15 Mar. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2117,
pp. 144–46.

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
if the people failed to surrender, attacking and burning them down.111 The official history 67
lists these episodes in the “battle calendar,” the last one for 23 August 1905.112
Meanwhile, the brunt of the war had shifted to the south, where the various clans of
the Nama, or Hottentots, as whites called them, had been in united rebellion since October 1904.113 The ﬁghting in the Nama war never escalated to annihilation, however. For
one thing, Namaland was even less accessible than Hereroland, and in the absence of any
railroad at all, and with a fatal epidemic among the oxen, the Germans could not sustain
the cumbersome reinforcements that had permitted the encirclement attempt at the Waterberg. But more than this, the Nama never gave them such a target. Instead of provoking a European-style battle by collecting themselves and waiting in a single spot, the
Nama stuck to the style of warfare at which they excelled: hit-and-run guerilla warfare
with fast-moving, small, mounted units of excellent marksmen. Furthermore, women
and children did not accompany the warriors, so the opportunities even for individual
atrocities were very limited.114 Finally, the Germans felt considerably less threatened by
the Nama than by the Herero: they were a much smaller group (perhaps twenty thousand
people with a maximum of eighteen hundred warriors), located on the very underpopulated southern fringe of the colony; they possessed much less wealth (cows) than the
Herero; and they did not demonstrate their victories over German troops by marking the
bodies of the dead.115
Nevertheless, Trotha approached the Nama exactly as he had the Herero. His object
was to bring as much technological force as possible to bear, as that was the source of European superiority. Because no railroad existed to move supplies, Trotha wanted to postpone all operations until one was built. When that outrageous suggestion was rejected,116
Trotha ordered Colonel Deimling, in charge of operations in the south, to move very cautiously, in hopes the Nama would collect their forces and permit a decisive battle. Deimling, however, attacked head on, and conﬁrmed the inevitability of a lengthy guerilla war.
Despite the advisability under these circumstances of dividing and conquering, among
other means, by negotiation, Trotha rigidly refused his commanders permission to do so.
And just to make sure, he destroyed the ﬁrst tentative negotiations with one African
leader by issuing another proclamation, this one to the Nama people. It began by following the Kaiser’s order of 8 December 1904, promising life to those who freely surrendered
111. Trotha to General Staff, 28 Apr. 1905, ibid., Nr. 2118, pp. 75–76; Lettow-Vorbeck, diary entry, 3 May 1905,
BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 34.
112. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 2:339–40.
113. For accounts of the ﬁghting: General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, vol. 2: Der Hottentottenkrieg;
Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 176–230; Bridgman, Revolt, 132–63.
114. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen 2:118, 175–76.
115. Less threat: General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 2:16. Numbers: Leutwein, Elf Jahre, 436.
116. Trotha to General Staff, copy, 29 Dec. 1904, and Trotha to General Staff, tel. Nr. 33, Windhuk, 30 Dec.
1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2134, pp. 93, 100. Although the General Staff agreed with Col. Dir. Stübel that this
was a virtual “declaration of bankruptcy” by Trotha, Schlieffen covered for Trotha by not presenting this request
to the Kaiser, which would have given the civilian leadership another opportunity to try to remove Trotha: Stübel draft report, Berlin, 4 Jan. 1905 (with Bülow’s mark on it), ibid., pp. 102–3.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
68 and were not guilty of murder or of leading the revolt. But then it promptly slipped into
the old language:
Further, those few who refuse to surrender will have happen to them what happened to the Herero people, who in their blindness also believed they could successfully make war on the mighty German kaiser and the great German
people. . . . The whole Herero people have had this happen, part of them have
died of hunger and thirst in the desert, part were killed by German troops, part
were killed by the Ovambo. The same will happen to the Hottentot people, if they
do not freely surrender themselves and their weapons. . . . Those who believe that
[because they have murdered or are leaders] they will receive no mercy, should
leave the land, because if they are seen on German territory, they will be shot at,
until all are destroyed.117
The proclamation ended by placing bounties on the heads of three Nama leaders.
Despite Trotha’s thunder, the war in the south went its slow, difficult, but different,
course. The almost accidental death in late October 1905 of Hendrik Witbooi, one of the
chief leaders of the revolt, provided the opportunity to declare a premature victory and to
remove Trotha, whose methods had not brought success. Sentiment in the colony had
turned against Trotha, after he had in late November 1904 publicly announced his intention to exterminate the Herero. In response to questions posed by the Windhuk council
(Beirat), Trotha told the colonists that “at the moment the destruction [Vernichtung] of all
rebellious tribes is the goal of military measures. Supporting the settlers’ prosperity naturally ranks behind this goal.”118 The editors of the Deutsch-Südwestafrikanische Zeitung
spoke for the settlers when they countered this view: “The economic interest of the country argues against the rigid maintenance of this viewpoint, because the natives represent a
colonial possession of high economic value. . . . Not their destruction but their actual
submission must therefore be the goal of the current war.”119
General Schlieffen, too, had been disappointed by Trotha’s inability to end the war, or
to pursue it more successfully with the means at his disposal.120 But for almost a year he
covered for Trotha. Schlieffen’s impending retirement, planned for the end of 1905, probably eased Trotha’s ouster. Certainly, the general did not leave willingly: one of his young
staffers reported how hard he found it to be removed before the job was done.121 In midNovember 1905 Trotha began the journey back to Germany, where he received Prusso-

117. Trotha, proclamation of 22 Apr. 1905, reprinted in General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 2:186;
Bridgman, Revolt, 145.
118. Trotha, “Bescheid,” of 24 Nov. 1904, printed in Deutsch-Südwestafrikanische Zeitung 49 (7 Dec. 1904), 2,
“Aus dem Schutzgebiet.”
119. Deutsch-Südwestafrikanische Zeitung 50 (14 Dec. 1904), 2.
120. Stübel, draft, 4 Jan. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2134, pp. 102–3.
121. 1st Lt. Eberhard v. d. Hagen to Heinrich v. d. Hagen, Keetmanshoop, 12 Nov. 1905, BA-MA Freiburg,
Militärbiographische Sammlung (MSg. 1), Nr. 2038 (Eberhard v. d. Hagen).

Pursuit and Annihilation
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Germany’s highest military decoration, the Pour-le-mérite, four other prestigious medals 69
from other German states, and a full pension.122
The war against ﬁrst one Nama band and then another continued into 1907. Trotha’s
command was taken over on an interim basis by Colonel v. Dame and then permanently
by Major-General v. Deimling, who eventually ended the war by negotiation. With
Trotha’s departure and the appointment of a new civilian governor (Friedrich von Lindequist), SWA returned to the usual arrangement whereby a civilian government set general
political policy, and military commands were given inside those parameters. The military
dictatorship was over.
122. Bley writes that Trotha’s pension was too low for his rank, but the cabinet order of 21 May 1906 spelled
out that Trotha would receive the “legal pension.” Bley, South-West Africa, 165n46; AKO of 21 May 1906, Trotha
Papers, Nr. 315, Anhang 2, Nr. 30b. Medals: ibid., 30a.

31
Death by Imprisonment

W

e must return to January 1905, when Chancellor Bülow’s difficult, partial
victory over the military leadership ushered in a new aspect of the war: imprisonment.1 Imprisonment had two phases: one under Trotha, which coincided with ongoing military sweeps, and another under Governor Lindequist (after December 1905), which until September 1906 operated under almost a truce.
But in both phases the mortality rate among prisoners (men, women, and children) was
extraordinarily high, raising the question whether annihilation had not merely reappeared under a different mask. And death by imprisonment hit Herero and Nama equally,
despite the radical differences in the methods of warfare against each.

Trotha’s Principles of Imprisonment
The transition from shooting to imprisonment was difficult. It appears that instructions to local officers about how to handle the situation arrived late, if at all. It was left to
the missionaries to improvise and to cajole cooperation from the district officers. Depending on the personality, experience, and political convictions of the officer in question, this could go well or badly. But there was also some system in this, for Trotha’s leadership style tended to replicate itself among many of his underlings. Trotha’s own
recalcitrance was crystal clear. Forced against his will to accept prisoners, Trotha informed Berlin he was placing them all in chains. Once again, Bülow had to intervene and
order Trotha to desist from this practice, except in extraordinary cases, since knowledge
1. Recent articles: Zimmerer, “Kriegsgefangene”; Joachim Zeller, “ ‘Wie Vieh wurden hunderte zu Tode
getrieben und wie Vieh begraben,’ ” Zeitschrift für Geschichtswissenschaft 49:3 (2001): 226–43.

70

Death by Imprisonment
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
of the procedure prevented Herero from surrendering.2 Forced to lift the chain order, 71
Trotha reported, “I have ordered the people to be told that, if they don’t reveal where they
have buried guns and ammunition, which they have clearly done, I will have one warrior
shot every eight days, until they tell the truth.”3 Bülow replied that “it is beyond my competence to judge whether such rigorous measures as shooting warriors is necessary. Your
Excellency must decide on your own responsibility.”4
With their commander setting such an example, it is not surprising that subalterns
mimicked Trotha’s forceful extremism. So, for example, in Otjimbingue, where First
Lieutenant Friedrichs grew impatient at the reluctance of the Herero to surrender. He told
missionary Kuhlmann that if they did not hurry up, he would “saddle up and shoot down
the Werften.” Kuhlmann hastened to Friedrichs’ superior, District Chief First Lieutenant
Kuhn, who replaced Friedrichs with two more understanding officers.5 Or in Omaruru,
where First Lieutenant Cramer’s ﬁrst response to the news that Herero were nearby was to
lead a patrol against them. The best the missionary could wrest from him was the promise not to shoot those who wanted to surrender. Cramer’s superior, First Lieutenant
Count v. Brockdorff, short-circuited Cramer’s dash by ordering that African messengers
be sent out in place of soldiers.6 This became the main method of luring Herero to give
themselves up. The pattern here is that lieutenants with less experience in SWA tended to
cleave to Trotha’s example, whose adamantine attitude, as missionary Eduard Dannert
noted, was “that one would rather let the Herero die and rot, than save them for the
colony.”7 Inspector of Missions Gottlob Haussleiter summed up the problem of the ﬁrst
few months: “It was especially difficult for victorious soldiers in the ﬁeld to set aside their
weapons and reach out to the beaten and dispersed enemy. Later, however, the idea of
peace gained ground.”8 Nevertheless, relatively sensible and experienced officers had
trouble reconciling their profession with treating with the enemy, even with noncombatants and prisoners. District Chief First Lieutenant Kuhn defended himself against the possible charge that his policies showed he was “soft” on the Herero by declaiming in public
that “I have not made this suggestion from considerations of humanity—I am completely
free of dizzy humanitarianism [Humanitätsduselei].”9
Administering prisoners at all, much less in a way that might guarantee their survival,
was so alien to the proper task of a “real” soldier that prisoner management was the
2. Trotha to General Staff, copy, tel., 29 Dec. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2134, p. 93; Tecklenburg to Col.
Dept., tel. Nr. 7, Windhuk, 6 Jan. 1905, ibid., Nr. 2089, pp. 118–19; Trotha to Bülow, tel. Nr. 6, Windhuk, 7 Jan.
1905, ibid., p. 115; Bülow to Trotha, tel., Berlin, 13 Jan. 1905, ibid., p. 116.
3. Trotha to Bülow, tel. Nr. 13, Windhuk, 14 Jan. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, p. 120; Drechsler, “Let Us
Die Fighting,” 165–66.
4. Bülow to Trotha, tel., Berlin, 21 Jan. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 124–26.
5. Kuhlmann, “Report on the attempts to negotiate peace in Otjimbingue,” 16 Feb. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal,
Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72, pp. 10–15. The quotation gives Kuhlmann’s words.
6. Dannert to Spiecker, Omaruru, 11 Mar. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal, Dannert papers, B/c II 43, p. 116. Brockdorff had earlier been stationed at Omaruru and knew how the station worked.
7. Ibid. Another example was Lt. Reuss: Vedder to inspector, Swakopmund, 7 Nov. 1906, VEM-Wuppertal,
Vedder papers, B/c II 87, p. 97.
8. Haussleiter to Bülow, Barmen, 22 Apr. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2118, pp. 70–72.
9. Dannert to Spiecker, Karibib, 8 Oct. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal, Dannert papers, B/c II 43, pp. 107–8.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
72 stepchild of military administration. Prisoners of war (and civilians interned for military
reasons) fell under the purview of the commander of the rear (Etappe), or occupied zones,
who also managed provisioning. In SWA this was Major von Redern (later Colonel v.
Dame, then Major Maercker), whose chief of staff was Maj. Arnold Lequis. Prisoners were
such a low priority, however, that Lequis’s table of administration on arrival in SWA (June
1904) lists no position for them.10 Trotha abjured all responsibility for accepting or maintaining them the instant he received the order to take prisoners in December 1904, and
tried to shift the burden to the civilian administration.11 The colonial government turned
back this attempt, although Bülow asked it to report to Berlin on the situation, apparently
trusting that its interest in maintaining an African workforce would spur it to effective supervision over the military.12 Bülow’s move recognized that civilian administration might,
in fact, be better able to provide for prisoners, but it did not change the fact that under
military law and practice, prisoners were the military’s responsibility.13
In mid-January 1905, in an order to all troops, Trotha laid down the principles by
which prisoners were to be treated:
The chancellor has canceled my order that all male Herero are to be put in chains.
Troops and stations, instead, are to send back surrendering or otherwise captured
Herero as they see ﬁt. The offensive capacity for further operations in the east
[Omaheke] and the provisioning of troops must under no circumstance suffer.
Depending on geographical location, the bands are to be sent to Windhuk, Okahandja, or Karibib. . . . The rear areas that receive Herero prisoners are to contact
the local missions for accommodating the prisoners and should also seek the cooperation of the district chief [who was invariably an officer]. I await telegraphic
reports concerning the provisioning of prisoners already in Swakopmund,
Karibib, Omaruru, and Okahandja. Guarding them without chains is impossible.
Guarding is to be limited to a daily check in the presence of the missionary, to ascertain escapes. If possible, a doctor should examine and watch over prisoners. If
a contagious disease breaks out, the camp is immediately to be moved several
kilometers into the bush and the old camp burned down. I intend to affix to prisoners of both sexes a nonremovable tin badge with the letters “G.H.” (gefangener
Herero [Herero prisoner]).14
Treatment of prisoners under the Trotha regime was therefore to follow these principles:
ﬁrst priority always went to battle-readiness and provisioning of German troops; “prison10. “Wirklich Iststärke der einzelnen Formation des Etappenkommandos,” Doc. 25, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl.
Lequis, Nr. 35.
11. Tecklenburg to Col. Dept., tel. Nr. 249, Windhuk, 10 Dec. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, p. 60.
12. Bülow to Schlieffen, Berlin, 30 Dec. 1904, ibid., pp. 108–9.
13. Cf. Bridgman, Revolt, 155, where he blames the prisoners’ deaths on the civilian government. The commander of the Schutztruppe had supreme authority over prisoners, as Trotha insisted to the end: Trotha to
Bülow, coded tel., 22 Aug. 1905, Trotha Papers, Anhang 1, Nr. 37.
14. Trotha, “To all troops and stations in Damaraland,” copy sent to Bülow, tel. Nr. 14, Windhuk, 16 Jan.
1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 122–23.

Death by Imprisonment
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
ers” were all Herero, regardless of age and sex, and no distinction was made between 73
those captured and those who surrendered following the Kaiser’s invitation; the local officer was given remarkable latitude in determining how to transport and provision prisoners; guarding was to be kept to an absolute minimum, with the result that draconian
security requirements like chains became necessary; missionaries were to run accommodations at the collection camps, thus relieving the military of this responsibility; aside
from escapes, the chief anxiety concerned contagious disease; ﬁnally, the Herero were to
be visibly and permanently identiﬁed. Bülow approved these principles, or at least did not
ﬁght to have them rescinded. He agreed to the last item provided it did not “involve cruelty,” and he reiterated that chains were to be used sparingly.15 Apparently, Governor
Leutwein had already in May 1904 successfully tested a system of tin “passes” for Africans
in Swakopmund.16

Prison Camp Conditions under Trotha
By the beginning of April, 4,033 prisoners were alive in German hands, only 25 percent of them adult males; by the beginning of December 1905, when Lindequist’s new system replaced Trotha’s, there were 13,216 prisoners.17 But many more than this must have
surrendered or been captured, for the death rates among prisoners were very high. What
happened to Herero and Nama prisoners? They arrived, many of them starved and ill
from their desert experience, at the collection camps listed in Trotha’s order.18 Occasionally, contemporaries, including the chancellor, referred to these as “concentration
camps.”19 At the turn of the century that term meant internment camp, primarily for
large numbers of civilians. Such camps, and also the name “[re]concentration camp,” had
ﬁrst appeared in Cuba in 1896, when the Spanish military governor Valeriano Weyler y
Nicolau had attempted to suppress the revolt there by imprisoning the civilian population and thus separating it from the guerillas who hid in its midst. Four years later, British
military leaders Generals Frederick Sleigh Lord Roberts and Hubert Horatio Kitchener
did the same thing in the Transvaal, during the Boer War. In short, concentration camps
were a colonial, military phenomenon. Because “concentration camp” has since come to
have a rather different meaning, I will use the term “collection camp” to refer to the ﬁrst
holding areas for African prisoners in SWA.

15. Bülow to Trotha, tel., Berlin, 21 Jan. 1905, ibid., pp. 124–26.
16. Zeller, “ ‘Wie Vieh,’ ” here 238n37. On the origin of the idea of tin IDs in 1900: Zimmerer, Deutsche
Herrschaft, 73n56.
17. Trotha to General Staff, tel. Nr. 104, Khub, 10 Apr. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2118, pp. 61–64; Maj.
Maercker, appendix to report Nr. 26176, Windhuk, 8 Dec. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, pp. 187–88.
18. The Nama also retreated into the desert, the Kalahari, in which one could survive, but at a high physical
cost. For a description of the poor condition of surrendering Nama, see Hermann Alverdes, Mein Tagebuch aus
Südwest; Erinnerungen aus dem Feldzuge gegen die Hottentotten (Oldenburg, 1906), 172.
19. Bülow to Trotha, tel., Berlin, 11 Dec. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, p. 54; Bülow to Trotha, tel.,
Berlin, 21 Jan. 1905, ibid., Nr. 2089, pp. 124–26; Lindequist to Col. Dept., tel. Nr. 4, Windhuk, 4 Jan. 1906, ibid.,
Nr. 2118, p. 201.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
74

Starving Herero returning from the desert where they had been driven by the Germans. Two
women are unable to stand. Union of South Africa, Report on the Natives of South West Africa and
Their Treatment by Germany (London: HMSO, 1918), plate 3.

From the collection camps, prisoners were very quickly shipped by train or wagon to
other camps: to labor camps along the Otavi railroad, to prison camps in Windhuk,
Swakopmund, and Lüderitzbucht, and sometimes from there still further to private companies or farms, which often ran camps of their own.20 The ostensible reason was the
labor shortage that had held SWA in its grip since even before the uprisings.21 Imprisoned
Herero, working without pay, were supposed to ﬁll this gap. The military had ﬁrst call on
prisoner labor. By the end of March 1905, it had ﬁlled its needs and had begun to redirect
prisoner labor into the private sector. In the absence of preexisting rules regulating such
an enterprise, the occupation command and the government reached an agreement stipulating the following: families with young children should not be split apart, if possible;
prisoners should remain locked up at night; the private “employer” was responsible for
food, clothing, and shelter, but was admonished “to observe the right proportion: the
people must receive adequate food and be protected from the cold with blankets, but one
should never forget that these people are prisoners and are to be maintained as such”;
prisoners were not to be paid for their work; and, ﬁnally, “employers” were to pay a tax of
20. Zeller, “ ‘Wie Vieh,’ ” 227; Gewald, Towards Redemption, 221–22; Zimmerer, Deutsche Herrschaft, 45.
21. Zimmerer, Deutsche Herrschaft, ch. 5.

Death by Imprisonment
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
10 marks per month per prisoner to the district office (Bezirksamt).22 The military occu- 75
pation command and the civil government split these proceeds, using them to ﬁnance the
maintenance of their prisoners.23 These rules would not have been necessary had the civil
and military authorities intended for the prisoners to die.24 The authorities nevertheless
insisted that prisoner status required rigid limits to good treatment. Punishment required
harshness; if death resulted, that was acceptable. Hard-liners such as Trotha and Deputy
Governor Tecklenburg, who set the parameters of policy, though they did not closely supervise actual administration, thought death appropriate punishment.25 The invention of
a “tax” to help pay for prisoners indicates the reluctance to divert money or matériel from
the Schutztruppe to its prisoners, whose cost should have been entirely covered by government subsidy. The low priority that prisoners received in an institution focused on
combat, the deﬁnition of the enemy as the entire population, together with the stubborn
requirement to punish Africans who had dared resist German authority, created standards of treatment below the subsistence level.
After only two months, the impact of the imprisonment policy was already obvious.
The missionary Heinrich Vedder visited the Swakopmund prison camp in late February–early March 1905, only a month after it had received its ﬁrst large shipment of prisoners.26 He reported its catastrophic conditions to his superiors.27 Most of the surrendering Herero, he wrote, were being sent to Swakopmund, and after far too short a recovery
time in the collection camps. They arrived “completely impoverished, naked, starved,
weakened, and mostly ill.” Their treatment in Swakopmund then did the rest, because unlike Hereroland, Swakopmund (and Lüderitzbucht, the other main prison camp) lay on
the coast. From April to October (winter in the south of Africa) it was exposed to a cold,
damp, ocean wind. Most of the Herero lived in huts “that consist only of stakes over
which canvas cloth is thrown as a wall and roof, which provides no real protection during
the night. On the ground are nailed boards taken from boxes. Thirty to forty Herero sleep
in these huts each night.” They received no warm clothes. The government provided
eighty blankets for twelve hundred to ﬁfteen hundred prisoners. Food was “in no sense
adequate. The only thing the people receive is rice, which even the commandant [Major
Bauer] admits is in insufficient quantity.” Because they lacked pots, the prisoners could
not cook the rice enough to make it digestible. “[The commandant] would like some ﬂour
and sent in a request.” “If an ox or horse dies, the people get some meat. A couple of days
ago they received as an extra ration some ham that had been meant for the troops. As
Major Bauer exclaimed, ‘This [ham] really stinks!’ The results were inevitable. Along with
22. Maj. Dame, memorandum attached to Nr. 7957, Windhuk, 29 Mar. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3.,
vol. 1, p. 45.
23. Maercker to Lindequist, Nr. 9070, Windhuk, 10 May 1906, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 2,
pp. 190–92.
24. Zeller vacillates between attributing to the authorities intention or mere acceptance: “ ‘Wie Vieh,’ ” 242.
25. See below for their reaction to the deaths of the Witboois in captivity.
26. Dr. Fuchs, report Nr. 1035, Swakopmund, 29 May 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, pp. 58–59.
27. Vedder to mission inspector, Swakopmund, 3 Mar. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal, Vedder papers, B/c II 87,
pp. 50–57.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
76 the weak and those with lung diseases, now many suffer from dysentery.” Under these circumstances it is hard to imagine how the prisoners could work, but each day they were
taken out of the camp, leaving the sick behind with no medical or nursing care, and in the
evening they returned. Their treatment by the guards was uniformly “harsh.” “I have
never seen an overseer without a sambok [a club], whip, or truncheon.”
Vedder described Major Bauer as “a serious and God-fearing man,” whose efforts to
improve the situation were blocked by the governor (Trotha).28 Bauer’s request for warm
clothing had gone unanswered. Vedder expected the same regarding the ﬂour, since Bauer
had told him “that the administration [Behörde] have told the rear to ‘send the weak and
sick back into the bush,’ ” or, less drastically, “ ‘to accept the help of the missionaries in
medical-sanitary matters.’ ” In fact, the military tried to unload all prisoners unable to
work onto the missionaries, but Trotha, suspicious to the end, insisted that a doctor make
sure there were no malingerers. And while Trotha accepted the possible substitution of
ﬂour for rice, he adamantly refused to allocate more money “for the better provisioning of
prisoners.”29
Under these circumstances, the mission, whose own resources were scant, saw itself
blocked by the same intransigence that faced Major Bauer. Vedder’s superior, Haussleiter,
therefore turned to Berlin. After meeting with Haussleiter at the beginning of May, Colonial Director Stübel ordered Deputy Governor Tecklenburg to look into the matter.30
Tecklenburg warned District Administrator Dr. Fuchs of Swakopmund to do so “discreetly and without saying why.”31 A week later Tecklenburg received the devastating results. Dr. Fuchs minced no words: “In agreement with the government doctor, I regard
the cause [of the high mortality rate among native prisoners in Swakopmund] as inadequate accommodation, clothing, and food, in combination with the raw, unaccustomed
climate and the weakened condition of the prisoners brought here.” The major causes of
death were pneumonia and scurvy. Stopping these deaths was relatively simple. Dr. Fuchs
recommended “accommodation in dry, ventilated but wind-fast rooms, warm clothing
(ﬂannel shirts, pants, blankets, shoes) and some variation in the diet (rice, ﬂour, if possible frequently meat, onions, or oil), and medical care.” He also asked that the collection
camps keep debilitated or sick Herero, sending only strong and healthy people to
Swakopmund. The most damning aspect of the report was the ﬁgures. Whereas the annual death rate among Africans incarcerated in the city jail for 1903 and 1904 was 1.7 percent, the prisoner camp had in just the last two weeks of May compiled a death rate of 10
percent. Annually, that was enough to wipe out the entire camp population two and a half
times over. Because mortality among Herero working and living for private persons was
28. Vedder to inspector, Swakopmund, 1 Mar. 1905, ibid., pp. 48–49. After Leutwein’s departure, Trotha exercised power as interim governor: Bley, South-West Africa, 159; Lettow-Vorbeck, diary entry of 13 Nov. 1904,
BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 34.
29. Trotha marginalium to First Lieutenant Adjutant Starck to commando of the Schutztruppe, Okahandja,
11 Mar. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, pp. 39–40, emphasis in original.
30. Stübel to Tecklenburg, tel. Nr. 52, Berlin, 18 May 1905, ibid., p. 56.
31. Tecklenburg to dist. admin. Swakopmund, Windhuk, 21 May 1905, ibid., p. 57.

Death by Imprisonment
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
lower, Dr. Fuchs recommended that more prisoners be shifted from the military to the 77
private sector.32
Despite these ﬁgures, both Deputy Governor Tecklenburg and Rear Commander
Colonel v. Dame rejected the missionaries’ advice, which Stübel had forwarded, to remove sickly Herero prisoners to the interior to regain their health “and avoid decimation.”33 Tecklenburg hoped the prisoners would acclimate themselves to Swakopmund
with the help of warmer rooms.34 Dame was more candid. So many workers were needed
to unload ships at Swakopmund and Lüderitzbucht that “no substitute could be found for
them,” he wrote.35 Both men agreed that “especially weak” prisoners should be sent to
neither place, but they placed solving the labor shortage above the prisoners’ lives. This
seemingly straightforward, materialist motive foundered in illogic, however, for dying
Africans provided at best only brief, poor-quality labor. At worst, they provided none at
all. Just before the debate about Swakopmund erupted, the district administrator in
Windhuk, where conditions were better, reported to Tecklenburg that he was unable to
provide any workers at all for the construction office, “because the majority of prisoners
of war are ill.”36 We see here one of the abiding patterns of militarily organized forced
labor, not just in the colonies but also later in World War I: force constantly overwhelmed
the ostensible economic goal.
Although better treatment would have served the economic interests of the occupation and civil authorities, improvements were made only stingily and haphazardly. Vedder’s interventions in March, for example, brought the following results: “While the occupation command [Dame] distributed old uniforms to them, an instruction from the high
command [Trotha] took them away again and replaced them with rough sacks that, without underwear, worn right next to the skin, give no warmth.” Trotha had okayed alternating ﬂour with rice, and “for a short time ﬂour was actually available but then unfortunately for some unknown reason was quickly removed again.”37 In the month after
Stübel’s intervention, it appears that some efforts were made to make the dwellings more
wind-resistant, and the occupation command built a hospital of corrugated tin, but still at
the end of June, Dame could report only that “the question of better nutrition for the
prisoners is being considered.”38 The wheels of bureaucracy ground slowly, but that is not
32. Dr. Fuchs, report Nr. 1035, Swakopmund, 29 May 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, pp. 78–79.
Figures are unreliable for prisoners in private hands, but Dist. Admin. Fuchs estimated that about three hundred
Herero were with private people. In the same two-week period where the military camp had a 10% death rate,
the private ﬁgure was 4.6%, which still would have more than wiped out the prisoner laborers over the year. Ibid.
and Dist. Admin. Fuchs to Tecklenburg, Nr. 686, Swakopmund, 27 Apr. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol.
1, p. 73.
33. Stübel to Tecklenburg, tel. Nr. 52, Berlin, 18 May 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, p. 56.
34. Tecklenburg memorandum, Nr. 7689/05, 7 June 1905, ibid., p. 57.
35. Dame to Tecklenburg, Nr. 13131, Windhuk, 27 June 1905, ibid., pp. 60–61.
36. Dist. Admin. Capt. Puder to Tecklenburg, Windhuk, 20 Apr. 1905, ibid., p. 52.
37. Vedder to district administration in Swakopmund, 27 May 1905, VEM-Wuppertal, Vedder papers, B/c II
87, pp. 60–63.
38. Dwellings: two doctors reporting to the occupation command described the housing in June as acceptable: Dr. Lowade to occupation command, Nr. 1029, Swakopmund, 15 June 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3.,

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
78 the whole explanation—it took the district office just two days to act on the mission’s suggestion that alcohol be forbidden to African prisoners.39
Although conditions in the Swakopmund prison camp were worse than in camps in
Windhuk, Karibib, and Okahandja, they were better than those in Lüderitzbucht. There,
prisoners were shut up on a rocky island (Shark Island) in the middle of the bay, even
more exposed to damp, cold winds. “The native [prisoners in Swakopmund] are so afraid
of Lüderitzbucht,” Vedder reported, “that when recently 150 men were due to be transferred there, 60 of them escaped despite guards and fences. . . . Another time [when such
a transfer was to occur] a man slit his own throat with a pocket knife.”40 Missionary
Kuhlmann’s superiors sent him to check on Shark Island at the end of July 1905. He discovered the same mixture of neglect, malice, and uneven attempts at amelioration that
reigned in Swakopmund.41 “Housing” consisted of pieces of wood leaned up against the
rocks, covered by sacks. Or it consisted of nothing at all; some prisoners slept completely
in the open, others, between clefts in the rocks. “The result was a terrible dying-off; in the
beginning, as the commandant’s manager, First Lieutenant Wagenführer told me, each
week twenty-ﬁve, twenty, or ﬁfteen prisoners died.” Kuhlmann hastened to add, however,
“that people here are not being starved; they receive more meat than in other camps, and
rice is also plentiful.” He complained, however, of lack of ﬂour. Worse, warm clothing was
unavailable. Death rates had fallen, but still, in the week of Kuhlmann’s visit, eleven inmates died. Sanitation was disastrous. Many prisoners suffered from diarrhea, and without medical or nursing care as their strength left them, they lay in their own excrement.
Shark Island also suffered from inadequate leadership and vicious caprice. The commandant led an absentee administration. Apparently Wagenführer never set foot on the
island himself but delegated complete authority to a brutal overseer named Benkesser.
One day during Kuhlmann’s visit, Benkesser, a former police sergeant, called the prisoners to work detail. “A women so weak from illness that she could not stand, crawled to
some prisoners to beg for water. The overseer ﬁred ﬁve shots at her; two shots hit her, one
in the thigh, the other smashing her forearm. This inhuman creature left her there. In the
night she died. Benkesser told another soldier of his deed.” Yet word apparently never
reached the camp manager, Wagenführer. When Kuhlmann reported the incident to
him, he was surprised and incensed, and told Kuhlmann he would investigate. Unlike at
other camps, charitable donations (for example, ten blankets that Kuhlmann wished to
distribute to the prisoners) were not permitted at Shark Island; instead, all “requests” had
to go through the overseer. Benkesser’s may have been an isolated atrocity, but it was lax

vol. 1, p. 64; Dr. Plappe (Plagge?), Nr. 14376/I, Windhuk, 26 June 1905, ibid., p. 65; Chefarzt Dr. Berger, “Report,”
Swakopmund, 8 June 1905, ibid., p. 65. Hospital: Vedder to district administration in Swakopmund, 27 May 1905,
VEM-Wuppertal, Vedder papers, B/c II 87, pp. 60–63. Dame: Dame to Tecklenburg, Nr. 13131, Windhuk, 27 June
1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, p. 61.
39. Note of 29 May 1905 appended to Vedder to district administration in Swakopmund, 27 May 1905,
VEM-Wuppertal, Vedder papers, B/c II 87, p. 63.
40. Vedder to inspector, Swakopmund, 26 May 1905, ibid., p. 67.
41. August Kuhlmann, “Report on a trip to Lüderitzbucht,” 10 Aug. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal, Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72.

Death by Imprisonment
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
administration that permitted the ever-present potential for brutality to become real. 79
Laxity (or administrative incompetence) was the systemic result of making prisoners a
low priority.
Deportation was another method of handling prisoners of war. It had many advantages: no guards needed to be detached from the ﬁghting forces, escape was impossible,
and “problem natives” disappeared from the colony entirely. Deportation was a “ﬁnal solution.” But it was also the ﬁrst solution to the prisoner problem that occurred to Governor
Leutwein. Already in January 1904, Herero living in Swakopmund or who had been captured along the railroad lines were interned in the ﬁrst prisoner-of-war “camp,” the ship
Eduard Bohlen belonging to the Woermann Line. It sailed for Cape Town on 20 January,
just six days after the revolt began, carrying 282 Herero, who thereafter worked as miners
in South Africa.42 Colonial administrators, who thought in terms of populations and their
instrumentalization, easily arrived at deportation as a solution to security problems.
Deportation was the fate of a unit of ninety or so Witbooi soldiers who had fought
with the Schutztruppe but were disarmed and interned when news of the Witbooi uprising reached the troops in early October 1904. It appears to have been Governor Leutwein,
not Trotha, who suggested deportation: “The natives would understand it better if we shot
the 80 [sic] Witboois, than if we fed them at state’s expense. Using them as workers is out
of the question because of danger of escape.”43 There was widespread agreement that deportation was the best way to maintain security.44 Thereupon, the Witboois, whose numbers had swelled to 118,45 were sent to another German colony, Togo.
For the ﬁrst month, the Witboois were healthy. But as soon as a group was sent to
work in the interior, they acquired malaria, and then, weakened, dysentery and lung diseases.46 By 15 May, sixteen had died, and then in just a week, a contagious illness claimed
another thirty-six.47 By mid-July the dead had reached sixty-three; only eleven prisoners
were healthy.48 The climate, unaccustomed pathogens, and strange food made Togo
deadly. Missionaries checking on the Witboois since December did not report ill-treatment.49 But the mission concluded that the Witboois had to be repatriated if they were to
survive.50 Meanwhile, the Togo administration improved rations further (the Witboois
had already been receiving more meat than was usually allotted to Africans), providing
meat and ﬁsh soup on alternate days, “rice, Zwieback, tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco (and oc42. Zeller, “ ‘Wie Vieh,’ ” 227.
43. Leutwein, tel. Nr. 210, Windhuk, 21 Oct. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 5.
44. Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 178; Viktor Franke, diary entry, 25 Oct. 1904, BAKoblenz, Nl. Franke, Nr. 3, p. 118; Deutsch-Südwestafrikanische Zeitung 43 (26 Oct. 1904), 2. See also Zimmerer’s
account, Deutsche Herrschaft, 49–55.
45. Not all of the deportees were necessarily soldiers or Witboois but Nama of other clans: Rohrbach, Aus
Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 178–79.
46. Dr. Krueger, Report, Lome, 24 June 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, pp. 37–38.
47. Dep. Gov. Schlettwein to Col. Dept., Lome, 26 June 1905, ibid., p. 36.
48. Station administrator Pfeil to Col. Dept., tel., Lome, 15 July 1905, ibid., p. 28.
49. August Schreiber to Spiecker, Bremen, 20 Dec. 1904, VEM-Wuppertal, papers relating to Witboois, C/i
17; excerpt from a letter from missionary Osswald, Lome, 30 Mar. 1905, ibid.
50. Schreiber to Haussleiter, Bremen, 22 Apr. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal, papers relating to care (Fürsorge), C/o
5, p. 86.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
80

Lt. Gen. Lothar von Trotha and Witbooi troops at Okahandja, SWA, June or July 1904. Courtesy of
Stadt- und Universitätsbibliothek, Afrikaabteilung, Frankfurt am Main, Nr. 010-2112-04.

casionally corned beef).”51 It gave quinine prophylaxis against malaria, but either in insufficient quantities or too late to help. But it despaired of providing guards sufficient to
force the Witboois to achieve German standards of cleanliness.52
As none of these measures seemed to work, the governor of Togo, supported by the doctors, at the end of June 1905 demanded that the surviving Witboois be sent back to their
homeland.53 The Colonial Department relayed this request to Deputy Governor Tecklenburg and General Trotha, who, acting independently, but with a united vehemence, rejected
it. Tecklenburg remarked that the “high mortality was not surprising; it must be regarded as
retaliation for the uprising.”54 A Colonial Department official underlined “retaliation” in
pencil and put a question mark beside it. Meanwhile, Trotha played the patriotic-security
card. He claimed it was impossible to guard the Witboois without chains. “Every German
shot to death by one of these Witboois shall be the responsibility of the person who orders
them repatriated. I suggest you send them to Kilimanjaro in East [Africa].”55
51. Dr. Krueger, Report, Lome, 24 June 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, pp. 37–38.
52. Ibid.
53. Dep. Gov. Schlettwein to Col. Dept., Lome, 26 June 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 36.
54. Tecklenburg to Col. Dept., tel. Nr. 65, Windhuk, 4 July 1905, ibid., p. 22.
55. Trotha to Col. Dept., tel., Keetmannshoop, 24 July 1905, ibid., p. 34.

Death by Imprisonment
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
The Colonial Department bowed to this stiff resistance and transferred the surviving 81
Witboois to the German Cameroons, instead, whose governor was under the impression
they could work as cattle herds. When he laid eyes on them, he was quickly disabused.
“Their current condition makes a pitiable impression,” he wrote.56 Following the instructions of government doctor Krueger for a plentiful and varied diet, and vigorous quinine
administration, the Witboois’ further slide into extinction was halted.57 But the Witboois
were never physically capable of more than light work, and Governor Jesco von Puttkamer pressed from the beginning and continuously thereafter for the return of these
“useless eaters” to SWA.58 As long as the Colonial Department deferred to Trotha and
Tecklenburg, however, the Witboois stayed where they were.
The only other possibility for African prisoners was to fall under the control of private
persons or companies. How many prisoners ended up on farms or in individual households is unknown.59 Contemporaries all assumed these prisoners received comparatively
the best treatment, though an individual’s fate depended entirely on the personality of the
“employer.”60 The largest group of prisoners working for private persons were those
building the railroad for the Otavi Company. They numbered over a thousand at any one
time. This mass project operated out of Karibib, and perhaps because of its size, the heavy
labor, and the national-security interest involved, conditions for Africans resembled those
in the regular prison camps. There was little provision for housing, though the better climate in the interior made this omission less fatal than it was elsewhere. The diet was similarly inadequate, which led to noticeable scurvy by mid-August 1905.61 By October,
scurvy was rampant; three hundred persons were ill.62 However, the Otavi Company, unlike the military, was more interested in work than in punishment. It employed a good
doctor; it made at least partially successful efforts to remedy the diet; missionaries reported less brutality in handling prisoners; and the company requested permission to pay
a token wage to the prisoners in order to encourage better work.63 The annual death rate
for 1905 was high, 11.6 percent, but nevertheless a third less than what the next “healthiest”
military prisoner camp managed to achieve.64
56. Puttkamer to Col. Dept., Nr. 14133, Buea, 23 Sept. 1905, ibid., pp. 45–46.
57. Apparently, Dr. Krueger’s prescription was forwarded from Togo. Public health doctor Waldow to Puttkamer, Victoria, 16 Nov. 1905, ibid., p. 55.
58. Puttkamer to Tecklenburg, Nr. 15020, Buea, 7 Oct. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.M.2., vol. 7, p. 48.
59. A document from 8 Feb. 1906 lists 3,251 prisoners as having been distributed to private persons or ﬁrms
by that date, 1,556 of them to either the Otavi railroad or the Lüderitzbucht railroad. Then 1,695 must have gone
to individuals or much smaller operations. “Nachweisung über an Private abgegebene Kriegsgefangene nach
dem Stande vom 1 February 06,” signed Maj. Maercker, Nr. I J. 3191, Windhuk, 8 Feb. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 151
F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 2, p. 1.
60. Krüger, Kriegsbewältigung, 133–34.
61. August Kuhlmann, “First report on my work in Karibib with the prisoners of war on the Otavi railroad,” Karibib, 14 Aug. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal, Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72, pp. 42–43.
62. Dannert to Spiecker, Karibib, 8 Oct. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal, Dannert papers, B/c II 43, pp. 106–9.
63. Doctor: ibid. Diet: August Kuhlmann, “Second report on the work on the Otavi railroad,” Omburo, 2
Jan. 1906, VEM-Wuppertal, Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72. Less brutality: Kuhlmann, “First report,” ibid.,
pp. 42–43. Wages: Tecklenburg to Occupation Command, Windhuk, 5 Sept. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3.,
vol. 1, p. 105.
64. “Sterblichkeit in den Kriegsgefangenenlagern,” Nr. KA II. 1181, copy of undated report compiled by the
Schutztruppe Command, read in Col. Dept. 24 Mar. 1908, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2040, pp. 161–62. The other an-

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
82

As long as Trotha was commander and acting governor, there was no hope for real
improvement in the military prison camps. In mid-October 1905, just a month before he
was relieved of command, the suggestion was made to give the prisoner workers on the
Otavi railroad a token payment to encourage productivity. Trotha’s response expressed
his unalterable philosophy: “The Herero are still to be regarded as prisoners, and [therefore] no privileges may be granted for the time being.”65

Imprisonment under the New Administration
When Friedrich v. Lindequist assumed office as governor in late November 1905, he
immediately set about canceling the policies of Trotha’s military dictatorship. On 25 November he met with the missionaries to arrange their mediation in bringing the rest of the
Herero in from the ﬁeld. He explained that “the prisoner-of-war status in the earlier sense
will end” and would be replaced by a system of low-wage labor. The new collection camps
run by the missionaries would play a larger role than before: “There the surrendering
Herero will remain for a time to regain their strength and [only] later will be sent to workplaces.”66 On 1 December 1905 Lindequist issued a proclamation that African messengers
distributed among the Herero. It assured them that Lieutenant General Trotha had returned to Germany: “His departure means that the war should now end.” Lindequist urged
all remaining Herero to turn themselves in to the two collection camps at Omburo and
Ojtihaenena. He assured them that no soldiers were present there. All military patrols and
sweeps were ended for the time being. He promised the Herero adequate food. “I have
taken every precaution that you will be justly treated,” he told them.67 To the German
troops he ordered “military operations in Hereroland and the destruction of HereroWerften by patrols to be suspended until further notice.”68 At home, Chancellor Bülow told
the Reichstag (5 December 1905) that the Schutztruppe had succeeded “in completely
breaking the resistance of the Herero,” and that that part of the war was virtually over.69
Given Lindequist’s acceptance of negotiations (and thus of a nonmilitary conclusion
to the war), and his strong interest in reviving the colony’s economy (and thus in preserving the Herero as a workforce), one would have expected the high death rates in the
prison camps to fall. But they did not. In Windhuk and on Shark Island, they reached

nual average death rates (for the period Oct. 1904 to Mar. 1907) were as follows: Okahandja, 37.2%; Windhuk,
50.4%; Swakopmund, 74%; Shark Island in Lüderitzbucht, 121.2% for Nama, 30% for Herero. Traugott Tjienda,
headman of the Herero at Tsumeb and foreman of a large group of prisoners at the Otavi lines for two years, testiﬁed years later to a death rate of 28% (148 dead of 528 laborers) in his unit. Union of South Africa, Report on the
Natives, 101.
65. Citing Trotha, Dame to Tecklenburg, No. 19929, Windhuk, 12 Oct. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3.,
vol. 1, p. 106.
66. August Kuhlmann, memorandum of 3 Jan. 1906, Omburo, VEM-Wuppertal, Kuhlmann papers, B/c II
72, p. 6.
67. Lindequist Proclamation of 1 Dec. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2119, p. 14; reprinted in Union of South
Africa, Report on the Natives, 102–3.
68. Lindequist to Col. Dept., tel. Nr. 142, Windhuk, 30 Nov. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2118, p. 185.
69. Bülow, Sten. Ber., 6th legis. per., 2nd session, 8th meeting, 9 Dec. 1905, vol. 214, p. 191.

Death by Imprisonment
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
their pinnacle under Lindequist’s administration.70 Yet, Lindequist’s relatively enlightened 83
attitude was genuine. He approved the Otavi Company’s request to pay prisoner laborers
a small wage, for example.71 And when missionaries complained that work requirements
made church attendance impossible for prisoners, Lindequist intervened on their behalf.72 Lindequist’s attitude encouraged or permitted ameliorative policies by the occupation command that Trotha had blocked. The order calling for more Herero prisoners to
be sent to Swakopmund in December 1905, for example, stipulated that families were not
to be broken up, that only healthy prisoners be sent, and that prisoners “be carefully provided with clothing and blankets suitable to the raw climate; further, they are to take with
them two days’ rations (generously measured).”73 This was a different atmosphere from
the Trotha era. Why did it not bring greater beneﬁt?
Part of the reason lies in the extreme debility of the surrendering Herero, six thousand
more of whom had surrendered between December 1905 and the end of April 1906.74 Although some of the ﬁrst to arrive were in fair shape, the rest “were so skinny and weak that
they could not immediately be used for work. They generally stay several weeks in the
[collection] camp, before being sent on.”75 Even those who appeared to be well were
highly susceptible to illness. Kuhlmann, the most understanding and empathetic of the
missionaries, who ran the camp at Omburo, reported that “as soon as they [the healthy
ones] are put on strange food, they become sick.”76 And strange food was all the military
and missionaries had to offer. The condition of the Herero, therefore, required generous,
long-term, patient, and attentive treatment. This they did not receive.
But the Herero people’s poor health, which was of course a result of German military
policy, is an inadequate explanation of the tremendous mortality rates. For the Nama
prisoners, who were usually in better shape on their arrival in the prison camps, died in
even greater proportion than the Herero. And their deaths occurred primarily under the
Lindequist administration.
Several factors worked against the positive effects one might have expected from Lindequist’s interest in preserving African prisoners as a workforce. One was the very interest
in work itself; the labor shortage (a result of military policy) and the purely instrumental
view of Africans moved Lindequist to comb the collection camps for every potentially
able “worker,” even though he knew that only the disabled remained in the camps.77
Lindequist came under very strong pressure from the military authorities to provide labor
70. “Sterblichkeit in den Kriegsgefangenenlagern in SWA,” Nr. KA II. 1181, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140,
pp. 161–62.
71. Lindequist to Dame, Windhuk, 5 Dec. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, p. 116.
72. Vedder to inspector, Swakopmund, 29 Nov. 1906, VEM-Wuppertal, Vedder papers, B/c II 87, 97.
73. Maercker to Occupation Command, Windhuk, 14 Dec. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, p. 121.
74. Lindequist to Col. Dept., Nr. 458, Windhuk, 17 Apr. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2119, pp. 42–43.
75. Ibid.; cf. Lindequist to Col. Dept., Nr. 137, Windhuk, 8 Feb. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2119, pp. 12–13.
76. August Kuhlmann, “Reports on the mediation work,” Omburo, 23 Apr. 1906, VEM-Wuppertal,
Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72, pp. 18–20.
77. Lindequist to Kuhlmann, Windhuk, 13 Mar. 1906, VEM-Wuppertal, Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72;
Kuhlmann to Lindequist, Omburo, 19 Mar. 1906, ibid., and in BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, p. 202; and,
again, Lindequist to Kuhlmann, Nr. 2174, draft, Windhuk, 17 Apr. 1906, ibid., p. 215.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
84 for railroad building. Unless the missionaries complained and Lindequist intervened
against the military (which on at least one occasion he did), Herero continued to be
shipped out of the collection camps too soon, and with inadequate clothing or blankets.78
As governor, Lindequist was also beholden to the settlers, who had so completely undermined Leutwein’s policies before him. It was to calm their nervousness at the number of
Herero and the relative “freedom” they enjoyed at the collection camp in Omburo that
Lindequist in August 1906 closed ﬁrst that camp, and then the camp at Otjinaenena, and
in September resumed armed military sweeps.79 Typically, Governor Lindequist’s orders
to close the Omburo camp were interpreted by the local lieutenant, Hellmich, to mean
close it by force, which he did in a surprise morning raid, much to the governor’s disgust.80
If Lindequist was ground down by the combined pressure of the military and the settlers, the civilian government’s commitment to “punishment” was another factor making
it hard for Lindequist to break cleanly from the military and settler viewpoints. Lindequist’s proclamation, he assured the chancellor, contained the obligatory phrase, “the
strictest punishment of criminals and ringleaders will not be touched by [this order].”81
This was not merely a formal sine qua non for “negotiations,” slipped in to satisfy the
chief of the General Staff, the Kaiser, or public opinion. Lindequist truly believed that
punishment and penitence were the cornerstones of wise policy. When he ﬁrst arrived
back in SWA as governor, Lindequist wanted to meet with some imprisoned Herero,
whom the missionaries duly cleaned up and brought before him. The governor told them
that they would go free once the war was over and the murderers had been punished. He
ended their meeting with a question and answer ceremony: “Do you admit that you
began the war without cause and are yourselves responsible for your own suffering?” the
governor asked them. “Yes, we know it,” they answered.82 This extraordinary colloquy
was meant to demonstrate the total sway of German authority; it was a civilian version of
complete military victory. The governor’s conception of guilt, punishment, and responsibility undermined his policy of preservation for work.
The main cause of prisoner deaths, however, was the continued operation of military
administration and its principles. The management of the military prison camps was
characterized by a fatal combination of neglect, red tape, ignorance of the needs of civilians (mothers, children, the aged, and the severely ill), and ignorance and contempt for
Africans’ accustomed lifestyles. More than anything else the rigid maintenance of military
priorities determined prison policy. The two most imperative commandments were “the
needs of the Schutztruppe come before those of prisoners” and “the prisoners’ status as
78. Wilhelm Eich to Lindequist, Okahandja, 9 Mar. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, p. 199; Lindequist to Eich, Nr. 4253, Windhuk, 16 Mar. 1906, ibid., p. 200.
79. Lindequist to Eich, Windhuk, 22 July 1906, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 2, p. 160; Eich to Spiecker,
Okahandja, 22 July 1906, VEM-Wuppertal, Eich papers, B/c II 36, p. 76; Lindequist to Col. Dept., Nr. 1087,
Windhuk, 23 Aug. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2119, pp. 73–74.
80. Lindequist to Col. Dept., Nr. 1087, Windhuk, 23 Aug. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2119, pp. 73–74. See
Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 208–9.
81. Lindequist to Col. Dept., tel. Nr. 142, Windhuk, 30 Aug. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2118, p. 185.
82. Vedder to Inspector Spiecker, Swakopmund, 27 Nov. 1905, VEM-Wuppertal, Vedder papers, B/c II 87,
pp. 30–32.

Death by Imprisonment
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
prisoners must always be visible and palpable.” Time and again well-meant efforts to im- 85
prove the prisoners’ health ran up against these limits.
Once Trotha was gone, the occupation command was much more willing to agree to
improvements. On 24 January 1906, Major Mühlenfels, commander of the rear, issued
new regulations “to stem the continuing illnesses of native prisoners of war.”83 All prisoners were to receive an additional portion of dried vegetables and more fat. The twiceweekly portion of meat was to be augmented by tinned beef. “Where supplies exist, as
long as the threat of scurvy persists, 200 g of legumes can be substituted for the rice, corn,
or ﬂour portion.” Those with scurvy could receive in addition preserved fruit and chocolate. “The garrison doctor will decide how much of these semiluxury foods [Genussmittel]
are to be provided, but the limit is 30 g per day.” These regulations “are only to be fulﬁlled
if the provisioning of the troops depending on the same warehouse is absolutely secure.
Therefore, allotment is left to the dutiful judgment of the warehouse manager.” This
order betrays the persistent anxiety that prisoners could take food from the mouths of the
Schutztruppler, and that prisoners might be too well treated.

The Death of the Nama
The greatest scandal of military occupation administration was the annihilation of
the Nama in the prison camps. The death of the Nama began as deportation. Governor
Lindequist had intended to deport the Nama clans to the German colonies of Samoa and
Adamaua after the war was over.84 Colonial wisdom held the Nama to be useless as workers, while the military judged them to be far more dangerous ﬁghters than the Herero.85
Although Lindequist had permitted the surviving Witbooi soldiers (who were Nama) to
return from the Cameroons, his ultimate solution was to remove all Nama permanently.86
This project was sped up by the return to SWA of Colonel v. Deimling, who replaced
Colonel v. Dame as the permanent commander of the Schutztruppe. The recent escape
from prison of some Witboois encouraged Lindequist to assent to Deimling’s demand
that all Nama prisoners immediately be deported as security risks.87 This solution, which
Lindequist explicitly said applied to the entire Nama peoples, was seriously considered at
a Colonial Department conference in mid-July but ultimately rejected by the director,
Prince Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg.88 He did approve deporting clan leaders; but

83. Mühlenfels to governor, Nr. IVa. 17486, Windhuk, 24 Jan. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, p. 189.
84. Lindequist to Col. Dept., tel., Windhuk, 10 July 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 62.
85. Deutsch-Südwestafrikanische Zeitung 50 (14 Dec. 1904), 2; Rohrbach, Deutsche Kolonialwirtschaft, 349;
Deimling, Südwestafrika, 14–16, 35, 46; Estorff, “Kriegserlebnisse,” 96; General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 2:16–17.
86. Dame to Lindequist, tel., Keetmanshoop, 6 Feb. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.M.2, vol. 8, p. 55; Lindequist to Col. Dept., Nr. 61, Windhuk, 11 Feb. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 58.
87. Lindequist to Col. Dept., tel., Windhuk, 10 July 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 62; Deimling, Aus
der alten in die neue Zeit, 113. Settler hysteria contributed to the urgent-seeming atmosphere: Referent v. Jacob
(Col. Dept.), “Essay for the Reichstag on the native prisoners on Shark Island,” Nr. KA II. 1167, 23 Mar. 1908, BABerlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140, pp. 157–60.
88. Memorandum of meeting of 13 July 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 64; Hohenlohe to Lindequist,
Berlin, 28 July 1906, ibid., p. 72.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
86 high transportation costs (130,000 marks) doubtless killed even this reduced version of
the plan.89 Meanwhile, the district administrator in Windhuk, to whom Lindequist had
“given” the returning Witboois from the Cameroons as non-prisoner-of-war labor, insisted on locking them up with extra guards, because he so feared them as soldiers.90
Prevented from the complete solution of deportation, Deimling and the civilian government agreed to a kind of internal deportation: all Nama were sent to Shark Island. The
appalling conditions on Shark Island did not improve with the inﬂux of Nama. Although
food and warm clothing seem to have been more plentiful than earlier, they were still inadequate to stop rampant scurvy and, ﬁnally, death.91 Conditions worsened in late 1906,
hitting the nadir in December, when 276 of 1,464 Nama died (18.9 percent).92 Under the
circumstances, the local missionary, Fenchel, requested a meeting with Colonel v. Deimling, at Deimling’s southern headquarters. “Then I told him,” Fenchel reported, “about
the conditions on Shark Island and asked if he couldn’t put the hundreds of women and
children, who were unnecessarily dying there, someplace else. He said: ‘It hadn’t occurred
to me that there are actually more women than men there. Certainly, I’ll take steps immediately.’ ”93 Colonel v. Deimling had not been paying attention.94 The association of the
rubric “prisoner” with men was so strong as to blot out the obvious facts. When Deimling
learned from Fenchel that the leaders were, not surprisingly, embittered at their treatment, he replied, “I’ll have to be all the more careful in letting the people go.” But he ordered the immediate transfer of the women and children to the missionaries’ care inland,
and searched for another camp for the men.95
But the Nama were not saved. When the remaining men complained at the removal of
their families, the women and children were returned to the island.96 Most of them never
left it alive.
When the head of the mission, Haussleiter, received Fenchel’s report of his meeting
with Deimling, Haussleiter forwarded it to the new director of the Colonial Department,
Bernhard von Dernburg, who in turn directed the civil government of SWA to intercede
to remedy matters.97 Whether it would have done so is questionable. As it was, Deimling’s
successor, Major Estorff, preempted it. Estorff had received a report that Deimling had
89. Norddeutscher Lloyd to Col. Dept., Bremen, 29 Aug. 1906, ibid., pp. 89–90; Aktennotiz of 12 Dec. 1906,
ibid., p. 100.
90. District Administration Windhuk to Dep. Gov. Oskar Hintrager, Nr. 10818, Windhuk, 31 Oct. 1906, BABerlin, R 151 F/D.IV.M.2., vol. 8, p. 217.
91. Missionary Laaf to Director (Präses) Fenchel, Lüderitzbucht, 5 Oct. 1906, copy, Col. Dept., BA-Berlin, R
1001, Nr. 2140, p. 18; testimony of Edward Fredericks, Union of South Africa, Report on the Natives, p. 99 (Samuel
Kariko’s testimony to the contrary refers to conditions in 1905, 101).
92. “Sterblichkeit in den Kriegsgefangenenlagern.”
93. Fenchel report, Keetmanshoop, 26 Dec. 1906, copy, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140, p. 18.
94. Capt. Zülow told another missionary, Laaf, that when he had asked Deimling to transfer the Nama inland, Deimling had replied, “As long as I command, no Hottentot is permitted to leave Shark Island alive.” It is
unclear when this exchange occurred, but it indicates that Deimling’s inattention was overdetermined. Zimmerer, Kriegsgefangene, 292.
95. Fenchel report, Keetmanshoop, 26 Dec. 1906, copy, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140, p. 18.
96. Jacob, “Essay.”
97. Dernburg to Dep. Gov. Hintrager, draft, 21 Feb. 1907, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140, p. 19.

Death by Imprisonment
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
solicited from camp commandant Captain von Zülow. It said “that of 245 men only 25 87
were periodically capable of work (all of whom, moreover, can only walk with canes), so
that staying on Shark Island would lead to a slow but certain death, [and that] since September 1906 of 1,795 natives on Shark Island 1,032 had died.” Estorff was horriﬁed. He ordered everybody to be removed to an inland camp immediately, which Zülow accomplished in under two days.98 Estorff informed his superiors in Berlin that “for such
hangmen’s services I can neither detail my officers, nor can I accept responsibility, because holding the Hottentots in this way breaks the promise I made to the people and
[their leader] Samuel Izaak, with the permission of the commander [Dame].”99 Estorff
had negotiated the surrender of Samuel Izaak and his clanspeople and had promised they
would not be interned. But Deimling soon replaced Dame and reneged on Estorff ’s
promise.100 Estorff now intended to recoup his good name. But he was a week late. On 31
March 1907 Germany had declared victory and an end to martial law. On 1 April authority over the prison camps shifted to the civilian administration, which was no longer led
by Governor Lindequist, who had left the colony in mid-October 1906, but by his deputy,
Oscar Hintrager. Hintrager had thoroughly absorbed the military-security perspective.
He immediately wired Berlin that, in his view, “Prisoners should remain on the island
until the complete paciﬁcation of the land, because except on the island their escape cannot be hindered and the escape of each one of the very embittered prisoners can cause renewed unrest and hostilities.”101
In the interests of humanity, Dernburg overlooked the letter of the law: he recognized
in principle the governor’s authority over the prison camps but upheld Estorff ’s decision.102 In just two weeks after the transfer, the death rate among the Nama had shrunk by
80 percent.103 Meanwhile, Dernburg wanted to know why his February order to improve
conditions had never been carried out; and, above all, he wanted to know how long the
civil government had known about the fatal conditions.104 Hintrager claimed he learned
of them only in February 1907, from Estorff, but he went on to say that he opposed removing even women and children at that time for security reasons.
But even if [the government had learned earlier], I would not have been able to
intercede [to improve conditions], and I have avoided giving the district administration in Lüderitzbucht any instructions whatsoever regarding the Shark Island
captives, because the All-Highest Cabinet Order of 19 May 1904 gives the deputy
governor no authority in this regard.105
98. Estorff to Schutztruppe Command in Berlin, tel. Nr. 461, Windhuk, 10 Apr. 1907, ibid., p. 88.
99. Ibid.
100. Estorff, Wanderungen, 123.
101. Hintrager to Col. Dept., tel. Nr. 89, Windhuk, 10 Apr. 1907, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140, p. 87.
102. Dernburg to Hintrager, copy, tel., Berlin, 11 Apr. 1907, ibid., p. 89; Dernburg to Hintrager, tel., Berlin,
18 Apr. 1907, ibid., p. 95.
103. Böhmer’s enclosure to Hintrager to Lindequist, Nr. 10834, Windhuk, 26 Apr. 1907, ibid., p. 111.
104. Dernburg to Hintrager, tel., Berlin, 11 Apr. 1907, and Dernburg to Schutztruppe Command in Windhuk, copy, tel., Berlin, 11 Apr. 1907, ibid., p. 89.
105. Hintrager to Lindequist, Nr. 10834, Windhuk, 26 Apr. 1907, ibid., pp. 109–10.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
88 Hintrager was referring to the Kaiser’s decree giving the military full control over policy,
which was a convenient alibi for civilian administrators, like himself, to whom mass
death was an acceptable price for security.

The Dead
On 31 March 1907, then, the war was over, the inﬂated Schutztruppe was gradually
withdrawn, and government returned, if not to normal,106 at least to civilian administration. At home, taxpayers had paid 600-million marks to put down the revolts. This was an
extraordinary cost, given that the normal yearly subsidy for the colony was only 14.5-million marks.107 Three times the government had spent money illegally, before the Reichstag
had appropriated it.108 Almost 19,000 German troops had gone to SWA, but only 3,000 of
them had fought there; the rest were absorbed in the tasks of upkeep and administration.109 Of the troops, 676 had been killed in ﬁghting (752, if one counts the 76 missing),
while 689 had died of disease—a typical colonial proportion.110
Against these ﬁgures, the loss of African lives is staggering. The census of 1911 listed
19,962 Herero and 13,858 Nama still alive in SWA.111 Reports indicate 1,275 Herero had escaped safely to British Bechuanaland; at a very generous estimate several thousands may
have survived in Ovamboland or as “ﬁeld Herero” in Hereroland itself.112 That still leaves
approximately 20,000 survivors (allowing for some demographic recovery after 1907).
Even if one were to accept the artiﬁcially low estimate of an original population of 40,000,
offered by those who wish to minimize the catastrophe, this still amounts to a death rate
of 50 percent.113 The more likely and more generally accepted ﬁgure of 60–80,000 yields a
death rate for the Herero of 66–75 percent. The Nama death rate remains accepted at 50
percent.114 Because we lack perfect statistics, the exact death rates will never be known.
But their magnitude can also be gauged by the observations of knowledgeable contempo106. See Bley’s excellent account of the paranoid violence loosed by the settlers in the postwar, “peacetime”
colony: South-West Africa, pt. 3, and Zimmerer, Deutsche Herrschaft, chs. 2–6.
107. Klaus Epstein, “Erzberger and the German Colonial Scandals,” English Historical Review 74 (1959),
637–63, here 645; Bley, South-West Africa, 150–52.
108. Epstein, “Erzberger,” 650.
109. Kommando der Schutztruppen, Sanitäts-Bericht, 2:438–40; Maercker, Unsere Kriegführung, 5.
110. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 2, Anlage 2, p. 335. A later official report slightly revised
these ﬁgures: 648 dead from wounds, 699 from illness: Kommando der Schutztruppen, Sanitäts-Bericht, 2:table
310, p. 405.
111. Diedrich Baedeker, “Kolonialstatistik und Bemerkungen,” Jahrbuch über die deutschen Kolonien 4
(1911), 218–37, here 230. Drechsler cites the 1911 census as showing only 15,130 Herero and 9,781 Nama survivors.
Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 246.
112. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:212; Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 166–67, 213–14;
Sudholt, Deutsche Eingeborenenpolitik, 186.
113. Sudholt, Deutsche Eingeborenenpolitik, 40–44, 185–86; Poewe, Namibian Herero, 59–62.
114. This rate is not accepted by Sudholt, who claims Bley has misread the 1911 census as 9,800 Nama instead
of 13,858: Sudholt, Deutsche Eingeborenenpolitik, p. 43. Bley was simply following Drechsler, “Let Us Die Fighting,” 214. Cf. Drechsler, 229n189, who says that he could not ﬁnd the 1911 census in “official annual reports or in
other sources,” so he relied on the citation in the Union of South Africa, Report, p. 35, whose ﬁgures Germany
never challenged.

Death by Imprisonment
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
raries. Paul Rohrbach had estimated in March 1905 that “probably half the Herero” had 89
died in the desert (with the war only one-third over).115 Estorff, who was nearer to the
dead than any other German officer, since he led the “pursuit” to the bitter end, thought
“the greatest part” of the Herero people had died there.116 Governor Leutwein reckoned
that two-thirds of the Herero had died altogether.117 And Major Maercker, who commanded the rear in late 1905 and 1906 and thus was in charge of prisoners of war, wrote in
1907 that of the seven Nama clans, four “have been so decimated that only pitiful remnants are left over.”118
The question of how many of these people died in captivity is also hard to answer
with certainty. The only official summary report I have been able to ﬁnd is the 1908 compilation by the Schutztruppe Command, which estimated 15,000 Herero and 2,000 Nama
captured, of whom 7,682 died.119 The Schutztruppe thus admitted a death rate of 45.2 percent. But their ﬁgures are incomplete. They lack any numbers for Karibib for 1906 and
1907. And internal evidence, interpreted in the most conservative possible way, shows a
minimum of 20,702 prisoners taken, not 17,000.120 The official history says that at the
war’s end, 16,000 prisoners were alive in German hands; if this were true, then, together
with the 7,682 dead listed by the 1908 Schutztruppe report, that would mean a total of
23,682 prisoners had been taken.121 In November 1907, in front of the German Colonial
Society, Major Maercker claimed that 20,000 prisoners had surrendered in just the period
after Governor Lindequist’s proclamation of 1 December 1905.122 If that is true, then the
Schutztruppe took over 33,000 Africans prisoner, since Maercker had listed 13,216 prisoners alive and in German hands on 8 December 1905.123 If 16,000 of these survived, as the
115. Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 195.
116. Estorff, Kriegserlebnisse, 92.
117. Leutwein, Elf Jahre, 542.
118. Maercker, Unsere Kriegführung, 57–58.
119. “Sterblichkeit in den Kriegsgefangenenlagern in SWA,” Nr. KA II. 1181, minuted in Col. Dept. on 24
Mar. 1908, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140, pp. 161–62.
120. The ﬁgure 20,702 comes from adding the 13,216 prisoners listed as alive and in German hands on 8 Dec.
1905 (Maercker, Anlage to Report Nr. 26176, Windhuk, 8 Dec. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1,
pp. 187–88) to the 1,400 who surrendered from the beginning of Dec. 1905 to 1 Jan. 1906 (Dame to General Staff,
Nr. 203, Windhuk, 3 Jan. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2118, p. 202) to the 4,497 total who surrendered at Omburo
from 1 Jan. 1906 to its closing in Aug. 1906 (August Kuhlmann, “Abschluss der Sammelarbeit,” Omburo, 31 July
1906, VEM-Wuppertal, Kuhlmann papers, B/c II 72, pp. 49–52) to the 1,503 who had to have surrendered at Otjihaenena (since Gov. Lindequist reported to Berlin that 6,000 prisoners had surrendered at Omburo and Otjihaenena from 1 Jan. to 17 Apr. 1906: Lindequist to Col. Dept., Nr. 458, Windhuk, 17 Apr. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001,
Nr. 2119, pp. 42–43), plus 86 members of the “Red Nation” Nama, who surrendered on 13 Jan. 1906 (Mühlenfels
to Lindequist, Nr. 949, Windhuk, 13 Jan. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.M.2., vol. 8, p. 105). It is certain that many
more surrendering Herero were gathered in at Otjihaenena, which remained open over three months longer,
and at new collection camps that operated until Feb. 1907 farther east, but whose statistics are unavailable (missionary Olpp, copy of report, Otjosongombe, 14 Aug. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2119, pp. 77–79; Hintrager to
Col. Dept., Nr. 245, Windhuk, 24 Feb. 1907, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140, pp. 81–83).
121. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 2:298. Zimmerer estimates between 21,000 and 24,000;
Zimmerer, “Kriegsgefangene,” 289, and Zimmerer, Deutsche Herrschaft, 44.
122. Maercker, Unsere Kriegführung, 48.
123. Maercker, Anlage to Report Nr. 26176, Windhuk, 8 Dec. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1,
pp. 187–88.

pa rt i . s u p p r e s s i o n b e c o m e s a n n i h i l at i o n
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
90 official history says, then around 17,000 had died, a death rate of 51 percent, not far from
that officially admitted by the Schutztruppe Command.
It is therefore probable that the number of prisoners taken and the number dead were
much larger than the 1908 report tally. In any event, it is striking that in the periodic reports sent to Berlin, the number of prisoners alive barely changes, despite the inﬂux of
thousands surrendering. From 8 December 1905 to 21 January 1906, for example, more
than 2,137 new prisoners were taken, yet the number of prisoners in German hands
dropped by 1,026.124 Major Quade reported 12,549 prisoners alive on 1 May 1906, a drop of
667 from December, when by official count a minimum of 7,400 new prisoners had been
taken from December 1905 to mid-April 1906.125 Some of these people must have been
transferred into private hands and thus disappeared from the military statistics.126 But
surely most of them had perished. The death rates calculated in the 1908 Schutztruppe report are consistent with this massive disappearance, which appears to have consumed numerically almost all the prisoners taken in 1906.127 Two of the prison camps, Windhuk and
Shark Island, reached their highest death rates in 1906. Annualized, these rates would have
been 61 percent for Windhuk, and at Shark Island, 86 percent for the Herero, and 227 percent for the Nama. The latter ﬁgure means that death would have consumed the entire
original Nama prison population plus over twice that number in incoming captives.128
But even the yearly rate of death averaged out for the period October 1904 to March 1907
yields staggering ﬁgures: death rates of 37 percent (Okahandja), 50 percent (Windhuk), 74
percent (Swakopmund), 30 percent (Herero at Shark Island). The average annualized
death rate for the Nama at Shark Island (121 percent) means that the original camp population plus twenty percent more newcomers would all have died in the course of a year.
Despite their incompleteness, these ﬁgures show that captivity was as deadly as war.
Far from being a haven from the ﬁghting and pursuit, imprisonment was a continuation
of annihilation by other means.
And so, as Paul Rohrbach observed, the “peace of the graveyard” settled over SWA.129
124. Ibid.; Dame to General Staff, Nr. 1648, Windhuk, 21 Jan. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 2, p. 83;
2,137: Dame to General Staff, Nr. 203, Windhuk, 3 Jan. 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2118, p. 202.
125. Quade to General Staff, copy, 5 June 1906, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2119, p. 46. 7,400: Dame to General
Staff, Nr. 203, Windhuk, 3 Jan. 1906, ibid., Nr. 2118, p. 202; Lindequist to Col. Dept., Nr. 458, Windhuk, 17 Apr.
1906, ibid., Nr. 2119, pp. 42–43.
126. In 1908 Maercker estimated that 15,000 Herero “might” (mag sein) be in private hands, in addition to
the 15,000 in military or mission camps. This estimate is hard to square with the 1911 census ﬁgure of just under
20,000 Herero. Maercker, “Die militärische Lage in Süd-Westafrika,” Jahrbuch über die deutschen Kolonien 1
(1908): 39–41, here 39–40.
127. 20,000: Maercker, Unsere Kriegführung, 48; 12,000: Bley, South-West Africa, 169.
128. “Sterblichkeit in den Kriegsgefangenenlagern in SWA,” Nr. KA II. 1181, minuted in Col. Dept. on 24
Mar. 1908, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140, pp. 161–62.
129. Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 182. Prein incorrectly attributes this expression to historian Horst Drechsler; Philipp Prein, “Guns and Top Hats,” Journal of Southern African Studies 20:1 (1994):
99–121, here 100. Cf. Zimmerer’s objections to the phrase, Deutsche Herrschaft 5, 13–14. For a similar contemporary metaphor, see Südekum, Sten. Ber., vol. 202, 30 Jan. 1905, col. 4123.

PA RT I I

 

11
Events in SWA followed a pattern that we should summarize before analyzing it in
part 2. First, military practices developed on the spot. The General Staff did not run
events in SWA; instead, it set the expectations (for victory, forceful leadership, and
proper priorities) that suffused operations. Scripts and routines then unfolded, if not
automatically, then almost thoughtlessly: the single concentric battle of annihilation,
the ﬁerce pursuit, and the punitive internment of the rebel population. Courtsmartial with frequent executions led to immediate executions, then to the wholesale
targeting of all ﬂeeing Africans, and, ﬁnally, to massacre. Unrealism permeated
planning and execution. As Germans began to suffer from scarcity and poor
logistics, their standard for treatment of Africans sank to a below-subsistence level.
Failure to achieve the Siegfrieden, the victory of military force, resulted in repeated,
widening spirals of violence and ﬁnally suggested an equally total analogue, the
disappearance of the native problem, either by deportation, expulsion, or death.
Only after annihilation had occurred did Trotha raise it to the level of policy.
The slide to extremes in SWA thus had several characteristics: it was
developmental, not ordered; it was dysfunctional (it destroyed the African workforce
and the colony’s cattle and it prolonged the war, thus raising German casualties and
expenses); and it was irrational from the perspective of goals or real limits to action.
We must therefore seek its rationality elsewhere, in the unexamined assumptions
and institutional habits of the military, that is, in military culture.
91

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
92

Military culture is a particular variant of organizational culture. The
organizational-cultural perspective of social science is valuable for its focus on
patterns of cognition and practice that organizations, including militaries, build
from the past and embed in methods of operation, routines, expectations, and
basic assumptions. Organizational culture is liable to produce irrationality and
dysfunction because the lessons of the past may be a poor guide to problems of the
present, and because its most inﬂuential tenets are often unconscious, hidden, or
taken for granted, and therefore difficult to correct. Nevertheless, organizational
culture is more likely to determine action than is explicit policy or ideology.
Germany’s particular military culture was strongly the consequence of the
military’s peculiar status in the constitution and politics. In SWA we saw how
the government’s decision to treat the revolt as a national security issue
immediately shifted power to the military. But the Kaiser’s legal ability to cancel
civil government (by handing affairs to the General Staff, impeding
negotiations, choosing Trotha, and approving martial law) was decisive in
permitting the untrammeled sway of military authority. Freedom from civilpolitical oversight had dramatic repercussions on Germany’s military culture.
We will begin the analysis of Germany’s military culture by looking at its
historical development in the wars of uniﬁcation and how the “lessons” learned
became institutionalized and codiﬁed. The distance between Germany’s rules
and contemporary international law is striking.
The next step is to look at operational practices: Were Germany’s other wars
before 1914 prosecuted in the same way as in SWA? Do we ﬁnd typical
expectations for warfare, planning shortfalls, and treatment of enemy ﬁghters
and civilians? Are these characteristic only of colonial warfare, or also of
European conﬂicts?
From practices and operations we move up a notch of abstraction to
doctrines, where one would expect to ﬁnd strategic reﬂection, or at least explicit
statements about how to wage war. The Schlieffen Plan provides a convenient
distillation of military culture at the doctrinal level.
Two questions are especially important to pose at each stage of analysis: How
different was Germany’s military culture from that of other Western armies? and,
How did explicit norms (embodied in doctrine or regulations) contain hidden
assumptions with powerful consequences for action? In other words, how did
norms create circumstances with systematic but unintentional results? The relation
between the explicit and the unconsciously implicit is extremely important.
I also examine how the juggernaut of military extremism could be
interrupted or stopped, comparing Germany in SWA with Britain during the
Boer War. My conclusion, that military extremism was more likely to be
prevented by intervention from outside the military than from within, returns
to the beginning of part 2: the relation of politics to the military.
Once the template of military culture is clear, we can then turn to how it
played out during World War I, the subject of part 3.

41
National Politics and Military Culture

C

ontemporary critics, and many subsequent scholarly studies, have identiﬁed the
baleful effects that the German military had on national politics and public opinion. They labeled this phenomenon “militarism.”1 Few observers have focused on
the reverse process. Yet, the peculiar functioning of the German military was
strongly a product of Germany’s constitution and the political culture it engendered.

Military Culture
“Military culture” is a way of understanding why an army acts as it does in war. Unlike military sociology, which mostly has focused on military organizations in peacetime,
a military-cultural perspective concentrates on practices during war.2 By “practice” I
1. Michael Geyer, “Militarismus,” in Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe, vol. 4, ed. Otto Brunner, Werner Conze,
and Reinhart Koselleck (Stuttgart, 1978), 1–48; Volker R. Berghahn, Militarism (Leamington Spa, U.K., 1981);
Volker R. Berghahn, ed., Militarismus (Cologne, 1975); Alfred Vagts, A History of Militarism, Civilian and Military, rev. ed. (London, 1959); Gerhard Ritter, The Sword and the Scepter, 3 vols., trans. Heinz Norden (Coral
Gables, Fla., 1969–73; orig. 1960–68); Laurence J. Radway, “Militarism,” in International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, vol. 10 (New York, 1968); Nicholas Stargardt, The German Idea of Militarism (Cambridge, 1994). On
the relation of the military to society: Ute Frevert, Die kasernierte Nation (Munich, 2001); Ute Frevert, ed., Militär und Gesellschaft im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert (Stuttgart, 1997).
2. Klaus Roghmann and Rolf Ziegler, “Militärsoziologie,” in Handbuch der empirischen Sozialforschung, ed.
René König (Stuttgart, 1967), 2:514–66; Karl Demeter, Das deutsche Offizierskorps (Berlin, 1930); Franz Carl Endres, “Militarismus als Geistesverfassung des Nichtmilitärs,” in Militarismus, ed. Berghahn, 99–101; Vagts, History of Militarism; Samuel P. Huntington, The Soldier and the State (Cambridge, 1957); Morris Janowitz, Military
Conﬂict (Beverly Hills, Calif., 1975); Karl Rohe, “Militarismus, soldatische Haltung, und Führerideologie,” in
Militarismus, ed. Berghahn, 267–82; Hans Paul Bahrdt, Die Gesellschaft und ihre Soldaten (Munich, 1987); Emilio
Willems, Der preussisch-deutsche Militarismus (Cologne, 1984); Wilfried von Bredow, “Erkundungsziel Militärwelt,” in Militär als Lebenswelt, ed. Wolfgang R. Vogt (Opladen, Germany, 1988); Wolfgang R. Vogt, ed., Militär

93

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
94 mean two things: the actions that result consciously from applied doctrine and training,
and the habitual actions that seem obvious by virtue of unquestioned assumptions or
necessary by virtue of the unintended consequences of regular military procedure. Two
ﬁelds analyze practices in this sense: anthropology and the sociological subﬁeld of organizational culture. Using both one can develop a conception of military culture that will
help explain how and why a particular military behaved as it did in wartime.
Cultural anthropologist Clyde Kluckhohn provides especially useful observations on
what “culture”3 is:
By “culture” we mean all those historically created designs for living, explicit and
implicit, rational, irrational, and nonrational, that exist at any given time as potential guides for the behavior of men.
“Design” denotes both “theory” and “practice.” “Design” is meant to designate
both “behavioral patterns” and “ideal patterns.”
Some of the most critical premises of any culture are often unstated, even by the
intellectuals of the group. Likewise, some basic categories of “thinking” are implicit.
[These implicit parts of culture operate unconsciously, in the sense of being] “not
verbalized” or “not habitually verbalized”—the unstated premises, for
example. . . . In every culture there are certain pervasive principles of “orderings” . . . certain clusters that persistently turn up.4
Kluckhohn’s deﬁnition of culture contains several important elements. First, culture consists of an interrelation between norms and actual behavior (practices) tested through
time, both affecting each other. It is not simply an idea template that stamps out approved
behavior. Second, much of culture operates implicitly; it is unexamined and unverbalized. That means, third, that it does not necessarily operate in relation to “rational” goals.

als Gegenkultur (Opladen, Germany, 1986), 171–79; Paul Klein and Ekkehard Lippert, eds., Militär und
Gesellschaft (Munich, 1979).
3. On different anthropological interpretations of “culture” see Marietta L. Baba, “Organizational Culture,” in Encyclopedia of Cultural Anthropology, ed. David Levinson and Melvin Ember, vol. 3 (New York, 1996),
891–95, here 894. A convenient history: Ino Rossi, “The Development of Theories of Culture,” in People in Culture, ed. Ino Rossi (New York, 1980), 31–78; Ward H. Goodenough, “Culture,” in Encyclopedia of Cultural Anthropology, vol. 1, ed. David Levinson and Melvin Ember (New York, 1996), 291–99.
4. Clyde Kluckhohn, “The Concept of Culture,” in Culture and Behavior, ed. Richard Kluckhohn (New
York, 1962), 19–73, here 54, 54, 59, 62–63, respectively. I partially quote Kluckhohn and Edgar Schein in an abbreviated discussion of “military culture” in “Military Culture, Wilhelm II, and the End of Monarchy in the First
World War,” in The Kaiser, ed. Wilhelm Deist and Annika Mombauer (Cambridge, 2003), 235–58, here 239–41.

National Politics and Military Culture
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Therefore, functional analyses according to goal orientation (à la Weberian sociology) 95
will be inadequate for a complete understanding of cultural processes.
Militaries are, of course, organizations, and organizations develop cultures in somewhat more speciﬁc ways than do cultures at large. The failure of functional analyses to explain dysfunction and seeming irrationality in organizations led to the development of
the subﬁeld of organizational culture. One of the most useful and inﬂuential deﬁnitions
of organization culture comes from one of the ﬁrst social scientists to study it, Edgar
Schein. He writes:
[Culture is] the total of the collective or shared learning of that unit as it develops
its capacity to survive in its external environment and to manage its own internal
affairs. Culture is the solution to external and internal problems that has worked
consistently for a group and that is therefore taught to new members as the correct way to perceive, think about, and feel in relation to those problems. Such solutions eventually come to be assumptions about the nature of reality, truth, time,
space, human nature, human activity, and human relationships—they come to
be taken for granted and, ﬁnally, drop out of awareness. The power of culture is
derived from the fact that it operates as a set of assumptions that are unconscious
and taken for granted.5
The operation of culture, Schein continues, occurs on three levels (and is therefore accessible to analysis on three levels): (1) artifacts, “the visible behavior manifestations of underlying concepts”; (2) overt beliefs or professed values, the level of justiﬁcation for actions; and (3) learned basic assumptions, which motivate action.6 Surprisingly, levels two
and three are often discrepant.7 Not only is it common for individual and organizational
behavior to contradict stated beliefs, it is common for individuals and organizations to
deny the discrepancy. Summing up the social science literature on this subject, Steven Ott
writes that “many organizations actually reward behaviors that are inconsistent with
their stated cultural beliefs and values.”8 The common disjunction between practice and
norms means that analyses of military action and decision making derived solely from

5. Edgar H. Schein, “How Culture Forms, Develops, and Changes,” in Gaining Control of Corporate Culture,
ed. Ralph H. Kilmann, Mary J. Saxton, and Roy Serpa (San Francisco, 1985), 17–43, here 19–20.
6. Ibid., 21–23.
7. Argyris and Schön call this discrepancy the disjuncture between “theory-in-use” (i.e., practice) and “espoused theory”; Chris Argyris and Donald A. Schön, Organizational Learning II (New York, 1996), 13–15.
Vaughan refers to the “frame of reference” or “predispositions, scripts, conventions, and classiﬁcation schemes”
that operate in a “pre-rational, preconscious manner” in decision making; Diane Vaughan, The Challenger
Launch Decision (Chicago, 1996), 404–5. See also Scott A. Snook, Friendly Fire (Princeton, 2000), 209–10.
8. J. Steven Ott, The Organizational Culture Perspective (Chicago, 1989), 95, also 44; Alexander George, “The
Causal Nexus between Cognitive Beliefs and Decision-making Behavior,” in Psychological Models in International Politics, ed. Laurence S. Falkowski (Boulder, Colo., 1979), 95–124, here 97; Alice M. Sapienza, “Believing Is
Seeing,” in Gaining Control of the Corporate Culture, 66–83, here 69.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
96 doctrine will miss much of the actual motivation and most of the tension, dysfunction,
and irrationality that frequently occur in military organizations and that are a major
focus of this book.
The basic assumptions that remain hidden from the actors, and consequently are not
easily accessible to outside observers, are the results of past learning. Some lessons sink in
deeper than others: those that occur at the founding moments of an institution, for example, or that are associated with an especially inﬂuential leader. One of the most indelible learning processes is what Schein calls “trauma-learning.” Organizations that have
overcome extreme threats or challenges tend to reify whatever procedures they think
saved them. The resulting lessons are doubly memorable: as solutions to the problem and
as prescriptions against the anxiety the trauma caused. Trauma-learning is therefore especially resistant to change and testing. “Cultural assumptions learned by this means can
thus be thought of as defense mechanisms that the group has learned to cope with anxiety
and potential trauma.”9 One might say that militaries are in the trauma business; a great
deal of their learning occurs in times of existential threat. Trauma-learning is thus a common characteristic of militaries, and is, as we shall see, a major foundational factor in Imperial German military culture.
The basic assumptions that organizations acquire, by whatever means, structure their
perceptions of their own essence and purpose, of the problems they must solve, and of the
ways they should solve them. Culture deﬁnes, and therefore narrows, perceptions and, by
reducing the alternatives, makes it easier for individuals and organizations to deﬁne tasks
and make decisions. This strength can also be a weakness, however. It can lead to rigid
thinking, to “collective blindness to important issues,” to a reluctance to seek further information, and to unrealistic assessments.10 The quality of perception strongly affects decision making, to the extent that some perceptions (of the dangerousness of an enemy, for
example) are in themselves already decisions; that is, they short-circuit the process of collecting and evaluating information, weighing alternatives, and making decisions.11
For many reasons, basic assumptions tend to coalesce into a pattern.12 The resulting
constellation of mutually supporting assumptions lends stability and consistency to the
whole. Similar or analogous beliefs developed by other organizations or subcultures will
also be more readily accepted as obvious, “natural,” or true.13 But the internal consistency
of basic assumptions does not necessarily mean that they are logical or rational in an external sense; that is, they would not necessarily pass the test of evidence or argument independent of their own perceptual base. The interlocking, self-generating quality of the

9. Schein, “How Culture Forms,” 25, whole discussion 24–27.
10. Blindness: Turner, “Organizational and Interorganizational Development of Disasters,” 378–97, here
388; information: George, “Causal Nexus,” 101–3.
11. George, “Causal Nexus,” 103; Nils Brunsson, “The Irrationality of Action and Action Rationality,” Journal of Management Studies 19:1 (1982), 29–44, here 38.
12. Schein, “How Culture Forms,” 23; George, “Causal Nexus,” 100–101.
13. Martha Finnemore, “Constructing Norms of Humanitarian Intervention,” in The Culture of National
Security, ed. Peter J. Katzenstein (New York, 1996), 153–85, here 173–74.

National Politics and Military Culture
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
German army’s basic assumptions about conﬂict and violence is striking, for example. 97
Their coincidence with widespread social Darwinist views, which arose independently,
seemed to conﬁrm for officers their correctness.
Basic assumptions are the products of historical experience. They therefore fall into
the category of “irrational beliefs,” as Alisdair MacIntyre would term them, meaning they
are functions of social processes rather than of rigorous procedures of thinking.14 Their
rationality lies in their social history; from other perspectives, they will appear “irrational.”
There are other sources of seeming irrationality in organizational culture, too.15 Nils
Brunsson considers irrationality “a basic feature of organizational behavior.” “Some irrationalities are necessary requirements for organizational action,” he writes. “Choices are
facilitated by narrow and clear organizational ideologies, and actions are facilitated by irrational decision-making procedures which maximize motivation and commitment.”
This latter he terms “action rationality.”16 Few organizations are more dedicated to action
than the military, and few actions require more motivation and commitment than exposing oneself to deadly ﬁre in battle. We should therefore expect action rationality to be particularly well developed in militaries.
Finally, the type of organization inﬂuences its culture. Militaries are “strong” organizations. They are led by long-serving professionals (officers); they aspire to be total institutions that control their charges around the clock, even off duty. They devote tremendous resources to training and indoctrination. They consciously inculcate values (of strict
obedience, indifference to danger, use of violence, for example) at odds with those of the
surrounding society. They attempt extreme regulation via printed rules, and so forth.17 In
short, they produce a strong organizational culture. And strong organizations are often
more disaster-prone than weak ones; they are less ﬂexible and less innovative.18 Furthermore, the disasters militaries produce are likely to be extensive because their task is wielding concerted violence.
The motor of organizational behavior is its basic assumptions. Because these remain
hidden from the actors and often contradict their stated beliefs, discovering the constellation of basic assumptions is not always straightforward. One must begin by examining the
patterns in their practices. But basic assumptions are also revealed in the group’s language
(which indicates categories of perception), myths, explanations of events, standard oper-

14. Alisdair MacIntyre, “Rationality and the Explanation of Action,” in Against the Self-Images of the Age
(New York, 1971), 244–59, here 246.
15. James G. March, “Decision Making Perspectives,” in Perspective on Organization Design and Behavior,
ed. Andrew H. Van de Ven and William F. Joyce (New York, 1981), 205–44.
16. Brunsson, “Irrationality of Action,” 29, 36.
17. Elizabeth L. Kier, Imagining War (Princeton, 1997), 28–30; Schein, “How Culture Forms,” 26; Anonymous, “Informal Society in the Army,” American Journal of Sociology 51:5 (March 1946), 365–70; Maury Feld, “A
Typology of Military Organization,” in The Structure of Violence (Beverly Hills, Calif., 1977), 31–69, here 33.
18. Kier, Imagining War, 32; Barry R. Posen, The Source of Military Doctrine (Ithaca, N.Y., 1984), 32–33,
54–57.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
98 ating procedures, and doctrines.19 All of these will be objects of examination in the next
chapters.

The Military Culture of Late-Nineteenth-Century European Armies
When one asks what produces military culture, rather than simply what it is, one
moves onto somewhat different ground. Here, the breadth of the phenomenon is important. Elizabeth Kier insists, for example, that military culture is not synonymous with the
“military mind,” meaning the assumptions or habits that all militaries share.20 She would
like to reserve the term “military culture” to refer to a speciﬁc military at a given historical time.21 But if one is trying to determine what distinguished one army from another
(why one moved from administrative massacre to attempted extermination, when others
did not, for instance), then it makes sense to deﬁne military culture broadly as the culture
of comparable militaries in the same era, and to include as wide a spectrum of determinants of military culture as possible. Only in that way can one see which factors made a
difference in a given situation.
It is possible to identify seven main factors determining how general military culture
fashioned itself over time: (1) its place in state and society (constitutional limits to its
power, its social prestige, its openness to fashionable ideas or ideologies); (2) its task (in
general the legitimate wielding of deadly force, but it may have acquired other tasks as
well); (3) its hierarchical and (relative to other formal organizations) rigidly imperative
organization; (4) the resources at its disposal (especially technology, funding, and education); (5) its social base (both for the officer corps and the common soldiers); (6) its gender constituent (which in the late nineteenth-century was, of course, purely masculine);
and (7) its past history (especially the last major war or engagement it fought).
Late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century western and central European armies
differed in important ways. The most important of these was the position of the armed
forces in state and society. They also had somewhat different social bases and different
past histories, and some had acquired other main tasks (for example, the protection of an
overseas empire, or internal police functions, or integration of subject minorities). But
they all existed in the post-Napoleonic world of stronger, activist states with more resources of money, manpower, technology, and industrial strength that made armed force
much stronger than it had ever been. These modern armies shared the general task of
wielding legitimate violence in the name of and (presumably) in the interest of national
security; they shared imperative organization, extensive resource base (especially regarding colonial warfare), and gender homogeneity. Their similarities far outweighed their
19. Andrew M. Pettigrew, “On Studying Organizational Cultures,” Administrative Science Quarterly 24:4
(1979), 570–81, here 575–76; Sonja A. Sackmann, “Culture and Subcultures,” Administrative Science Quarterly
37:1 (1991), 140–61, here 141–42; Sonja A. Sackmann, “Uncovering Culture in Organizations,” Journal of Applied
Behavioral Science 27:3 (1991), 295–317, here 297–98.
20. Elizabeth Kier, “Culture and French Military Doctrine before World War II,” in The Culture of National
Security, 186–215, here 203.
21. See discussion in Deborah D. Avant, Political Institutions and Military Change (Ithaca, N.Y., 1994), 14.

National Politics and Military Culture
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
differences. Furthermore, they learned from one another: they sent observers to report on 99
foreign wars and annual maneuvers; they read one another’s journals and treatises. Most
European militaries shared signiﬁcant aspects of military culture, whose features we must
discuss to establish a base line before considering their differences.22
The most formative aspect of military culture is clearly the general task of exercising
violence on a mass, systematic scale for national ends.23 From this task ﬂow most of its
other distinguishing peculiarities. Exercising violence in this way requires the military to
reconcile or accommodate two major paradoxes. First, violence destroys social stability.
Wielded by any other agent except the military, violence is the epitome of social harm,
and therefore its suppression is the ﬁrst and founding duty of the state. Max Weber’s famous dictum that the state is the monopolist of legitimate violence (Gewalt) is only half
the story, for in wielding violence the state at once demonstrates its sovereignty and
threatens to undermine it fundamentally. If violence lasts too long or destroys too much,
it delegitimizes the state that is responsible for it. The military, as the designated agent of
violence, therefore represents this foundational aspect of the modern state (and is thus
symbolically synonymous with the state and its order) and at the same time officiates over
the greatest instrument of disorder and existential threat. Because the military operates in
the realm of the most powerful social taboo, it enjoys exceptional status among state organs. The second paradox arises from the fact that violence is the province of emotion: the
terror of being killed and the anxiety of killing (the breaking of a fundamental taboo) release powerful emotions. Yet, the military is supposed to channel violence in a systematic
fashion toward speciﬁc ends. It is supposed to calculate and operate coolly under circumstances of white-hot passion.
Modern European armies tried to reconcile these paradoxes through bureaucratic organization. The hierarchical command structure, the imperative of near-absolute obedience (Kadavergehorsam: corpse-like obedience), obsessive drill, constant practice, detailed planning, and by-the-book management were supposed to overcome the
difficulties inherent in the military’s assigned task. Discipline had to outweigh terror, exhaustion, and uncertainty; doctrine had to produce decisions in the absence of adequate
information or time for reﬂection; planning had to counterbalance the inevitable chaos of
battle; and routine had to tame the explosively extraordinary.
In order to fulﬁll these, in many ways, impossible tasks, military bureaucracy became
more bureaucratic and overly organized than civilian organizations. All the typical failings of bureaucracy—sluggishness, pedantry, cleaving to the formal process at the expense of the goal, expense, redundancy, inﬂexibility—were likely to reach luxuriant
heights in the military. Most late-nineteenth-century European militaries were rigid and
resisted criticism and innovation.24 They were loath to reexamine the standard operating
procedures and doctrines they had worked out to deal with crisis. Where they had professionalized war planning in general staffs dedicated to this purpose, militaries risked bu22. On tactical, technical, and learning similarities: Dieter Storz, Kriegsbild und Rüstung vor 1914 (Herford,
Germany, 1992).
23. Feld, Structure of Violence.
24. Posen, Sources of Military Doctrine, 32–33, 46–47, 54–57; Avant, Political Institutions, 15.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
100 reaucratically induced unrealism. Future planning was by deﬁnition both secret and visionary; neither outside critics nor real circumstances normally intruded into the illusions that ﬂourished there. Uncorrected by outside inﬂuences, war planning tended to become self-referential. Planners proceeded from what they could control, namely, their
own military-political necessities, and these, rather than the enemy, often determined
their war plans.25
The balancing act of using violence to create order, and using order to control violence, encouraged two seemingly opposite characteristics, which in fact were closely related and mutually reinforcing. One was control mania.26 Necessary discipline and the
understandable wish to exert as much control as possible in chaotic, dangerous conditions encouraged both higher standards of order and a stronger devotion to upholding
them. The symbols of order were omnipresent: the uniform, exact drill, spic-and-span
appearance of the barracks, the day divided precisely into its constituent parts, the myriad
regulations. The more pervasive the demand for order, the more opportunity for disorder
was created, and thus, the greater the danger to order and the more watchfulness it required. All militaries were vulnerable to this vicious cycle.
The second characteristic exaggerated the violence end of the spectrum from order to
violence. Not surprisingly, organizations specializing in the use of force will tend to value
force as the best solution to military-political problems. Such a conviction, however, reduces the panoply of possible military options, which is actually quite broad: threat, feint,
defensive positioning, blockade, negotiation, divide and conquer, Sitzkrieg, and so on. In
the late nineteenth century the exaltation of the violent solution was especially prevalent
and took many forms: for example, the “cult of the offensive”; the ﬁxation on superior armament or numbers; or the demand for unconditional surrender. Another variant conceived of peace in terms of an “order” so perfect that it required the disappearance of any
potential enemy. This type of thinking led to the wish to exterminate.
A further effort to master the problems posed by the military’s task of order via violence was the institution of the rigid command structure and the requirement of stringent
discipline. This imperative quality brought further dangers with it. It hindered criticism
coming from inside the institution, making external feedback all the more important to
it. Yet the military task, risking and perpetrating death, produced a sense of specialness
and bonding that set its members apart from others and made it harder to hear or accept
criticism coming from outsiders, from mere civilians.
Military discipline required that soldiers and officers give up certain basic freedoms
for the period of their service. Foremost among these was the realm of personal choice,
which included the right to question orders. In fact, German military regulations were
more accommodating in this regard than were those of other Western armies (including
the United States), but still, the premium on obedience to orders left little room for critical thinking, especially among common soldiers. Military discipline, which was partly
25. Maury D. Feld, “Information and Authority, the Structure of Military Organization,” in Structure of Violence, 71–84, here 74, 80.
26. Bahrdt, Die Gesellschaft und ihre Soldaten, 31.

National Politics and Military Culture
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
designed to stop individual atrocities, also meant, however, that massacres ordered or 101
even suggested from above would likely be carried out. Under these circumstances, resisting orders for mass destruction, not conforming to them, is the behavior that requires
explanation.
Even fully democratic regimes energetically tried to guarantee that their soldiers
would carry out orders regardless of personal conviction. A range of restrictions aimed to
isolate soldiers from critical inﬂuences emanating from civil society. Thus, they typically
needed to receive permission to marry; they were forbidden from joining political parties;
and their rights to free assembly and speech were curbed.27 Soldiers were, therefore,
everywhere intentionally stunted; wherever the military existed, civil society stopped.
That is why liberals (and social democrats) were antimilitarist. It is also why conservatives
and others who rejected what they viewed as the baleful tendencies of modern society
championed the military as the upholder of (social) deference, order, and simpler virtues.
The marriage of convenience between the military and the conservative or right-wing
spectrum of politics was a general European phenomenon.
The premium on obedience, order, and discipline not surprisingly produced (or continued) a system of repressive, physical punishment presided over by a military legal system that lacked the safeguards of regular courts. Military justice was short and sharp. Military punishment was physical and often brutal, among other reasons because the
treatment of ordinary recruits was already harsh and often demeaning.28 Military organizations were characterized by a readiness to be punitive and to conceive of punishment in
terms of physical suffering. The anxiety and carnage of war only reinforced this readiness.
The “punitive expeditions” of imperial campaigns exempliﬁed the propensity of militaries to regard themselves as agents of brutal punishment.
The fact that the military was an all-male institution did little to put a brake on the
organizational predisposition toward greater use of force. The (not only) late-nineteenthcentury identiﬁcation of males with strength, violence, decisiveness, success, relative lack
of emotion, and so forth, gave individual soldiers a powerful, personal incentive to conform to military ideals and do their duty to the point of massacre and gratuitous destruction. Masculine identity made the military’s task easier, but it was also another factor
pulling in the direction of potentially greater violence.29
These tendencies of military culture, which came partly from its sociology but primarily from the military task and the rigid organization designed to meet it, were common to all Western armies. So were the resources at their disposal in the colonial theater.
27. Vagts, Militarism, 160.
28. Anthony Clayton, France, Soldiers, and Africa (London, 1988), 13–18; István Deák, Beyond Nationalism
(Oxford, 1990), 104–7.
29. Herbert C. Kelman, “Violence without Moral Restraint,” Journal of Social Issues 29:4 (1973), 25–61, here
54, 58; Morris Janowitz, “The Ineffective Soldier,” Administrative Science Quarterly 5:2 (Sept. 1960), 296–303, here
302; Neil J. Smelser, “Some Determinants of Destructive Behavior,” in Sanctions for Evil, ed. Nevitt Sanford and
Craig Comstock (San Francisco, 1971), 15–24, here 22–23. Generally: Ruth Seifert, “Militär und Ordnung der
Geschlechter,” in Ordnung zwischen Gewaltproduktion und Friedensstiftung, ed. Klaus Dieter Wolf (BadenBaden, 1993), 213–29; Ruth Seifert, Individualisierungsprozesse, Gechlechterverhältnisse, und die soziale Konstruktion des Soldaten (Munich, 1993), 64–65, 74, 138, 141–45.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
102 The whirring and grinding of the late-nineteenth-century arms race was of course predicated on the possibility that one state or another would achieve technical or resource
paramountcy.30 But this possibility, which did not in fact materialize, was irrelevant to
imperial conditions, where all colonial powers enjoyed overwhelming technical superiority over the native populations.31 That was the very precondition of imperialism, and consequently technical (military) superiority became the symbol of European (“racial”) superiority.32 As a result, Western militaries fought very similar imperial campaigns guided
by almost identical doctrines calling for the best exploitation of their superior ﬁrepower
and the most impressive display of their material power generally (for purposes of moral
intimidation). In planning for the First World War and ﬁghting it, resource differentials
were more signiﬁcant, however.
In sum, nineteenth-century European military culture tended toward rigidity, encapsulation, control mania, and overvaluation of force. Its professional expertise and discipline tended to make it all too successful in realizing goals of mass destruction. Nonetheless, this potential for mass destruction did not always become actual. It was, instead, a
possible outcome that—if a campaign ran into difficulty, if a war lasted too long, if no
forces intervened to hinder it—was more likely to occur than other possibilities.
In regard to these possibilities that were inherent in general military culture, Germany was not much different from other European nations. But several of the determinants of its military culture were unique. Its immediate past military history, the FrancoPrussian War of 1870–71, was formative for its military doctrine and much of its actual
tactical practice, as we shall see.
The social base of its officer corps was also somewhat different from that of other European armies, but less so than some histories make it appear.33 Nobles were overrepresented in all late-nineteenth-century officer corps. It is true that the Prussian Junkers had
a special political signiﬁcance, but this was more important for domestic politics than for
military practice. By 1900 the status of officer and the ethos of the corps had become
largely independent of the social caste with which they were originally identiﬁed. The ofﬁcer corps had become a Stand: it socialized and assimilated its members according to its
own professional and cultural values.34 It might even be argued that the Junkers had become a function of the officer corps, rather than vice versa. At any rate, it is difficult to
identify Junker characteristics that affected practice in warfare.35
30. David G. Herrmann, The Arming of Europe and the Making of the First World War (Princeton, 1996).
31. With rare exceptions, such as Menelek of Eritrea.
32. Michael Adas, Machines as the Measure of Men (Ithaca, N.Y., 1989); Joseph Conrad, Heart of Darkness
(London, 1902).
33. Hanns Hubert Hofmann, ed., Das deutsche Offizierkorps, 1860–1960 (Boppard am Rhein, 1980); Martin
Kitchen, The German Officer Corps, 1890–1914 (Oxford, 1973); Manfred Messerschmidt, “The Military Elites in
Germany since 1870,” in The Military, Politics, and Society in France and Germany in the Twentieth Century, ed.
Klaus-Jürgen Müller (Oxford, 1995), 43–72.
34. Michael Geyer, “The Past as Future,” in German Professions, 1800–1950, ed. Geoffrey Cocks and Konrad
Jarausch (New York, 1990), 183–212, here 192.
35. For an attempt to do so: Bernd F. Schulte, “Die Armee des Kaiserreichs im Spannungsfeld zwischen
struktureller Begrenzung und Kriegsrealität, 1871–1914,” in Schulte, Europäische Krise und Erster Weltkrieg
(Frankfurt am Main, 1983), 45–124.

National Politics and Military Culture
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
More than anything else, it was the differing constitutional and political parameters 103
that distinguished German military culture from that of its neighbors. These gave the
army additional tasks and created a vacuum in which military culture developed its peculiarities relatively unchecked.

Military and National Political Culture in Germany
The army’s unique place in Germany’s constitution was the most important factor
shaping its military culture. That place derived from the oddity that the (Prussian) army’s
most important task after 1815 was not national defense but defense of the monarchy
against its internal political enemies, and later national consolidation and deﬁnition.36
This is probably the best-studied subject in German history, and we need only summarize
it here.
The greatest victory the Prussian army achieved in the nineteenth century came in
1849 against the proponents of national revolution and reform.37 However, this negative
victory of repression could not indeﬁnitely retard the ever-growing, differentiated movement for unity and liberal and/or social reform. After a decade of reaction, the economic,
political, and social forces pressing for reform coalesced in the Prussian parliament and
squared off against the monarch.38 The issue was, broadly, civilian versus monarchical
control over the army, whose monopoly over violence had determined Prussia’s (and the
other German states’) political course in 1849 and would do so again.39 In this constitutional crisis, Prussian War Minister Albrecht von Roon pushed the monarch to accept the
military’s candidate—Otto von Bismarck—as chancellor. Bismarck’s political acumen
transformed a negative politics of obstruction into a far cleverer politics of preemption.
Instead of merely blocking reform, Bismarck used the army to unify Germany by war,
which gave the military a positive halo of national heroism while enabling Bismarck to
draft an incomplete national constitution designed to keep the army ﬁrmly in the monarch’s hands. This bifurcated heritage, in which the army was both the instrument of reactionary repression and the quintessence of national integration, helped produced the
Kaiserreich’s characteristic political culture, in which the military as symbol and real institution played a central role.
Bismarck wrote the intentional, negative, or repressive aspects of this heritage into the
German constitution of 1871. Together with the Kaiser’s control over foreign policy, his
command of the military (Kommandogewalt) constituted his major power. Every effort
was made to protect this power from criticism by the civilian government and the public.
36. Michael Geyer, “Die Geschichte des deutschen Militärs von 1860 bis 1945,” in Die moderne deutsche
Geschichte in der internationalen Forschung 1945–1975, ed. Hans-Ulrich Wehler (Göttingen, 1978), 256–86; Manfred Messerschmidt, Militär und Politik in der Bismarckzeit und im wilhelminischen Deutschland (Darmstadt,
1975); Wilhelm Deist, “Armee in Staat und Gesellschaft, 1890–1914” in Deist, Militär, Staat, und Gesellschaft (Munich, 1991), 19–42; Bernd F. Schulte, Die deutsche Armee, 1900–1914 (Düsseldorf, 1977).
37. Dieter Langewiesche, “Die Rolle des Militärs in den europäischen Revolutionen von 1848/49,” in Ungarn-Deutschland, ed. W. Bachofer and H. Fischer (Munich, 1983), 273–88.
38. Wolfram Siemann, Gesellschaft im Aufbruch (Frankfurt, 1990).
39. Eugene Newton Anderson, The Social and Political Conﬂict in Prussia, 1858–1864 (Lincoln, Neb., 1954).

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
104 The Reichstag’s budgetary power over the military was curtailed by setting army strength
in perpetuity and ﬁxing military budgets for seven-year (later ﬁve-year) periods. That
gave the Reichstag only intermittent opportunity to debate military policy. There was no
secretary of war; at most the Prussian war minister might answer questions posed by Reichstag representatives. But after the mid-1880s, he was intentionally kept ignorant of planning, personnel, and even many ﬁnancial matters, so his answers were not especially instructive.40 Where ministerial links between the army and Reichstag were lacking, those
between the military and the monarch continued as in absolutist times through the Military Cabinet (and with the founding of the navy, the Naval Cabinet), which after 1883 ran
personnel matters.41 To protect the Kaiser’s power of command from civilian oversight
within the government, the chief of the General Staff (in charge of war planning), the military and naval cabinet chiefs, and numerous other higher-level commanders gradually
acquired the right of meeting with the monarch in the chancellor’s absence, which vastly
increased the probability that policy would be formed according to military rather than
civilian-political considerations. Finally, in the event of war or domestic uprising, Article
68 decreed that all civilian government ceased; its functions automatically went over to
the district military commanders. We shall examine the consequences of the military’s
isolation below.
Not surprisingly, such formal, constitutional measures also encouraged informal accommodation, since political power ﬂowed through military channels. The monarchy
successfully manipulated and thus nationalized its military image. Both Kaiser Wilhelm I
and his grandson, Wilhelm II, conceived of themselves as military men, appearing in
public exclusively in uniform. They cultivated strong personal relations with the members of the officer corps, and Wilhelm II (ruled 1888–1918) surrounded himself with military advisors.42 Prussian court ceremonies, which after 1871 took on national importance,
were saturated with uniforms and military custom. Because both real and symbolic
power were so heavily militarized, ambitious social groups, particularly from bourgeois
strata, acquired military trappings to aid their upward mobility. Bourgeois sons coveted
reserve officer status for this reason, despite its many fetters to their political and social
freedom.43 Military service became synonymous with manhood and with citizenship,
providing another reason for the exclusion of women from politics. And military mannerisms—the “hard look” (forscher Blick), the command tone, stiff bearing, and so
forth—penetrated deep into civilian life.44
40. Gordon Craig, The Politics of the Prussian Army, 1640–1945 (Oxford, 1955), 217–51.
41. Rudolf Schmidt-Bückeburg, Das Militärkabinett der preussischen Könige und deutschen Kaiser (Berlin,
1933).
42. Isabel V. Hull, The Entourage of Kaiser Wilhelm II, 1888–1918 (Cambridge, 1982), 175–235.
43. Manfred Messerschmidt, “Die Armee in Staat und Gesellschaft—die Bismarckzeit,” in Das kaiserliche
Deutschland, ed. Michael Stürmer (Düsseldorf, 1970), 107; Deist, “Armee in Staat und Gesellschaft,” 30–31;
Eckart Kehr, “Zur Genesis des Königlich Preussischen Reserveoffiziers,” in Kehr, Primat der Innenpolitik, ed.
Hans-Ulrich Wehler (Berlin, 1965), 53–55.
44. The classic contemporary ﬁctional account is Heinrich Mann, Man of Straw, trans. Ernest Boyd (London, 1947).

National Politics and Military Culture
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
The military self-presentation of the monarchy and the enthusiastic identiﬁcation of 105
bourgeois circles with military symbols for a long time made it seem that the monarchy
and its noble supporters successfully controlled nationalist politics by manipulating “militarism.” Recent research has shown, however, that the monarchy lost control of nationalist politics, despite (or rather because of) the ubiquity of national-military priorities.45
The repressive-reactionary side of the military could not integrate disparate social strata
into a national whole nor could it deﬁne the goals of the nation any better in 1900 than it
had in 1860. It was the other side, the army as heroic instrument of uniﬁcation and exemplar of patriotic self-sacriﬁce, that alone could fulﬁll these functions. And this was precisely the aspect of the military that was “captured” by bourgeois and lower-middle-class
groups organized into agitation societies.46 As government foreign policy seemed increasingly unsuccessful to these groups, they wielded the national-military bludgeon against
the monarchy in vicious criticism of governmental weakness and ineptitude. These
groups had come to deﬁne what successful national policy was; they had given it content.
This is the process that Stig Förster has labeled “double militarism.”47 Because it produced a hothouse effect on Germany’s military culture, we need to examine it more
closely.
Signiﬁcantly, double militarism began in the 1880s and 1890s in colonial politics. The
Pan-German League, the most extreme and vociferous agitation group, developed out of
the colonial organizations, while the Navy League, the largest and best-funded group, was
founded surreptitiously by the government to whip up popular support for the new instrument of Weltpolitik, the navy. These agitation groups and others, such as the Army
League, wholeheartedly endorsed the main outlines of government policy: identiﬁcation
of Germany with its military strength and, in lieu of immediate domestic reform, an activist, expansionist, and bellicose-sounding foreign policy ﬁt for a world power. The difference between the agitation groups and the government was that, not having to pay for
these policies or realize them in fact, they were free to demand immediate, grandiose successes. When these were not forthcoming, they held the government responsible. For, unlike the relatively conservative national leadership, which at most hoped to use foreign
political changes to shore up the status quo at home, the agitation groups recklessly embraced the revolutionary potential of German foreign policy abroad and at home. They
embraced the transformation of mere nationalism into dynamic, high-stakes, imperialist,
and populist ultranationalism. Above all, as other nations reacted to German imperial,
military, and foreign political actionism by increased armament and protective alliances,
the agitation groups deﬁned the new situation according to their own extreme social Darwinism. The world was a place of ubiquitous, inevitable, existential conﬂict, and only that
nation that was prepared to give itself up entirely to military preparedness would sur-

45. Geoff Eley, Reshaping the German Right (New Haven, 1983).
46. Ibid.; Roger Chickering, We Men Who Feel Most German (Boston, 1984); Thomas Rohkrämer, Der Militarismus der “kleinen Leute” (Munich, 1990); Stig Förster, Der doppelte Militarismus (Stuttgart, 1985).
47. Förster, Der doppelte Militarismus.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
106 vive.48 That required a mobilization of popular masses and a diversion of resources for
military purposes far beyond anything most government leaders dreamed of or wanted.
In short, the agitation groups took the military, foreign political, national premises of
Wilhelminian government literally, and they took them to their extremes. They came to
dominate public opinion on national politics. They were able to do so because they were
more adept at wielding commercial propaganda than the government was, because their
organizations gave a political voice and satisfying activism to hundreds of thousands of
Germans dissatisﬁed with the narrowness and ineffectuality of the political parties, because they seemed like “experts” on colonial and military matters, and because the government had nothing better to offer. Furthermore, the “logic” of nationalism and national security made it impossible for the government to counter the agitation groups:
after all, they were the most pro-German, patriotic, promilitary people in the country. Increasingly, the government lost control over the national arena; it faced enormous pressure from the agitation groups for colonial expansion, arms increases, and war. This was
especially true after 1911, but the process began the moment Germany ﬁrst embarked on
colonialism in the early 1880s.
As for the Reichstag, it, too, succumbed to the intertwined logic of national security
and national imperialism. It did so in 1904–5 because of the revolts in Southwest Africa.
The ﬁrst debates in January 1904 show how reluctant most members were to throw more
resources into Germany’s exotic and unsuccessful colonies. The most powerful argument
causing them to overcome their colonial tepidness was duty: “Because we have established
a German protectorate in the area, we owe SWA every protection.”49 The government
played the national security card by claiming the “dignity” of the nation was at stake.50
Once troops were committed and had sacriﬁced themselves, then the regular mechanisms
of fortress patriotism came into play and even Left Liberals announced that “the current
moment, when our troops are risking life and blood in the battle against the Herero, is inappropriate [for questioning].”51 By the end of 1904, despite all the wrangling over railroad building, it was clear that two main blocs of former colonial opponents had swung
around to supporting colonialism: parts of the Center Party and the Left Liberals. In
short, military engagement made the colony into an issue of national pride and security,
which dampened criticism and converted opponents to proponents. This was a profound
political transformation, for it brought a much larger spectrum of liberal, bourgeois opinion into the government camp than had ever before been possible. Chancellor Bülow
merely cashed in on these changes during the famous “Hottentot” elections of 1907.52
Even though the 1912 elections produced a Social Democratic Party (SPD) victory, the reconﬁguration of liberal-bourgeois politics remained steadfast.
48. Chickering, We Men, 96, 122–23, 129.
49. Spahn, Sten. Ber., 11th legis. per., 14th meeting, 19 Jan. 1904, vol. 197, p. 365, and entire debate, pp.
361–70.
50. Stübel, ibid., 14 Mar. 1904, vol. 199, p. 1772. Also Patzig, p. 1895.
51. Richter, ibid., 17 Mar. 1904, 1896–97. Also, Schrader, p. 1897, and Patzig, p. 1895.
52. George Dunlap Crothers, The German Elections of 1907 (New York, 1941); Jonathan Sperber, The Kaiser’s
Voters (Cambridge, 1997), 241–47

National Politics and Military Culture
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
The story of Germany’s forced uniﬁcation and of the “double militarism” that fol- 107
lowed from it has been often told, but almost always it has been from the standpoint of
the invidious effects “militarism” had on policy, politics, and/or society.53 But this process
also worked in reverse; the peculiar constitution, the unintegrated (“polycratic”)54 governance structure, and the symbolic importance of the military to German populist nationalism all affected the military and its functioning. They strongly shaped Germany’s military culture by deﬁning the framework in which it operated and the force ﬁeld to which it
responded.

The Effects of Political Parameters on German Military Culture
The constitution, drafted to ensure maximum power to the military, had two major
unintended consequences for military culture. First, it created a vacuum in which military-institutional dynamics could freely develop without being crosscut or interrupted by
extramilitary considerations. Although militaries tend toward encapsulation, the German
case was unusual. This did not necessarily shape the content of German military culture
but it increased the probability that whatever content arose would tend to develop to an
extreme. Furthermore, civilian leaders accepted the military’s insularity and preeminence
in times of crisis and intentionally absented themselves from decision making or curtailed
their own critical inﬂuence, as we have seen Bülow do in SWA, and as Chancellor
Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg did in July 1914 and throughout World War I.
Second, the constitution thwarted policy coordination in two different ways. The political, legal, economic, diplomatic, and social considerations a civilian chancellor and
cabinet ought to have brought to military thinking were missing. That is, strategy, which
is the combination of these, was blocked institutionally. Bismarck’s constitution vested
the Kaiser with sole responsibility for coordinating these realms, and either he or his
chancellor had to be extraordinarily gifted to accomplish this task without having an institutional venue regularly providing the occasion to coordinate policy. After Bismarck’s
dismissal in 1890, no such personality ﬁlled the gap. The polycratic potential of Wilhelminian government, with its many uncoordinated founts of policy, could not exercise
oversight, much less domination, over the military. Military policy tended to be solipsistic, even in matters of national security. Incredible as it may seem, Germany’s military
planning after 1871 occurred largely without reference to its foreign policy.
If there was no integration of politics and the military, there was no coordination
among the various military organs, either. The General Staff, in charge of planning for
war, the Prussian War Ministry, in charge of matériel and troop strength, and the Military
Cabinet, in charge of personnel, proceeded along their separate tracks without regard for
one another. The General Staff consequently developed a war plan (the Schlieffen Plan)
that required eight army corps (about sixteen divisions) more than the War Ministry had
53. For example, concerning responsibility for the war: Ritter, Sword and the Sceptre; Egmont Zechlin, Krieg
und Kriegsrisiko (Düsseldorf, 1979).
54. “Polycratic” was Hans-Ulrich Wehler’s term for the Kaiserreich. It has since more widely been used to
characterize Nazi Germany. Hans-Ulrich Wehler, The German Empire, 1870–1918 (Leamington Spa, U.K., 1985).

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
108 provided by 1914.55 German army organization was radically segmented. The segments
were inadvertently encouraged to act solipsistically, that is, in reference to their own requirements or judgments without the feedback or restraint that comes from inconvenient
reality. Scholars have used the term “autism” to describe the resulting organizational behavior, which tended to wishful thinking instead of realism, to projection, and to vicious
circles.56
The organizational weaknesses bequeathed to the military by the constitution meant
that the military was unable to fulﬁll the enormous national roles and tasks expected of it
by “double militarism.” Hungry to legitimate itself and strongly identiﬁed with the military, the monarchy was powerless to counter the populist military enthusiasm generated
by the agitation groups and apparently adopted by much wider circles. Double militarism
enormously inﬂated the military’s symbolic importance to national identity. This went far
beyond the usual equation of the military with national security, which would have made
it important enough. Instead, the military was also the foremost instrument of national
integration (“the school of the nation”); the main guarantee of Germany’s world power
status; the exemplar of its national virtues of technological prowess, discipline, rational
planning, and practicality; and the instrument of its future in a cut-throat, competitive
world. The military was, thus, an overfreighted symbol. And it was impossible for most
people to separate the symbol from the real institution and its actions.
Symbolic overload had at least two important consequences for German military culture. One was stereotyping. Popular enthusiasm for the military and projection onto it
expressed itself in all sorts of commercial venues, cheap books, daily newspapers, magazine supplements, picture postcards, and the like. All of this encouraged a larger-than-life
picture of military characteristics and virtues that was not without effect on the officers
and men. The colonial-military memoir literature, for example, describes the expectations and then the experiences of the writers in repetitive little stories and snapshots that
constitute abiding tropes: the experienced, fatherly senior officer; the dashing, reckless
lieutenant; the nervousness before the “baptism by ﬁre”; the pride, patriotism, and satisfaction afterward; the comradeship of physical suffering; the tenderness toward one’s own
wounded; the cunning and ruthlessness of the solitary hero; the perﬁdy and cowardice of
the enemy; the nobility of and attachment to one’s horse; and so forth. This stereotype,
while useful for building identity and identiﬁcation, was also a straitjacket reinforcing insularity and inﬂexibility.
The most important result of symbolic overload, however, was the imperative to succeed. The widespread public identiﬁcation of the military with Germany’s essence, with
its world power and future prosperity, or simply with Germany itself, meant that the public expected it always and under every circumstance to acquit itself successfully. We have
already seen in the case of SWA what “success” meant: quick, smooth, unquestionable
victory. In that the military’s métier was force, the victory was expected to be in the same
55. Stig Förster, “Dreams and Nightmares,” in Anticipating Total War, ed. Manfred F. Boemeke, Roger
Chickering, and Stig Förster (Cambridge, 1999), 358.
56. Dieter Senghaas, Rüstung und Militarismus (Frankfurt, 1972), 50–62; Schulte, Die deutsche Armee, 72.

National Politics and Military Culture
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
coin, that is, the physical defeat of the enemy. And because the military operated so 109
strongly in a symbolic mode, the enemy’s defeat had to be similarly expressed in clear
symbols of deference and humiliation. These sorts of expectations placed an enormous
burden on the military. It was simply unthinkable that Germany’s premier institution
should fail. The most astonishing sign of the ubiquity of this conviction is the ease with
which right-wing officers convinced most Germans, in the face of every physical and political indication to the contrary, that Germany had not in fact lost World War I but had
instead been “stabbed in the back” at home.57
An enormous cleft thus opened up between the huge national tasks it faced and the
army’s ability to fulﬁll them. For conservative social reasons, the constitution inadequately tapped Germany’s burgeoning wealth (for example by omitting a national income tax), so the army remained underfunded. For reasons of domestic control, the War
Ministry restricted army growth to socially “reliable” groups, so Germany never took full
advantage of universal military service.58 The desire to escape Reichstag scrutiny was so
strong that the army put a premium on handling crises with the available resources, rather
than asking the Reichstag for supplementary funding. And the national tasks may have
been too large to fulﬁll even if all possible material resources had been exploited. In the
event, the army was left to overcome the cleft between reach and grasp by cultivating its
peculiar qualitative virtues and its officers’ zealotry.
The elements of Germany’s political culture that we have just examined—its constitution and “double militarism”—set the parameters within which German military culture developed and ﬂourished. They affected the shaping of military doctrine, self-understanding, training, decision making, and practice. It is to these subjects that we now turn
in detail, beginning with the founding event of the German army, the Franco-Prussian
War of 1870–71.
57. Wilhelm Deist, “Der militärische Zusammenbruch des Kaiserreichs,” in Deist, Militär, Staat, und
Gesellschaft (Munich, 1991), 211–33; Friedrich Frhr. Hiller von Gaertringen, “ ‘Dolchstoss-Diskussion’ und
‘Dolchstoss-Legende’ im Wandel von vier Jahrzehnten,” in Geschichte und Gegenwartsbewusstsein (Göttingen,
1963), 122–60.
58. In 1914 only 36.5% of potential draftees served in the German army, as opposed to 60% in the French
army: Holger Afflerbach, “ ‘Bis zum letzten Mann und letzten Groschen?’ ” in Die Wehrpﬂicht, Beiträge zur Militärgeschichte, vol. 43, ed. Roland F. Foerster (Munich, 1994), 71–90, here 76; Stig Förster, “Militär und staatsbürgerliche Partizipation,” in Die Wehrpﬂicht, 55–70.

51
Lessons of 1870–71
Institutions and Law

P

russia entered the mid-nineteenth century with a formidable military tradition.
It was the product of self-contradictory parentage: the pragmatic “absolutism” of
Frederick the Great, the liberal reforms of the Napoleonic period (epitomized in
the writings of Carl von Clausewitz), the hostile revisions of those reforms that
accreted after the post-Napoleonic restoration, and the antiliberal but technically modernizing “reform” of King Wilhelm I in the early 1860s.1 These doctrinal, institutional, and
cultural inheritances were galvanized and transformed during the three wars of German
uniﬁcation in 1864 (against Denmark), in 1866 (against Austria and the other German
states), but especially in 1870–71 (against France). The Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71 set
the model for the subsequent standard practices of the German army. This is hardly surprising since the Franco-Prussian War was the ﬁrst German “national” war and was thus
formative in a number of respects. The armies of the several, independent German states,
which had fought against Prussia just four years earlier, now fought victoriously under the
leadership of the Prussian General Staff. The war created the German state, revolutionized the state system of Europe, and seemed to inaugurate a new kind of warfare.2
For the military, the wars of uniﬁcation were foundational doctrinally and institutionally. Chief of the General Staff Helmuth v. Moltke’s modernization of the older Prussian military view that the proper way to ﬁght was to concentrate nearly all one’s forces
at a single point with the Clausewitzian aim of totally destroying the foe’s military force
was established as canonical in 1866 and 1870. Doctrine will be the subject of chapter 7.
1. Geyer, “Past As Future.”
2. Watershed in warfare: Daniel Pick, War Machine, 88–114; Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen, and Prussian War
Planning, 85; Martin van Crefeld, Command in War (Cambridge, Mass., 1985), 144; Mark Stoneman, “The Bavarian Army and French Civilians in the War of 1870–1871,” War in History 8:3 (July 2001), 271–93, here 290–91, 293.

110

Lessons of 1870–71
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Here we concentrate on the institutional revolution that 1870 created. This occurred on 111
four fronts: the elevation of the General Staff to paramountcy, the establishment of “mission tactics,” the laying down of principles governing treatment of civilians, and the consequent development of the theory of war and “military necessity.” As we shall see, Germany’s military regulations and its interpretation of military necessity diverged ever more
widely from the principles that were being codiﬁed in international law.

The General Staff
After 1871 the General Staff became the main arbiter of Germany’s modern military
culture. It selectively interpreted the lessons of the past and institutionalized them (in explicit doctrine, regulation, and bureaucratic routine, as well as in implicit basic assumptions and unexamined thought patterns). The General Staff educated several generations
of military leaders in these precepts and through them and their professional habits
helped disseminate these patterns throughout the army.
The Prussian reformers of the Napoleonic period had created the General Staff to ensure systematic, professional planning. It stayed a small and overlooked subunit of the
War Ministry until its chief, Helmuth v. Moltke, demonstrated in 1864 how effectively it
could coordinate operations.3 Moltke’s General Staff received credit for defeating the Austrians at Königgrätz in 1866, thanks to its meticulous prewar planning, audacious use of
the new technology the railroad, and effective staff work.4 Consequently, in 1866 the chief
of the General Staff received the right to oversee troops in war, not simply to plan. The
operative effectiveness of the General Staff was demonstrated yet again in 1870–71, and its
prestige thereafter was unapproached by any other unit in the military.
After 1871 the power of the General Staff increased until its purview encompassed operational planning, oversight in wartime, mobilization, communication and railroad coordination, and training of the officer corps.5 In the absence of an overall coordinating institution, the General Staff ﬁlled that vacuum.6 The consistency it lent (through war
planning, the staff system, bureaucratic procedure, and example) was the main avenue
through which its version of military culture became hegemonic inside the army.
Its officers incorporated the virtues of the officer corps and became models. Serving
in the General Staff was the goal of every ambitious officer, so it attracted the very best
candidates. A competitive examination selected 150 men per year for the war college, of
whom only a third graduated. These select few then served two years with the General
Staff, and of these, only three or four officers were chosen to become permanent members
of the General Staff. The rest commonly rotated between service in the General Staff and
3. Arden Bucholz, Moltke and the German Wars, 1864–1871 (New York, 2001).
4. Gunther Rothenberg, “Moltke, Schlieffen, and the Doctrine of Strategic Envelopment,” in Makers of
Modern Strategy, ed. Peter Paret (Princeton, 1986), 296–325, here 304; Wilhelm Deist, “Remarks on the Precondition to Waging War in Prussia-Germany, 1866–1871,” in On the Road to Total War, ed. Stig Förster and Jörg Nagler (New York, 1997), 311–25, here 321–22.
5. Colonel Trevor Nevitt Dupuy, A Genius for War (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1977), 46–47, 112–13.
6. Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen, 99–102, 226. Hew Strachan appears to disagree, at least for the later army: The
First World War, vol. 1 (Oxford, 2001), 172.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
112

Division staff between Mlawa and Sierpc in Poland, First World War. Der Weltkrieg, illustrierte
Kriegs-Chronik des Daheim (Bielefeld: Velhagen & Klasing, 1915–), vol. 2, 109.

“line” commands, which created a cadre of like-trained officers throughout the army,
who were in charge of operative planning and coordination at army, division, and regimental levels.7 The General Staff operated according to merit, not social background
(noble predicate). It cultivated a colossal work ethic and an ethos of selﬂess, goal-oriented
duty.8 The relatively small number of officers who had enjoyed General Staff training
made up a disproportionately large number of troop commanders and inspectors, and
most military attachés. They also represented the German military internationally, for example, during the negotiations to codify the rules of war at the Hague Conferences.9
The German General Staff was a modern bureaucracy, organized according to the
principle of the specialization of knowledge. It was divided into sections (operations, mobilization, railroad, topography, maneuvers, etc.) that functioned separately and without
much knowledge of the other sections.10 Technical efficacy was heightened through rotation to line commands, which kept tactical problems in the focus of planning, and
through regular staff rides, war games, and “homework,” all of which encouraged periodic, critical self-appraisals.11
The advantages the general staff system produced were so obvious to contemporaries that states without it swiftly introduced the system after 1871.12 As it was meant to
7. Theodor Ropp, War in the Modern World (Durham, N.C., 1959), 137, cited in Dupuy, Genius, 48.
8. Hugo Frhr. von Freytag-Loringhoven, Menschen und Dinge, wie ich sie in meinem Leben sah (Berlin,
1923), 135, 268; Wilhelm Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, ed. Friedrich Frhr. Hiller von Gaertringen (Göttingen,
1957), 69.
9. Otto, Schlieffen, 53.
10. Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 84; Germany, Reichsarchiv, Der Weltkrieg 1914 bis 1918, 14 vols. (Berlin,
1925–44), vol. 12:3; Wiegand Schmidt-Richberg, Die Generalstäbe in Deutschland, 1871–1945, vol. 3, ed. Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt (Stuttgart, 1962), 11–120, here 33–36, 49–51; Otto, Schlieffen, 35–52.
11. See Bucholz’s excellent descriptions in Moltke, Schlieffen, 85–93, and passim.
12. Dupuy, Genius, 113–14.

Lessons of 1870–71
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
113

Staff officers observe a battle from a hill, First World War. Der Weltkrieg, illustrierte Kriegs-Chronik
des Daheim (Bielefeld: Velhagen & Klasing, 1915–), vol. 2, 301.

do, the General Staff guaranteed focused, professional, systematic, operative planning. It
selected the cream of military talent and trained it to high standards, producing a uniform set of motivated, hard-working professionals who could perform almost interchangeably.13 Through this system Germany created the ﬁnest army in Europe, meaning
that it could win battles against superior numbers and it could inﬂict more casualties per
soldier than could its opponents.14 The German army was extremely effective at the level
of ﬁghting.
The palpable successes of the general staff system were so great that they eclipsed the
main danger inherent in its organization: that it could become ever more narrowly focused on perfecting the technical management of violence, until the means became the
end. The triumph of technical narrowness and its counterproductive effects are clearest in
doctrine and in the conduct of World War I, where we will examine them more closely.
For now, it is enough to indicate the direction of developments and the relation of these to
the founding events of 1870–71.
Hyperspecialization is a common dynamic in modern organizations. Its foundations
were laid in the functional structure of the General Staff (its division into sections). Arden
Bucholz has shown, for example, how the railroad section gradually assumed preemi13. Rothenberg, “Moltke,” 301–2; Schulte, Die deutsche Armee, 106–8, 156, 160; Gerhard Granier, “Einleitung,” in Adolf Wild von Hohenborn, Briefe und Tagebuchaufzeichnungen des preussischen Generals als
Kriegsminister und Truppenführer im Ersten Weltkrieg, ed. Helmut Reichold and Gerhard Granier (Boppard am
Rhein, 1986), 2; see also the uniform leadership standards for all levels of officers in Prussia, War Ministry, Exerzir-Reglement für die Infanterie, 2nd ed. (Berlin, 1889) (often spelled “Exerzier”).
14. Dupuy, Genius, 177–78; Bucholz, Moltke and the German Wars; Dennis E. Showalter, “German Grand
Strategy,” Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen 42 (1990), 65–102; superior numbers: Deist, “Remarks,” 315, 317.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
114

Regimental scribe in the ﬁeld, First World War. Der Weltkrieg, illustrierte Kriegs-Chronik des Daheim
(Bielefeld: Velhagen & Klasing, 1915–), vol. 2, 64.

nence inside the General Staff because of its task to plan for the next war15 and, above all,
because it construed that task technically, as the solution to discrete organizational problems (for example, mobilization and deployment). This view is already visible in the experts’ interpretation of Moltke’s victories in 1866 and 1870 as the result of superior organization and technical manipulation. The institutional and the cognitive mutually
supported and mutually determined each other. The resulting narrow view of war then
replicated itself, producing further “lessons” upholding its validity. Schlieffen’s excursions
into military history are famous examples.16
Professional narrowness tended to spiral downward toward the ever more speciﬁc
use of violence. Instead of the strategic, the General Staff focused on operations, or even
tactics.17 This institutional bias (in planning, for example) also had cognitive aspects apparent in the model character of Moltke’s victories. Moltke had won battles; the wars
were actually concluded by diplomacy. The professionals’ interpretation of the wars of
uniﬁcation placed the battles at the center. Thereafter, the battle became the focus of
15. Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen, 145–50.
16. Ibid., 314.
17. Showalter, “German Grand Strategy,” 76–78; Dennis E. Showalter, “From Deterrence to Doomsday Machine,” Journal of Military History 64 (July 2000), 679–710, here 697; Walter Goerlitz, Kleine Geschichte des
deutschen Generalstabes (Berlin, 1967), 131; Messerschmidt, “Military Elites,” 60–65; Förster, Doppelte Militarismus, 20; Deist, “Remarks,” 322–23; Detlef Bald, Der deutsche Generalstab, 1859–1939 (Munich, 1977), 44–48.

Lessons of 1870–71
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
planning, as if it could end war by itself; the military-technical displaced the political- 115
diplomatic.
The organizational-cultural dynamic pressed the spiral ever downward. Decision
making and problem solving tended to revolve inside the narrow frame of the battle, predisposing General Staff officers to seek solutions to military problems at the same level, or
lower (i.e., tactics). As we saw in SWA, when officers faced problems, they were likely to
launch another battle or try new tactics rather than to rethink the problem strategically,
structurally, or extramilitarily.
Planning, the original task of the General Staff, displayed these same tendencies. Organizations frequently have difficulty avoiding self-referential, and therefore unrealistic,
planning.18 In the German case, the narrow focus on battle relegated everything else, even
including provisioning one’s own troops, to the background. Again, the template was set
in 1870: Moltke’s brilliant use of the railroads to deploy huge armies used every single
train, leaving none for logistics.19 The organizational split between the General Staff and
the War Ministry, which was in charge of resources, did not help the General Staff overcome its propensities. We will examine planning in detail in chapter 7.
The General Staff ’s ﬂaws derived from its strengths. Its excellence in solving complex
management problems, its superior, “strong” organization made it supremely successful
at ﬁghting on the operative level. As World War I showed, these very operative strengths
blinded Germany to its strategic weaknesses. Success, in the 1860s and 1870s and later,
measured in terms of ﬁghting capacity, helped block the General Staff from reexamining
itself as an institution.
Similarly, its fabled success in producing a cadre of like-minded professional officers
insulated its military culture from critical scrutiny inside the military. The uniformly
trained staff officers shared so many of the basic assumptions about the nature of war, the
paramountcy of battle, the irrelevancy of other considerations, and the exploitation of operative and tactical mastery, that they were betriebsblind (organization blind), that is, unlikely to see the problems plaguing their own institution. The more successful their training, the blinder they were likely to be.

Mission Tactics
As the General Staff incorporated the lessons of 1870 in institutional form, “mission
tactics” (Auftragstaktik) did so in command and leadership on the battleﬁeld. In 1866 and
again in 1870 Moltke had gotten the drop on his opponents by deploying his forces separately and having them converge at the time of battle. This solution to the problem of
swiftly maneuvering mass armies, together with the expectation that commanders would
attack aggressively, required that officers think and act independently without waiting for
18. Feld, “Information and Authority,” 74; Jack Snyder, The Ideology of the Offensive (Ithaca, N.Y., 1984);
Posen, Sources of Military Doctrine, 47–50; Stephen van Evera, “The Cult of the Offensive and the Origins of the
First World War,” International Security 9:1 (summer 1984), 58–107.
19. Martin van Crefeld, Supplying War (Cambridge, 1977), 105–7; Deist, “Remarks,” 322–23; Goerlitz, Kleine
Geschichte, 131.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
116 orders that inevitably would arrive too late. It took until 1888 for this principle to be enshrined in training regulations, and probably longer before it saturated actual training,
but over time Auftragstaktik became the unique hallmark of the German army.20 It contributed substantially to the German army’s singular effectiveness, but, like its institutional counterpart, the General Staff, it also encouraged dangerous dynamics; it made excessive zeal and actionism on the part of officers more likely.
Under mission tactics, commanders issued general orders outlining the task at hand
and left the details of accomplishment to their subordinates. This system operated from
the senior-most general to the junior-most lieutenant and held good for the ﬁghting as
well as the occupation forces. Mission tactics demanded thinking and initiative. The combat manual (Felddienst-Ordnung) for 1900 made the principle clear: “In every situation,
even the most extraordinary, each officer should apply his entire personality, without
shrinking from responsibility, to fulﬁll his mission, even without waiting for orders concerning all the details. Superiors must encourage this application of personality.”21 A popular, unofficial handbook for officers glossed this rule: “The officer’s obedience must be
self-activating, voluntary and not slavish.” It continued, “The officer must early on fashion his own viewpoint and may express this tactfully and modestly to his superior.”22
Two things prevented anarchy in this system. First, uniform training in operative and
tactical principles ensured that officers would judge military situations and “solve” problems similarly.23 Second, initiative was to be exercised only in fulﬁllment of the mission.
As the exercise manual (1888) put it, “The decisions to be taken independently must always be guided by the coherence [of the plan].”24 Mission tactics did encourage critical
thinking and therefore was one potential source of resistance to standard operating procedures and their consequences. But the critical thinking that mission tactics encouraged
was sharply bounded by tactical and operative parameters; it was self-delimiting, making
it more likely to increase the army’s effectiveness at ground level and even to produce policy drift toward greater violence, than to challenge it.
In order to allow their subordinates latitude, commanders were warned to avoid “intervening immediately in [the operation of] lower units.”25 The directives German officers received were usually less detailed than those characteristic of other armies. Nonetheless, while the mission tactics system produced broad orders, it still contained explicit
expectations of its officers. Moltke himself had inserted the following sentence in the 1888

20. Daniel J. Hughes, “Schlichting, Schlieffen, and the Prussian Theory of War in 1914,” Journal of Military
History 59 (April 1995), 257–78, here 265, 270; Rothenberg, “Moltke,” 296; Dupuy, Genius, 116; Schulte, Die
deutsche Armee, 477–78; Storz, Kriegsbild, 31–32, 167–70.
21. Prussia, War Ministry, Felddienst-Ordnung (Berlin, 1900), 9–10. The revised manual of 1908 was less emphatic but made the same point: Felddienst-Ordnung (Berlin, 1908), 9.
22. Eiswaldt’s Handbuch für Einjährig-Freiwillige, Reserve-Offizieraspiranten, und Offiziere des Beurlaubtenstandes des Trains, 10th ed. (Berlin, 1915), 45, 46. This handbook, ﬁnished in the summer of 1914, reﬂected military thinking just as war began.
23. Rothenberg, “Moltke,” 301–2.
24. Prussia, War Ministry, Exerzir-Reglement, 2nd ed., 126–27. This and other sections on the general duties
of officers are unchanged from the 1888 edition.
25. Ibid., 129.

Lessons of 1870–71
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
manual: “The highest commander and the youngest soldier must always be conscious of 117
the fact that omission and inactivity are worse than resorting to the wrong expedient.”26
In short, mission tactics pressured officers into actionism. The expectation that the good
officer would go beyond the book in the interests of the greater mission became a fundamental principle of German military culture.27 It encouraged risk taking and excess, and
it promised to forgive mistakes (“wrong expedients”) taken in that spirit.

The Treatment of Civilians
The Franco-Prussian War had the same foundational effect on military practices and
their justiﬁcations as it had on institutions. The practices that developed in 1870–71 were
codiﬁed in army regulations that remained substantially the same down to 1914, because
no European war occurred to challenge them and because the colonial punitive expeditions, which were Germany’s main military experience from 1871 to 1914, seemed to conﬁrm their aptness. Furthermore, the basic interpreter of the lessons of 1870 was the General Staff, and its subsequent hegemony over doctrine, planning, and preparation ensured
that its interpretation became canonical.28 The controversial “lessons” of 1870 concerning
treatment of civilians, consistently challenged afterward by other nations in international
conferences on the laws of war, were nevertheless written into German military regulations and almost univocally defended by German jurists. Unofficial guidebooks to proper
military conduct intended for use in combat defended the practices of 1870 and took them
as their foundation.29
The knowledge and habits that developed from 1870 proved especially resistant to
questioning or change because they were both institutionally formative and the result of
“trauma-learning.”30 The year 1870 deserves the epithet “traumatic” because it was literally “existential”—the (future) existence of Germany hung in the balance—and also because its course was unexpected and supremely frustrating to the self-understanding of
the army. On 2 September 1870 the Prusso-German army won the spectacular victory at
Sedan that “annihilated” the enemy in the Clausewitzian sense, that is, the French Emporer’s army surrendered. Yet the war did not end. Instead, an armed popular uprising
raised by republicans and radical French nationalists confounded the Prussian General
Staff, which found itself facing unconventional troops and occupying a surly and uncooperative populace. French popular forces in the end were limited and largely ineffective; the
26. Exerzir-Reglement, cited in Dupuy, Genius, 116.
27. Max von Gallwitz, Meine Führertätigkeit im Weltkriege, 1914–1916 (Berlin, 1929), 185.
28. Manfred Messerschmidt, “Völkerrecht und ‘Kriegsnotwendigkeit’ in der deutschen militärischen Tradition,” in Messerschmidt, Was damals Recht war . . . NS-Militär- und Strafjustiz im Vernichtungskrieg (Essen,
1996), 191–230, here 196; Geyer, “Past as Future,” 189–90, 193–94.
29. For example, Felix Dahn, “Der deutsch-französische Krieg und das Völkerrecht,” in Dahn, Bausteine,
vol. 5, no. 1 (Berlin, 1884), 122–224, written “especially for the German officer and every educated soldier,” 122;
and Germany, General Staff (Maj. Rudolf v. Friedrich, author), Kriegsbrauch im Landkriege (Berlin, 1902) (hereafter General Staff, Kriegsbrauch). Cf. Dahn’s 1884 work with that written at the start of the 1870 war, before its
“lessons” had been learned: Dahn, Das Kriegsrecht (Würzburg, 1870).
30. Schein, “How Culture Forms,” 25.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
118 Franco-Prussian War never became a full-scale guerrilla war. But guerrilla ﬁghters (whom
the Germans dubbed “francs-tireurs”) threatened railways and communications enough
that one hundred thousand German troops had to be diverted from ﬁghting to occupation duties.31 Worse, it was no longer clear how to end the war, now that straightforward
military victory was insufficient.
Chief of the General Staff Moltke, who originally had envisioned a conventional war
to be ended by diplomacy, now in the fall and winter of 1870–71 went beyond these limits
to embrace a more total form of war. Moltke “no longer reckoned with an equal partner
with whom he could negotiate but instead an enemy [who must be forced] to surrender
unconditionally [auf Gnade und Ungnade—literally, at the mercy of the victor].”32 This
enemy now included civilians.
The precedents for harsh treatment of civilians developed in a complex dialectic
among troop expectations, innovative ad hoc practices, officers’ retrospective approval,
and official orders. We saw this pattern in SWA and it reappeared in 1914 in Belgium and
northern France. Expectations were apparently set by a Prussian decree of 21 July 1866
that ordered the death penalty for civilian snipers.33 In the heat of action, some soldiers
omitted the obligatory courts-martial and resorted to summary execution; others torched
houses where they thought francs-tireurs might be hiding. Their actions were at ﬁrst tacitly approved by officers, encouraged further by broad, mission-tactic orders, and soon
incorporated in orders at ﬁrst from junior, and then from senior, commanders. Moltke
then legalized a panoply of harsh responses, though not summary execution.
Moltke recognized the regular army and the national guard as legitimate soldiers who,
when captured or wounded, enjoyed the status of protected prisoners of war. However, he
noted, “Francs-tireurs are not soldiers and thus are subject to . . . the laws of war and to
death.”34 Mayors of occupied towns were ordered to report francs-tireurs operating in
their districts on penalty of having their houses burnt down.35 The “order concerning the
punishment of enemy inhabitants in case of actions against the German army” set collective, villagewide ﬁnes reckoned at between ten and twenty francs per head and added:
“Furthermore, experience has shown that the more effective means [to deter francstireurs] is destroying the relevant farm or, in the case of more widespread participation,
the entire locality.”36 To secure the railway lines, Moltke ordered “harsh reprisals against
those localities in whose vicinity any disruption of the railroad has occurred. It would be
recommended that, in those places where rail disturbances have often occurred, hostages
consisting of local mayors or otherwise prominent persons should be taken on the trains
31. Albrecht von Boguslawski, Der kleine Krieg und seine Bedeutung für die Gegenwart (Berlin, 1881), 57–72,
esp. 67–69; Michael Howard, The Franco-Prussian War (New York, 1961), 249–56, 371–81, 407–12; Walter
Laqueur, Guerrilla (London, 1977), 85–87.
32. Rudolf Stadelmann, Moltke und der Staat (Krefeld, 1950), 246.
33. This account follows Stoneman, “Bavarian Army,” and Howard, Franco-Prussian War, 250–51, 252, 379.
34. Moltke to Lt. Gen. von Werder, Nr. 193, 22 August 1870, in Germany, General Staff, ed., Moltke’s militärische Korrespondenz (Berlin, 1896), 241–42; Howard, Franco-Prussian War, 378.
35. Christian Meurer, Die Haager Friedenskonferenz, vol. 2: Das Kriegsrecht der Haager Konferenzen (Munich, 1907), 109.
36. Order Nr. 380, 7 Nov. 1870, in Germany, General Staff, ed., Moltke’s Militärische Korrespondenz, 368.

Lessons of 1870–71
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
as hostages, preferably in the locomotives.”37 Civilians forced to act as guides for the oc- 119
cupiers were liable to execution if the information they gave was false. In addition to these
reprisals, the German army, after initially living off its own supplies, shifted the burden of
its own maintenance to the occupied country and resorted to heavy requisitions to feed itself and pay for military administration.38
Later apologists interpreted harsh reprisal orders as mere threats. But in fact civilian
hostages were placed on trains; localities were dunned stiff ﬁnes; guides, “spies,” and suspected francs-tireurs were executed (with and without trial); and houses and villages were
destroyed in reprisals. As in SWA, men were targeted far more than women. And, as in
SWA, soldiers continued to profess allegiance to moral values, even when they transgressed them, by blaming the victims or citing the necessities of warfare.39 Some, like
Trotha and Schlieffen in 1904, even claimed the conﬂict was a “racial war.”40 Nonetheless,
one should not exaggerate the harshness; the foremost modern historian of the war,
Michael Howard, concludes that in general the German armies exercised disciplined restraint in the face of sometimes irresponsible provocation by French ultranationalists.41

The Methods of 1870 and the Laws of War
The signiﬁcance of the 1870 war lies instead in the precedents it set. Chancellor Otto v.
Bismarck recognized the harshness of military conduct as something new in Germany’s
history.42 The new methods deemed acceptable after 1870 related mostly to the treatment
of enemy civilians, who were pulled into the vortex of war and who were less protected
from severe treatment than were prisoners of war.
The practical lessons of 1870 became part of Germany’s military culture in several
different ways, ranging from official regulation to not-quite-official regulation, to memoirs and myths (for example, about the francs-tireurs).43 The manual for the rear echelons, the Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung (KEO), is an instance of official regulation. It made
enemy civilians liable to collective punishment in case of sabotage and to service as
hostages on threatened railways. It also suggested that requisitions could be raised regardless of the welfare of the occupied population.44 All three points violated international law
at the time the KEO was written.
The fact that not one official German law book codiﬁed the proper treatment of civilians and prisoners of war testiﬁes to the skepticism with which military leaders viewed laws
regulating combat. Their views were translated into troop training and behavior. Recruits
37. Order Nr. 309, 1 Oct. 1870, in ibid., 318; also Order Nr. 321 and Nr. 350, pp. 328, 351.
38. Stoneman, “Bavarian Army,” 283–85, 287–88.
39. Ibid., 276–81, 278n43, 285–86, 291–92.
40. Ibid., 288.
41. Howard, Franco-Prussian War, 379–80. Stoneman agrees; “Bavarian Army,” 290, 293.
42. Cited in Felix Dahn, “Zur neueren Praxis und Literatur des Völkerrechts,” in Dahn, Bausteine, vol. 5,
no. 1, 45–121, here 63.
43. Myths and memoirs: Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 143–44.
44. Prussia, War Ministry, Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung (KEO) (12 Mar. 1914) (D.V.E. Nr. 90) (Berlin, 1914),
p. 68 (para. 137), p. 69 (para. 141), and p. 52 (para. 103). See discussion in ch. 10.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
120 had few opportunities to learn the international laws of war. They were probably most
conversant with the Geneva Convention concerning recognized prisoners of war, because
the convention had been printed in the back of the Felddienst-Ordnung since at least 1900,
and because most officers and military writers approved of the Geneva Convention. The
broader laws of war as codiﬁed at the Hague Conventions (1899, slightly modiﬁed 1907)
were not included in the Felddienst-Ordnung until December 1911. Recruits apparently received no instruction in the general laws of war; of the twenty books customarily used for
their training, only one (published ﬁrst in 1917) brieﬂy mentioned the Hague rules.45
The resulting ignorance of recruits reﬂected the convictions and priorities of their ofﬁcers. Until 1907, when the instructor was ﬁred, future General Staff officers at the War
Academy received each week a thirty-minute lecture on international law.46 So little did
the laws of war apparently rank in the opinion of the academy that the post was left vacant
for four years, and thereafter the legal lectures focused on domestic law.47 The army did
not even bother to draft regulations for executing the laws relating to prisoners of war.48
The officers’ lack of interest in law is also reﬂected in the complete absence of articles on
the subject in the Militär-Wochenblatt (the main professional journal) after 1906.
The most obvious bellwether of officer opinion was the 1902 manual on the laws of
war, Kriegsbrauch im Landkrieg. Allied propaganda pilloried this book during the First
World War, because it denied the binding nature of any agreements save the Geneva Convention, virtually ignored the Hague rules, and defended by reference to “military necessity” the methods of 1870–71, many of which the Hague and other agreements had since
outlawed.49 Commissioned by the historical section of the General Staff and written in six
weeks by Maj. Rudolf von Friederich, the book appeared under the imprint of the General
Staff and thus assumed “quasi-official” character, as a Reichstag investigatory committee
later admitted, even though strictly speaking only the War Ministry had the authority to
issue official volumes. Asked by the committee to explain the absence of the Hague rules,
which had previously been published in the Reichsgesetzblatt as officially binding for Germany, Friederich replied that he was not a lawyer. His intention had been “to describe and
explain the reigning opinions in Germany,” “the general opinion of the most inﬂuential
persons in the contemporary war literature.”50 Friederich based his compilation on a preexisting card catalog and the libraries of the War Academy and the General Staff. There is

45. Germany, Parliament, Das Werk des Untersuchungsausschusses der Verfassungsgebenden Deutschen Nationalversammlung und des Deutschen Reichstages, 1919–1928, Verhandlungen, Gutachten, Urkunden, Reihe 3: vol.
1, Das Völkerrecht im Weltkrieg, ed. Eugen Fischer, Berthold Widmann, and Johannes Bell (Berlin, 1927), 26–27
(hereafter UA 3:1, page). Also Ernst Stenzel, Die Kriegführung des deutschen Imperialismus und das Völkerrecht
(Berlin, 1973), 36–37.
46. The War Academy was careful to discuss Germany’s reservations about the applicability of certain of the
Hague Conventions: Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 149–50.
47. UA 3:1, 26.
48. The report of Christian Meurer, “Verletzungen des Kriegsgefangenenrechts,” in ibid., 3.1: 29–909, here
181.
49. General Staff, Kriegsbrauch, 2–3, 9, 12, 16, 18, 19, 25, 30–31, 47–48, 49, 51–52, 59, 61–63. The book is heavily indebted to Lueder, Krieg und Kriegsrecht and Landkriegsrecht, whose language it often borrows.
50. UA 3:1, 48, 47, 27–28.

Lessons of 1870–71
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
every reason to believe that his account is an accurate snapshot of what officers believed 121
about the laws of war, since the pattern of undervaluation, rejection, and misconstrual is
consistent with most German writings on the subject and, above all, with the training and
omissions in actual practice mentioned above.
Recruits trained according to the opinions compiled by Friederich would have been
under the impression that the following acts were legal and proper. Regarding civilians:
killing civilians guilty of taking up arms against an occupier loosely deﬁned (Kriegsrebellion); killing civilians guilty of harming the German war effort (Kriegsverrat); forcing
civilians to act as guides, to give information harmful to their own country, to act as
hostages, to work on public works with potentially military value; killing civilians for giving false information; subjecting them to collective ﬁnes for sabotage; killing them as
“spies” without a trial, though a trial was “desirable”; destroying their property if military
necessity, deﬁned as mere success, required it. Regarding recognized prisoners of war:
subjecting them to collective penalties; killing them in reprisal, as security risks, or if it
was impossible to feed them. Regarding native populations in colonies: starving them en
masse to win a guerrilla war.51
The recruits’ training provided few safeguards against the drift to such harsh methods. Above all, ambivalence and lack of interest blighted the tentative beginnings to promote international law. The Felddienst-Ordnung (1900) is a typical example. It began well,
but shrank back after the ﬁrst sentence: “Mild treatment of enemy civilians is usually the
most useful method. However, harshness appropriate to the earnestness of the situation
should not be omitted regarding hostile inhabitants. Mildness and leniency in the wrong
place can become harshness toward one’s own troops.”52 This kind of skepticism came
from the adamantine priority given to narrowly construed military operations, and it
pushed all other considerations, including the treatment of civilians, the wounded, prisoners of war, and so forth, far into the background.53
The behavior of German officers and troops from the very beginning of World War I
indicates that the panoply of harsh methods developed in 1870 were widely considered to
be perhaps unfortunate, but in any case necessary, expedients in wartime.54 The excep51. General Staff, Kriegsbrauch, civilians: 12, 13, 31, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 62, 63; prisoners of war: 14, 15, 16;
“savages”: 53.
52. Prussia, War Ministry, Felddienst-Ordnung (1900), §433, p. 127. This precept had a long pedigree. Hartmann may have penned it ﬁrst: “Leniency and mildness become cruelty, if they let the goal of war slip away and
thus hinder the conclusion of peace”; Julius v. Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit und Humanität,”
Deutsche Rundschau 13 (1877), 123–24. Thereafter, it was virtually a cliché. Col. Deimling, for example, informed
the Reichstag in 1904 that “mildness toward natives is cruelty toward one’s own troops”; in Gustav Noske, Kolonialpolitik und Sozialdemokratie (Stuttgart, 1914), 114. Or, Dep. Gov. Tecklenburg: “It would be a crime against
our own sick soldiers in hospital, against the settlers and their children, if we used even one cow they needed to
provide milk to save the lives of a few Herero prisoners.” Tecklenburg to Col. Dept., Nr. 600, 3 July 1905, Windhuk, BA-Berlin, R 1001 Nr. 2118, p. 154.
53. This principle is nicely explained in the Kriegs-Etappenordnung: “The ﬁeld army requires for the maintenance of its effectiveness . . . the removal of every burden that can hinder it (the sick, wounded, useless war
matériel, prisoners or war, booty, etc.). These tasks fall to the rear.” Prussia, War Ministry, Felddienst-Ordnung
(1908), Anhang 1, 21.
54. See ch. 9.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
122 tions of 1870 had become the rule. The hegemony of the exceptional inside the military institution was doubtless aided by its exceptional task of wielding violence. It was easy to
argue that violence had laws of its own that ran counter to the laws of society, indeed, that
cancelled them out. But behind such justiﬁcations one can discern basic assumptions of
which contemporaries were only dimly, if at all, aware.

Justiﬁcations: “Military Necessity” and the Law of War
German government and military officials and law professors had many occasions to
justify the practices of 1870–71, not only because France, England, and many smaller European states objected to them but because the creation of Germany coincided with an
upsurge in the codiﬁcation and extension of the international laws of war. The Geneva
Convention of 1864 (on prisoners of war, revised 1906), the Brussels Conference on Land
Warfare of 1874, and the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 were opportunities for military and civilian representatives of many states to debate and reach agreement on international norms governing war.55 These debates made explicit reasoning that might otherwise have remained submerged and inarticulate.
The various codiﬁcations of international law from 1864 to 1914 aimed to eliminate violence and destruction unnecessary to the accomplishment of military aims. The Geneva
Convention deﬁned wounded soldiers as no longer combatants; they and medical aides
(military and private) were not legitimate targets. Similarly, prisoners of war were guaranteed humane treatment at the same standards as one’s own troops. Nonofficers might
work, for pay, but not on war-related projects. The Hague Convention on Land Warfare
(1899) was the ﬁrst international summary of the laws of war. Its signatories, including
Germany, were bound to refrain from a list of techniques that spread suffering beyond the
ﬁghting troops: bombarding undefended cities; using new, cruel weapons (like dumdum
bullets, aerial bombardment, or poison gas); or using occupied civilians for military purposes (as guides, hostages, war workers). Collective punishment and ﬁnes and unlimited
requisitions were also forbidden in occupied areas.56 In addition to the speciﬁc acts the nations had agreed on, the Martens Declaration declared that other inhumane or unnecessary practices were equally forbidden, even though they were not contained in positive law:
“In cases not included in the present arrangement, populations and belligerents remain
under the protection and empire of the principles of international law, as they result from
the usages established between civilized nations, from the laws of humanity, and the re-

55. Geoffrey Best, Humanity in Warfare (London, 1980); Jost Dülffer, Regeln gegen den Krieg? (Berlin, 1981);
Stenzel, Kriegführung; Messerschmidt, “Völkerrecht und ‘Kriegsnotwendigkeit’ ”; Philipp Zorn, Die beiden
Haager Friedenskonferenzen von 1899 und 1907, vol. 5, pt. 1 of Handbuch des Völkerrechts, ed. Fritz Stier-Somlo
(Stuttgart, 1915); C. Lueder, “Krieg und Kriegsrecht im Allgemeinen” and “Das Landkriegsrecht im Besonderen,” in Handbuch des Völkerrechts, ed. Franz von Holtzendorff (Hamburg, 1889), 169–367, 369–544; John
Westlake, International Law, part 2: War (Cambridge, 1907); Meurer, Haager Friedenskonferenz; James Brown
Scott, ed., The Proceedings of the Hague Peace Conferences (New York, 1920).
56. The discussion below considers several other controversial issues.

Lessons of 1870–71
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
quirements of the public conscience.”57 The direction of international legal development, 123
then, was to prohibit the practices Germany had used in 1870–71.
The most thorough German justiﬁcation for the methods of 1870–71 appeared in the
popular journal Deutsche Rundschau in 1877–78.58 The arguments that Gen. Julius von
Hartmann, a retired cavalry officer, gave there summarized the official German position
thereafter, and not only among military men. Hartmann was arguing against the conclusions of the Brussels Conference, which had rejected using civilians as guides or as
hostages, collective ﬁnes and destruction of localities as reprisals against civilians who
could not be proven saboteurs, broad bombardment of undefended areas, unlimited requisitions, and the narrow deﬁnition of legitimate soldiers as only regular, uniformed
troops. As a cavalry officer, Hartmann had helped crush the revolution of 1848–49 and
had earned promotion to general while ﬁghting against France in 1870–71. In defense of
the practices condemned at Brussels he argued “military necessity,” which thereafter was
the main justiﬁcation used by German representatives at subsequent international conferences and by German legal experts on international law.59
Military necessity, Hartmann wrote, was dictated by “the great, ﬁnal purpose of war:
the defeat of the enemy’s power, the overcoming of the enemy’s energy, the overwhelming of
the enemy’s will. This one goal commands absolutely, it dictates law and regulation. The
concrete form of this law appears as military necessity.”60 War was the great exception in
human affairs:
War, as compared to peace, is something entirely abnormal; it produces exceptional/emergency situations [Ausnahmezustände—“declarations of emergency”]
in the most decisive sense of that word. Indeed, it is itself an exceptional situation
because it contradicts in its innermost nature the foundation on which civilization and culture rest, the laws according to which they have developed. In their
stead it returns to conditions that permit the unlimited justiﬁcation of individual
power and might [Kraft und Macht].61
The exceptionality of war raises it above law.
War interrupts the legal condition of peace explosively, so to speak, and during its
activity completely suspends the entire legal norms characteristic of peace.62 . . .
57. Named after Fedor Fedorovitch Martens, the Russian representative. Cited in Best, Humanity in Warfare, 166; original in Scott, Proceedings, 547–48.
58. Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit und Humanität,” Deutsche Rundschau 13 (1877), 111–28,
450–71; 14 (1878), 71–91.
59. The best discussion of this concept and the relation of the German military to international law is in
Messerschmidt, “Völkerrecht und ‘Kriegsnotwendigkeit.’ ” Also, Best, Humanity in Warfare, 172–79. Subsequent
German works on the law of war began from Hartmann’s positions; for example: Lueder, “Krieg und
Kriegsrecht,” 186–87, 254–57, 262–63, 275–76; General Staff, Kriegsbrauch; Meurer, Haager Friedenskonferenz,
8–15, 213.
60. Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit,” 453–54. Emphasis in original.
61. Ibid., 123. Emphasis in original.
62. Ibid., 124.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
124

War means the temporary suspension of [the international legal] order, which it
replaces with battle.63
In these passages Hartmann has done two things. He has reiﬁed the existential, exceptional quality of the 1870–71 war as characteristic of all wars: all are unlimited, existential
emergencies. From this follows the second principle, that anything that will win them
must be permitted (“The warlike action is deﬁned by its postulated goal, to lead the battle
to victory”).64 As the contemporary British critic John Westlake pointed out, this view
was an argument from “a necessity, not of war but of success.”65
The ﬁrst set of basic assumptions, then, concerned the always existential, unlimited
nature of war. The second set concerned enemy civilians. As the experience in 1870 had
shown, civilians were a legitimate target of war. “Modern war targets the entirety of the
enemy’s war power,” which meant that “war goals emerge that leave behind a speciﬁcally
military character and include general damage to the enemy.”66 Unlimited requisitions
followed this principle; “Misery and torment should not be spared the enemy—they actually serve to break his energy and conquer his will.”67 Most of the measures wielded
against civilians, however, came under another category: keeping order in the occupied
zone. Here, too, the 1870–71 example was decisive, for Hartmann imagined that the worst
case scenario, popular uprising, set the rules. In cases of popular uprising (guerrilla war),
the people’s “excesses can only be reined in when their paroxysm is met with drastic
means. If individuals are hit hard, as warning examples to others, that is certainly deeply
regrettable, but this harshness is a healthy and preserving good deed for the whole. Where
there is popular uprising, terrorism becomes a necessary military principle.”68 It should be
underscored that Hartmann’s approval of “terrorism” was meant for European populations. No wonder that colonials would expect the same.
The international debate over popular uprisings revolved around two issues. The narrower one was solved at the Second Hague Convention (1907), which recognized uprisings occurring before effective occupation as legitimate and their irregular troops as soldiers protected by the Geneva Convention. The larger question, however, concerned the
character of occupation itself and the rights of civilians under it. The German (and Russian) position was that occupation began immediately behind the front lines, regardless
of whether the “occupier” actually controlled the area. The counterposition required effective administration. In addition, the Hague Convention (1899) ratiﬁed the view that
occupation was temporary, pending the conclusion of peace; thus occupiers were to up-

63. Ibid., 128.
64. Ibid., 116.
65. Westlake, International Law, 117; Best, Humanity in Warfare, 175–76. Westlake was arguing against
Lueder’s restatement of Hartmann’s maxim and pointed out that international law already amply acknowledged
true necessity as a consideration in the legal limits to warfare, Westlake, International Law, 57, 115–17. Lueder,
“Krieg und Kriegsrecht,” 186–87, 254–55.
66. Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit,” 455, also 126–27, 461.
67. Ibid., 459.
68. Ibid., 462. Emphasis in original.

Lessons of 1870–71
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
hold local laws and to limit requisitions to the ability of the area to raise them, and they 125
were forbidden to force civilians to swear allegiance to them, to treat them as spies, to use
them as guides, or to make them help the war effort against their own nation.69
From the very beginning of the 1870 war, the German–Prussian position was different; the instructions for the occupying authorities announced (25 July 1870) that local,
French law would henceforth be superseded by German military law.70 That is, Germany
treated occupied areas (even before it could establish effective control) as if they were annexed.71 Section 161 of the Military Penal Code (1872) made “all foreigners or Germans in
foreign territory occupied by German troops” subject to German domestic law, “just as if
their act had been committed in Germany.” Among those laws was Section 89 of the Imperial Penal Code, which forbade “intentionally aiding a foreign power or harming the
war power of the German Empire during a war.”72 Doing so was treason for a German
(Landesverrat) or Kriegsverrat (literally, treason against war) for others.
The timing of the occupation instructions shows that this view of occupation and its
correlate, Kriegsverrat, was not a product of 1870 but belonged to an older conception of
order, legality, and state authority. It was conﬁrmed by 1870, however. As Hartmann
noted, “No contagion is more dangerous than anarchy.”73 The vision of order contained
in German expectations of (enemy) civilian docility was extreme and unrealistic. It is perhaps most clearly expressed by the specialist in international law C. Lueder, who was at
pains to underscore that civilians were not the enemy: “They are and remain subjects of
law” whose “life and limb, honor and freedom, family circumstance and religious observance are not to be diminished or harmed.”74 But, he continued:
The condition and correlate of their protected and free position is that they for
their part will truly behave completely peacefully, will refrain from every participation in battle and support of their countrymen’s war campaign, that they will
not deny obedience to the occupying power and will refrain from all attacks on or
damage to the troops and occupying power. If these conditions are not met, there
can be no talk of a protected position of the inhabitants. Instead, they will be subject to the full violence and harsh punishment of the laws of war.75
“Obedience” meant the following:
The inhabitants must submit to the limitations, burdens, and forceful measures
made necessary by the state of emergency or war, and they are obliged to give

69. See Best’s excellent discussion in Humanity in Warfare, 180–89.
70. Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit,” 76–77.
71. Best, Humanity in Warfare, 184.
72. Militär-Strafgesetzbuch of 20 June 1872, in Kurt Elsner von Gronow and Georg Sohls, ed., Militärstrafrecht für Herr und Marine des Deutschen Reichs (Berlin, 1906).
73. Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit,” 464.
74. Lueder, “Landkriegsrecht in Besonderen,” 469–70. Emphasis in original.
75. Ibid., 470.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
126

their temporary obedience to the occupying power as the actual and legal legitimate power, which when necessary may force the fulﬁllment of every duty.76
These duties were practically boundless: “The inhabitants must put up with all the extraordinary limits to their personal independence, even the most far-reaching and burdensome, which pursuing the goal of war requires, and can furthermore equally be forced
to positive personal service and work,” which included aiding the occupying army as
hostages, guides, or workers.77 Lueder’s interpretation was the dominant one inside Germany, including in the Foreign Office and the Chancellor’s Office, as the First World War
proved. It foresaw intensive instrumentalization of enemy civilians for military purposes,
yet barely recognized protections to save them from extremes.

Basic Assumptions
Among the premises contained in the German position as it developed after 1870 are
several fundamental assumptions that had major implications for military practice.
First, as we have seen, war, all war, was existential, which meant that it contained no
limits and tended to develop its capacity for violence and destruction to the extreme.
Second, the counterpart to this unsettling picture was a conception of equally extreme order, which the military was instantly to establish in the occupied areas. Order in
this conception was practically lifeless, for it required an extreme of self-abnegation (of
emotional loyalty to one’s land or people, of self-preservation) that could hardly exist in
real life. Holding enemy civilians to the same standards as one’s own citizens fostered the
expectation that not even passive friction would slow the wheels of administration or the
success of the war effort. It is difficult not to conclude that this exaggerated, sterile sense
of order was somehow required by the equally exaggerated vision of war as essential violence (Lueder: “violence [Gewalt], which must achieve victory at any cost”; Hartmann:
“violence and passion . . . suffuse the entire essence [of war]”; Zorn: “war is in its essence
violence [Gewalt], [and] the violent force [Gewalt] of the conqueror in the conquered
land is completely unlimited”).78 That is, the only commensurate justiﬁcation for risking
limitless destruction would be to create limitless order (security). The expectation of
complete docility also had its analogue in the vision of domestic harmony cherished by
monarchists and nationalists for Germany itself, a vision marred by noisy democrats and
socialists.
Third, the unrealistic expectation of perfect order artiﬁcially produced occasions for
disorder, which turned enemy civilians into criminals subject to harsh military law. In
short, “order” encouraged reprisals when it inevitably failed. Punishment thus became a
major military duty, and civilians became as dangerous as enemy soldiers. The instru76. Ibid., 469.
77. Ibid., 475, also 476–77.
78. Lueder, “Krieg und Kriegsrecht,” 186; Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit,” 122; Zorn, Die beiden
Haager Friedenkonferenzen, 25.

Lessons of 1870–71
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
mentalization of civilians for victory and the high, but unrecognized, likelihood that the 127
failure to instrumentalize them smoothly would result in their criminalization, are the
third basic set of assumptions that developed from 1870.
A fourth basic assumption concerned international law, the only limit to the violence
of war. Some writers, heady with the success of German arms in 1870–71, opined immediately thereafter that international law simply did not exist: there could be no limits to the
sovereignty of the nation-state.79 Subsequent writers, beginning with Hartmann, rejected
this position. Hartmann believed that most actual limits to war’s violence came from the
ethical and legal convictions of the warriors, which over time became customary and were
later codiﬁed in international agreements. Hence, he accepted the Geneva Convention (as
did all other German writers and military men) but was skeptical about the Brussels Convention or any conference designed to extend limits to war before these had developed
from actual practices in battle.80 Hartmann’s requirement that the laws limiting war develop out of war itself was the hegemonic position thereafter, both among Germany’s military and civilian representatives to international conferences and among its international
lawyers. Unlike the enthusiasts immediately after the 1870 war, however, later writers
seem to have indulged the military point of view because they appreciated its strength in
setting actual state policy. Even Lueder, the most promilitary of the scholars, explained
why he feared “hyperhumane demands that do not ﬁt real circumstances”: “These only
feed the preexisting mistrustful rejection of all codiﬁcation and humanization altogether
among those in positions that determine practice . . . and thereby endanger the creation
of humane codes.”81 In fact, Lueder favored international law and its extension but dared
not challenge the pervasive military standpoint, which cloaked itself as “realism.”82
Another limit to international law universally recognized in Germany was reciprocity.
After enumerating the limits that everyone recognized as customary (wearing a recognizable uniform; carrying arms openly; eschewing dishonorable weapons, poison, and
bounties; rejecting spies as dishonorable; treating prisoners of war and the wounded humanely; sparing hospitals; respecting the white ﬂag; etc.), Hartmann concluded: “Everywhere there exists reciprocity.”83 Some, but not all, German writers interpreted this principle to mean that “if one side does not fulﬁll [its recognized obligations], then . . . the
other side cannot be required to do so.”84 This facile suspension of international law
79. This was the position of Adolf Lasson and Max Seydel: Messerschmidt, “Völkerrecht und
‘Kriegsnotwendigkeit,’ ” 191–92.
80. Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit,” 123–25, 79–84, 86–88.
81. Lueder, “Krieg und Kriegsrecht,” 275, also 257, 262–63, 276. Same position: Meurer, Haager Friedenskonferenz, 213; Albert Zorn, cited in Stenzel, Kriegführung, 29.
82. “No process in the life of a people carries so decisively the quality of immediate reality as does war”:
Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit,” 111.
83. Ibid., 86. Emphasis in original.
84. Lueder, “Krieg und Kriegsrecht,” 255; also General Staff, Kriegsbrauch, 2–3, 5, 40. Meurer, who accepted
that “international law stands under the sign of reciprocity” (50), nonetheless stressed the prior obligation to
obey the law and to refrain from reprisals, much less wholesale abandonment of the law when the other side
broke it: Haager Friedenskonferenz, 11, 103, 123, 135, 152n6.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
128 seems to have been the more widespread interpretation in Germany, but not internationally, where it met sharp rejection.85
Aside from weakening the general validity of international law, “reciprocity” smuggled in two other assumptions with potentially far-reaching effects on the conduct of war.
Reciprocity suggested equality between combatants, since only like-minded foes could be
trusted to restrain themselves. This is one reason why those who were not western Europeans were so easily bracketed a priori from the rules of “civilized” warfare and subjected
to practices Europeans at least overtly shunned regarding themselves. And just as “occupation” rested on the spreading of domestic German law, “reciprocity” postulated a German model of right warfare. So, for example, because German industry produced ample
regulation ammunition, that was the norm, whereas the homemade bullets (of scrap
metal or glass) to which Africans had to resort were violations. Or, closer to home, because Germany had a well-trained, well-equipped standing army based on universal military service, when it confronted smaller states, such as Belgium, with its regular troops
plus a rag-tag militia of undertrained, non-uniformly uniformed troops, this by deﬁnition violated German standards of proper conduct.86
These four assumptions (the existential, unlimited nature of war; the vision of perfect
order in the occupied zones; the resulting instrumentalization and probable criminalization of civilians and the transformation of German soldiers into agents of punishment;
and the nature of international law as derivative of force and in any case reciprocal) were
all discussed openly in various forums. But many of their implications and necessary consequences in practice were not reﬂected upon or consciously understood. These aspects
deserve the label “basic assumptions” in the sense of lessons that had become submerged
and that operated almost automatically.87
Although these basic assumptions operated like a riptide undercutting international
law, the German army was not completely indifferent to the agreements the government
had signed. The inclusion in the Felddienst-Ordnung of the Geneva Convention and, after
1911, the Hague rules, the sometime instruction of General Staff officers, and the revision
of the Military Penal Code (in 1916) to conform with the Hague Conventions concerning
foreigners and prisoners of war, all show some concern.88 Still, other major powers gave
these matters higher priority. Both Britain and France relatively quickly reprinted the
Hague rules in their own manuals and provided convenient excerpts and explanations of
them in instruction manuals.89 While other governments pressed to extend international
law, Imperial Germany uniformly worked to limit it.
85. Best, Humanity in Warfare, 174–76; Messerschmidt, “Völkerrecht und ‘Kriegsnotwendigkeit,’ ” 193;
Westlake, International Law, 114.
86. The clashing expectations of big versus small European states were a standard feature of late-nineteenth-century international conferences.
87. March, “Decision Making Perspectives,” 222–24.
88. Art. 47, Pt. 2 of the Military Penal Code (1872) permitted a soldier to disobey an order he knew to be a
violation of military or civilian penal codes, but this provision was spelled out only in the commentary to the
provision and was not well known. Elsner von Gronow, Militärstrafgesetzbuch, §47, p. 52, and note 7, pp. 54–55.
89. UA 3:1, 26; Stenzel, Kriegführung, 37. In general: Geoffrey Best, “How Right Is Might?” in War Economy
and the Military Mind, ed. Geoffrey Best and Andrew Wheatcroft (London, 1976).

Lessons of 1870–71
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
The Boer War (1900–1902) helps put the German military in perspective. Three 129
months into the war, War Secretary Lord Lansdowne asked his aides whether Britain
should conduct the war according to the Hague rules. The chief of military intelligence,
Maj.-Gen. Sir John Ardagh, who had represented Britain at the Hague Conference, replied that the acts were merely the codiﬁed “customs and usages” of war and thus applied
even to nonsignatories, such as the Boer Republics. Field Marshal Lord Garnet Wolseley
disagreed, arguing that the Boers would not abide by the laws. Subsequently, the government told Parliament that Britain accepted the Hague rules and was conducting the war
accordingly; the military intelligence division told the cabinet the same thing. After the
war, in a report designed for future planning, Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain
asked directly whether certain actions committed in the war were consonant with international law.90 The point is not that Britain’s methods in the Boer War were always legal,
or that the government felt obliged to uphold international law in public before Parliament (Bülow had done the same before the Reichstag in 1904), but that inside the military
there were inﬂuential voices upholding international law as binding for military practice—even in a colonial war where that law would not seem to apply. Further, these military voices found support in the major institutions of government: Parliament, the cabinet, and within the bureaucracy, which independently asked for reassurance that British
troops were abiding by international norms. Such support would have encouraged the
Ardaghs in the military against the Wolseleys. Even Britain’s future war planning took international law at least into consideration. Such institutionalized and energetic concern
for the international law of war was missing in Imperial Germany, and therefore it was
missing from the training and from the expectations of its troops.
We turn now to one ﬁnal basic assumption, a collective self-understanding that repeatedly emerged in Germany’s argumentation at the international conferences. Geoffrey
Best has referred to it as the “arch-occupier” position, which Germany shared with Russia.91 Both countries argued as though they would always be the occupying power. For the
Russian Empire, whose very existence consisted of occupation, this made sense. But for
Germany, it had a different meaning. It meant that the German government thought of itself as always victorious, and of victory as always territorial (and probably aggressive), that
is, as involving the movement of German troops into other lands. It was apparently unthinkable that Germans might ever lose, suffer occupation, and therefore require the protections international law afforded to the occupied. It was not coincidental that the one
area in which German representatives ever tried to extend international law concerned
the transportation of wounded soldiers through neutral countries.92 Otherwise, international law represented an annoying series of impediments to military practice.
The official German point of view was thus military, not civilian; bellicose, not peaceful; and utterly devoted to victory. This self-understanding made Imperial Germany
unique among the other states at the international conventions; no other country, includ90. S. Burridge Spies, Methods of Barbarism? (Cape Town, 1977), 12–14, 270.
91. Best, Humanity in Warfare, 180–81.
92. Scott, Proceedings, 501.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
130 ing Russia, the other great continental military power, was so distant from the emerging
international norms.93 For our purposes, the most important point is the premium on
victory, which was so powerful that defeat was inconceivable, and thus could never be factored into decision making or planning as a (regrettable) possibility.94 The self-generated
pressure to succeed at all cost was one of the chief parameters inﬂuencing officers’ decisions in actual wars.
93. Ibid., 483, 487–88, 509–12, 520, 529–30, 552–53; Geoffrey Best, “How Right Is Might?” 120–35; Dülffer,
Regeln gegen den Krieg, 122–23, 345; Stenzel, Kriegführung, 32–33, 42; Zorn, Die beiden Haager Friedenskonferenzen, 30, 35–37, 53, 82, 94.
94. Lueder, for example, can only imagine a spiral of war that increases the cost, stakes, and effort; he never
entertains the possibility that statesmen might end a war whose cost had escalated beyond the original goal.
Lueder, “Krieg und Kriegsrecht,” 366–67.

61
Standard Practices

A

fter 1871, how did the German army ﬁght wars? How closely did it follow the
1870 precedents? We have examined one example in detail, Southwest Africa,
but was it representative of German combat practices? Is colonial warfare
properly comparable with European warfare? These are some of the questions
we must now address as we examine standard practices in Germany’s wars down to 1914.

Colonial Warfare
Contemporary military men claimed that colonial warfare was entirely different
from European warfare; it operated according to different rules, and therefore little could
be learned from it.1 However, even the brief discussion of the Franco-Prussian War will
have shown many similarities in the drift to extreme treatment of civilians, the slide from
courts-martial to summary executions, even the ex post facto justiﬁcation of atrocities by
reference to “racial war,” when war failed to end with a tidy, decisive victory of military
force, and when the population seemed untrustworthy. Although World War I will offer
the best evidence that modern colonial and European warfare are closely related, there
are other reasons to conclude that, in the period before 1914, at least the military behavior of Germans in the colonies was mostly the consequence of Germany’s own military
culture.2
1. See Bernd F. Schulte, Europäische Krise und Erster Weltkrieg (Frankfurt, 1983), 70–71. The Vierteljahrshefte
für Truppenführung und Heereskunde devoted under 10% of its pre-1914 column space to colonial wars.
2. Porch found the same to be true for France: “Bugeaud, Galliéni, Lyautey,” in Makers of Modern Strategy,
ed. Paret, 376–407, here 399–400. On Britain, see Michael Howard, “Colonial Wars and European Wars,” in Imperialism and War, ed. J. A. de Moor and H. L. Wesseling (Leiden, 1989), 218–223, here 223.

131

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
132

For one thing, Imperial Germany’s combat history from 1871 to 1914 was purely colonial. All its military engagements were extra-European. There were countless “punitive
expeditions” in Germany’s colonies—between 1891 and 1894 German East Africa
recorded ﬁfty-four of these, for example.3 They were handled by the local Schutztruppe,
which consisted of white officers and troops, supplemented by black NCOs and troops
under white command. Three military engagements were large and expensive enough,
however, to qualify as real wars: the Boxer Uprising in China (1900–1901), and the revolts
in Southwest Africa (1904–7) and in German East Africa (1905–7). Only in East Africa,
where Gov. Count Gustav Adolf von Götzen had learned from the mistakes in SWA, were
white troops carefully limited, leaving the ﬁghting to African mercenaries and recruits. In
both China and SWA most combat fell to marines and volunteers drawn from the various
contingents of the German army.
Unlike Britain and France, Germany lacked a specialized colonial army. The common denominator for all white soldiers in Germany’s colonial campaigns was the standard military training they received in Germany. Regular Schutztruppler, who served
long years in the colonies, supplemented that training with valuable on-the-spot experience. Not surprisingly, they were the most effective ﬁghters. However, the volunteers
(twenty thousand in China, ﬁfteen thousand in SWA, almost none in East Africa)4 received no special training for colonial warfare, and, surprisingly, neither did the marines
(naval troops), though they were expected to hold the fort until further reinforcements
arrived. Thus, the men who fought in Germany’s two largest colonial engagements
(China and SWA) did so with the formation, habits, and expectations characteristic of
the regular army.
The number of volunteers, both for the various Schutztruppen and, especially, for the
China and SWA campaigns, so exceeded the demand that only the most suitable-seeming
men were chosen; whatever misdeeds later occurred, they cannot be attributed to recruitment problems.5 However, the volunteers may not have been representative of the German army. Although the desire for battle experience and consequent career advancement
presumably had a general appeal, especially to officers in the peacetime army, there are
some indications that colonial “small wars” attracted a peculiar set of volunteers. Captain
v. Lettow-Vorbeck noted “many names of former officers, which had appeared in the
3. Karl-Martin Seeberg, Der Maji-Maji-Krieg gegen die deutsche Kolonialherrschaft (Berlin, 1989), 73. Trutz v.
Trotha counts thirteen colonial wars and hundreds of punitive expeditions: “ ‘The Fellows Can Just Starve,’ ” in
Anticipating Total War, ed. Boemeke et al., 415–35, here 420.
4. There were 100–200 white Schutztruppler in East Africa at the beginning of the uprising. They were reinforced by 228 marines, who were mainly used to man military stations and thus release the Schutztruppler for
ﬁghting. Governor Götzen then requested (20 Aug. 1905) 20 white officers to command 500 additional black
troops. Ernst Nigmann, Geschichte der Kaiserlichen Schutztruppe für Deutsch-Ostafrika (Berlin, 1911), 93; Walter
Nuhn, Flammen über Deutschost (Wilhelmshaven, 1991), 25, 105, 115; Gustav Adolf Graf von Götzen, Deutsch-Ostakfrika im Aufstand 1905/06 (Berlin, 1909), 74; cf. ﬁgure of 150 marine reinforcements: Bülow to Foreign Office,
Nr. 84, Wilhelmshöhe, 19 Aug. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 721, p. 74.
5. Götzen, Deutsch-Ostafrika, 39–41; Nuhn, Flammen, 26; Justus Scheibert, Der Krieg in China 1900–1901
(Berlin, 1909), 397; Bley, South-West Africa, 160–61. Generals volunteering for China: Annika Mombauer, “Wilhelm, Waldersee, and the Boxer Rebellion,” in The Kaiser, ed. Annika Mombauer and Wilhelm Deist (Cambridge, 2003), 91–118, here 106.

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
press [in scandals], who now wanted to rehabilitate themselves” (as common soldiers).6 133
Deimling, who supervised the collection of the ﬁrst volunteers for SWA, observed the disproportionate number of “rough ﬁghters” among them and wondered “if perhaps not all
company commanders permitted only those men to volunteer, about [whose departure]
they shed honest tears.”7 But Deimling dismissed the worst offenders of this sort. In any
event, colonial wars (or perhaps actual combat, anywhere) were particularly attractive to
certain officers; many veterans of the China campaign reenlisted for SWA.8 Only further
research might permit more detailed conclusions as to the sociological difference between
the regular army and the colonial contingents.
One further, organizational factor distinguished the colonial military experience
from that of the regular army. Except for the marines, the men fought in new, temporary
units formed especially for the purpose. These units lacked the cohesiveness and speciﬁc
group culture that regimental history and long service together encouraged. Their general
training and the military culture that they had absorbed was thus unusually important in
determining their collective behavior.
As with training, the command principles (mission tactics) remained identical in the
colonies and in Europe. In fact, the colonial situation epitomized the expectations embedded in the mission-tactical system and even exaggerated them, because difficult terrain and poor communications typically isolated officers from their commander and
forced them to act on their own. As we saw in SWA, colonial orders usually ceded broad
interpretive room to the unit officer. So, for example, a typical order from Governor
Götzen during the Maji-Maji Revolt in East Africa in 1905 said that “the mission of the expedition corps is the relief of the country around Ssongea, which appears strongly threatened, and the defeat [Unterwerfung] of the Wangoni [the rebellious local tribe]. Further
tasks will develop from the situation there.”9 How to achieve these goals was left to the ofﬁcer’s judgment. In East Africa even commanders of small units had the right to levy collective ﬁnes and to execute those whom they thought to be rebel leaders—and they did
so.10
The German army in the colonies was, in terms of its operating principles, sociology,
and experience, a European army. It brought with it from Europe certain operational expectations and habits of logistical planning. The cleft that opened up between these was
supposed to be bridged by the officers’ military virtues or character traits. When the army
6. Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, Mein Leben (Biberach an der Riss, 1957), 76–77.
7. Deimling, Aus der alten in die neue Zeit, 52.
8. Salzmann, Im Kampfe, 1–2; Leutwein, Elf Jahre, 441.
9. “Order for the expedition corps bound for Ssongea,” copy, 15 Oct. 1905, Dar es Salaam, MA-Freiburg,
RM 121 I, Nr. 441, Doc. 98. Similar orders: “Befehl für Oberleutnant von Grawert,” copy, 15 Oct. 1905, Dar es
Salaam, ibid., Nr. 441, Doc. 99; “Befehl für das Detachement Merker,” copy, 26 Sept. 1905, ibid., Nr. 441, Doc. 7.
Cf. Leutwein’s “Truppenbefehl,” copy, 15 Feb. 1904, Karibib, ibid., Nr. 422, Bl. 122–23, or Leutwein, “Operationsbefehl,” 11 Mar. 1904, ibid., Nr. 423, Bl. 41; and Leutwein, “Operationsbefehl Nr. 4,” Windhuk, 1 Apr. 1904, ibid.,
Nr. 423, Bl. 169.
10. Götzen, Runderlass Nr. 8040, Dar es Salaam, 13 Nov. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 724, p. 118; Götzen to
Foreign Office, Nr. 249, secret, Dar es Salaam, 12 Dec. 1905, ibid., Nr. 723, p. 191. For China: Mombauer, “Wilhelm,” 109.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
134 met the enemy it used standard practices, most of which were either already familiar or
developed logically from deeply held basic assumptions about the nature of war. The
same is true for its treatment of civilians. We will now examine in turn these aspects of
German war conduct before 1914.

Expectations
Inexperienced European soldiers—and it is well to remember that most German soldiers and their officers were inexperienced in both colonial warfare and warfare generally—shared broad expectations about colonial warfare. The volunteer soldiers who embarked for combat in China and SWA looked forward to achieving an easy victory over an
inferior, but cruel, opponent.11 This double expectation (the easy victory and the nature
of the foe) helped determine much of the conduct during the wars.
In retrospect, it seems possible to identify at least two main sources for the belief in a
quick, easy victory. The ﬁrst is the assumption of European superiority, manifested in
material, technological, managerial, and disciplinary preeminence over non-Europeans
(including those with ancient, high civilizations, such as the Chinese). This pan-European belief was expressed both racially and culturally, and it saturated public opinion,
government, and the military. The postulate of superiority tended to encourage escalation
in all Europe’s colonial wars. The clamor of public opinion, the desire of government to
placate it, and, in Germany, the myth of military perfection and its identiﬁcation with the
nation, all fed the pressure on troops to succeed. The more intense this pressure, the
greater the tendency to believe in one’s own superiority, since that guaranteed victory.
The dynamics of motivating soldiers to ﬁght also encouraged this spiral, as officers, who
believed in European superiority and who needed to believe in it, built up their men’s selfconﬁdence by belittling the opponent.12
The second source is the “short war illusion”: the belief prevalent throughout Europe
after 1870 that industrialism and the nature of the modern state made war so destructive
of economies and societies that long wars were impossible. All European military planning began from the premise that future European wars would be short. If that were true
among the nearly equally equipped and trained Great Powers, then surely no colonial war
between unequals could last longer. As Alfred Vagts has pointed out, the short war illusion
was a way of “getting something for nothing.” It ran on the principle of “limited liability,”
permitting great dreams of conquest at limited cost.13 That, of course, was the entire principle behind imperialism, so it should not be surprising to ﬁnd the analogue of the short
war illusion operating in the colonial sphere.
The second feature of soldiers’ expectation—the inferior, but cruel, enemy—was the
standard colonial foe. This trope was generated almost automatically as the opposite of
11. For example: Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 2, 11; Auer v. Herrenkirchen, Meine Erlebnisse, 5; and Max
Schwabe, “Einige Lehren aus dem Kriege in Südwestafrika,” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und
Heereskunde 1:3 (1904), 461–79, here 480.
12. This is a feature of the rationality of action: Brunsson, “Irrationality of Action,” 32–33.
13. Vagts, History of Militarism, 349–50.

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
the superior, law-abiding and moral European, following cultural principles of “we” and 135
“other” that have been well researched.14 The stereotype of native cruelty justiﬁed in advance “reciprocal” cruelty by Europeans. In Germany this pattern of stereotyping seemed
to receive the imprimatur of national military policy by Kaiser Wilhelm II himself, in his
famous “Hun speech,” delivered in July 1900 to the ﬁrst reinforcements embarking to
quell the Boxer Uprising in China.15 The Chinese government had attempted to use the
spontaneous uprising of patriotic-xenophobic young men in several of China’s northern
provinces to eradicate Western penetration of the Middle Kingdom. Germany joined
seven other powers in intervening against the Chinese after its envoy, Baron Wilhelm Emmanuel von Ketteler, had been assassinated and the foreign embassies in Peking put under
siege (a violation of international law). Because this was Germany’s ﬁrst major military
engagement since 1870 and its ﬁrst outside Europe as a Great Power, the Kaiser’s speech
occurred at a critical symbolic moment when the public and the soldiers might assume
that basic principles of conduct would be laid down. The Kaiser presented their mission
to the troops. “You are to avenge grave injustice,” he told them, accusing the Chinese of
“discarding thousand-year-old international law” and claiming that these acts proved that
Chinese culture was inferior to Christian culture. And then he said the following, part of
which he extemporized:
So, I send you out so that you will demonstrate, ﬁrst, your traditional German efﬁciency, second, the sacriﬁce, braveness, and joyful bearing of all discomfort, and,
third, the honor and fame of our weapons and ﬂags. You should give an example
of discipline [Manneszucht und Disziplin], but also of overcoming and self-control. You will ﬁght against a well-armed power, but you should also avenge, not
only the death of the envoy, but of many Germans and Europeans, too. When you
meet the enemy, you will beat him; you will give no pardon and take no prisoners.
Those whom you capture are at your mercy. As the Huns a thousand years ago
under King Etzel made a name for themselves that has lasted mightily in memory,
so may the name “Germany” be known in China, such that no Chinese will ever
again even dare to look askance at a German.16
The virtues the Kaiser praised will be discussed shortly. At the time, hardly anyone noticed them, so riveted were they by the Hun image and the injunction to take no prisoners. In some quarters, including outside Germany, the speech was immensely popular; it
struck a deep chord of anger and vengefulness. To the civilian leadership, however, the
speech was a dreadful embarrassment because it contravened Chancellor Bülow’s express
policy of moderation. Bülow tried to contain the damage by removing from the official,

14. John W. Dower, War without Mercy (New York, 1986), 10, 147–80, 320n8, 342n3.
15. Bernd Sösemann, “Die sogenannte ‘Hunnenrede’ Wilhelms II,” Historische Zeitschrift 222:2 (1976),
342–58. My account follows his. See also Mombauer, “Wilhelm,” 95, 97, 112.
16. Sösemann, “Die sogenannte ’Hunnenrede,’ ” 349–50. Sösemann gives the actual words that Wilhelm delivered, as reconstructed from the notes of newspapermen.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
136 printed version the references to Huns and taking no prisoners. But Wilhelm’s utterances
were so striking, they soon leaked out.
The instant notoriety of the Hun speech showed that, along with civilian government
leaders, probably most of the German public rejected the harsh military methods the
Kaiser had praised.17 But conservatives and ultranationalists welcomed them and scorned
the “whole sentimentality [Zimperlichkeit]” typical of the critics.18 More telling is the response of the troops. Whereas in previous days they had written slogans such as “Express
Train to China” on their troop trains, they now wrote “Revenge Is Sweet” and “No Pardon.”19 The Kaiser’s carte-blanche ﬁtted the comforting self-stereotype of the hard, uncompromising military man and provided immediately popular expressions for men
about to subject themselves to peril. The slogans pithily expressed the extreme possibilities latent in their training and in the situation of avengers in a foreign land.
The hullabaloo surrounding the Hun speech caused Bülow to muzzle the Kaiser successfully when the revolt in SWA in 1904 provided the next opportunity for such an oration.20 Nevertheless, Colonial Director Stübel opened the government’s request for emergency funding by characterizing the Herero as “cruel [grausam],” and that word became
epithetic for the Herero thereafter in government publications, newspapers, speeches, and
later memoirs. The Herero practice of mutilating dead German soldiers, stripping their
bodies, using homemade “dirty” ammunition, and ﬁghting while wounded provided a
foundation for the accounts. The Boxers in China and the Maji-Maji rebels in East Africa
also engaged in outlandish and expressive killing (mostly of Chinese Christians and
African villagers, respectively), vengeful destruction, and other acts that Europeans found
sickening and in violation of the norms of European warfare. Such actions made reprisals
and escalation of combat more likely. But that is not the point here, for we are looking at
a process of political labeling that took place outside the military, away from the theater of
war, often before extensive ﬁghting had occurred, and in which exaggeration and extrapolation overwhelmed observation. Again, stereotyping the enemy was not peculiar to
Germany; it was a general Western political phenomenon common at times of (complete
or incomplete) national mobilization. The late- nineteenth–early-twentieth-century variant was heavily racialist, and it tapped into domestic discourses of danger, disorder, and
threat. In times of war (even “small” ones), it placed the enemy outside the moral universe of Europeans and thus beyond the protection of legal limits to war. In short, stereotyping created the most important precondition for “authorized” massacres: it dehumanized the enemy and legitimized extreme measures to punish them and protect the
European soldier (as ﬁghter, or as representative of national power and honor).21
17. The Catholic Center Party, the socialists, and the Left Liberal Party denounced the speech in a lengthy
Reichstag debate: ibid., 355–56.
18. Friedrich Naumann’s phrase, in ibid., 355.
19. Ibid., 345.
20. The Kaiser’s brother delivered the speech to the embarking troops in Kiel, while the Kaiser conﬁned
himself to calling for the reimposition of “law and order” (Ruhe und Ordnung) in a short speech in Berlin a few
days later. Reichsbote, Nr. 16, 20 Jan. 1904, and Nr. 18, 22 Jan. 1904; Spraul, Der “Völkermord,” 718.
21. On the mechanisms by which mass destruction of life is authorized see the articles in Nevitt Sanford and
Craig Comstock, ed., Sanctions for Evil (San Francisco, 1971), esp. Sanford and Comstock, “Sanctions for Evil,”
1–11; Neil J. Smelser, “Some Determinants of Destructive Behavior,” 15–24; Troy Duster, “Conditions for Guilt-

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
The basic assumptions behind German troop expectations were more political than 137
military and more European than German. However, there was added pressure for German troops to succeed. As SWA demonstrated, the organizational and cultural values of
the German officer corps deﬁned victory more absolutely than did other European
armies—as the annihilation of the enemy. And the national importance of the military as
symbol of the German nation seemed to require unequivocal demonstrations of German
power and authority. Together, these factors created a potential for disappointment and
frustration when the easy victory did not materialize, and it encouraged a readiness to resort to exemplary harshness, even when it did.

Logistical Planning
Perhaps the most astonishing aspect of Imperial German military organization is the
cleft between the ambitious, often bombastic, goals and the real preparations taken to
achieve them. This gap is so great that failure seems, in retrospect, to have been preprogrammed. Deﬁcient preparation was the dual result of the administrative chaos typical of
Wilhelminian government and willful neglect inside the military.
A certain degree of administrative chaos was typical of all European armies ﬁghting
outside the Continent. The troops in SWA, for example, were (mis)managed by ﬁve separate agencies: the Colonial Department of the Foreign Office, the Navy, the War Ministry,
the high command of the Schutztruppe (under the chancellor), and the General Staff.22 In
China only three had jostled with each other.23 But the situation elsewhere was hardly better. The British official investigation into the management of the Boer War took 143 pages
to outline the administrative deﬁciencies it had uncovered, and even before its assessment, the government had already reorganized the War Office and created the Defence
Committee and a clearer command structure at the top to address the mistakes revealed
during the war.24 In France, various aspects of the administration and command of colonial troops were shared by or transferred among the Colonial Office (which itself was
shifted to the Commerce Department in 1889 and became independent in 1894) and the
Naval and War Ministries.25
But German planning suffered under structural deﬁcits all its own. The ﬁrst was political: the desire of both the civilian and military leadership to avoid asking the Reichstag
for money. Appropriations opened the door to scrutiny and criticism. Besides, before the
revolts of 1904–5, the Reichstag had had little stomach for colonies and was loath to pay
much for them. Miserliness had ensured small Schutztruppe forces and thin, underdevelFree Massacre,” 25–36; and Viola W. Bernard, Perry Ottenberg, and Fritz Redl, “Dehumanization,” 102–24; also
the excellent article by Kelman, “Violence without Moral Restraint.” On exclusion from the moral universe of
the perpetrator: Helen Fein, Imperial Crime and Punishment (Honolulu, 1977), 19.
22. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:129–30.
23. Germany, Admiralty, Die Kaiserliche Marine während der Wirren in China 1900–1901 (Berlin, 1903), 171.
24. Great Britain, Parliament, Report of His Majesty’s Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the Military
Preparation and Other Matters Connected with the War in South Africa (London, 1903), Cd. 1789, 132–35.
25. A. S. Kanya-Forster, “The French Marines and the Conquest of the Western Sudan, 1880–1899,” in Imperialism and War, ed. J. A. de Moor and H. L. Wesseling (Leiden, 1989), 121–45, here 123; C. Fourniau, “Colonial
Wars before 1914,” in ibid., 72–86, here 76.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
138 oped colonial infrastructures the military could make use of in case of revolt.26 The length
to which the leadership would go to keep the military independent of the Reichstag is best
illustrated by the Maji-Maji Revolt of 1905–7.27
German East Africa was not a settler colony like SWA. Vast (almost two hundred
thousand square kilometers) and economically productive, in 1905 East Africa contained
between four and seven million African inhabitants but only two thousand Germans.28
German authority in the interior was nominally upheld in a symbolic way by military stations. In summer 1905 the southern provinces rose in revolt against the newly imposed tax
system, the plantation economy, and the use of forced labor for public works.29 Inspired
by religious wise men, who claimed to make them invulnerable to bullets by dousing
them with sacred water (maji), the members of many different tribes united against the
Germans; the revolt spread throughout the whole southern half of the colony.
At Governor Götzen’s request, the Kaiser sent two cruisers and 150 marines as reinforcement. Chancellor Bülow was disappointed to hear from the undersecretary of the
treasury that the cruisers and men exceeded the peacetime budget, “not to speak of the
question whether a peacetime budget can be stretched in the same way a war budget
can.”30 Undeterred, Bülow called a meeting of naval, treasury, and Colonial Department
officials to see how to circumvent the Reichstag. Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz, chief of the
Naval Office, rescued them by agreeing to cover the cost, as Bülow explained, “through
savings in other areas, so that [we] can avoid calling the Reichstag, which in my opinion
would create an uncomfortable precedent.”31 The price of this arrangement was divided
command: the Schutztruppe remained under the governor, and the marines were under
naval command, which insisted that the marines be used only to hold military stations,
releasing the Schutztruppe for ﬁghting. The governor was forced to agree. Only through
good personal relations with the naval commanders did he create an acceptable administrative modus vivendi.32
The second structural deﬁcit in German planning was the result of the narrow interpretation of operational priorities. Only actual ﬁghting was deemed important. Adminis26. Captain von Haeften, “Eine Deutsche Kolonialarmee,” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und
Heereskunde 2:4 (1905), 609–31, here 614–16; Nuhn, Flammen über Deutschost, 15, 25.
27. Kaiser Wilhelm kept the Reichstag out of the China expedition, as well: Mombauer, “Wilhelm,” 97.
28. Iliffe estimates four million; Götzen, seven million: John Iliffe, Tanganyika under German Rule,
1905–1912 (Cambridge, 1969), 9; Götzen, Deutsch-Ostafrika, 20. Detailed contemporary description: Hans
Meyer, ed., Das Deutsche Kolonialreich, vol. 1: Ostafrika and Kamerun (Leipzig, 1909), 3–416.
29. The best account of the uprising is Detlef Bald, “Afrikanischer Kampf gegen koloniale Herrschaft,” Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen 19 (1976), 23–50. Other useful works are Seeberg, Der Maji-Maji-Krieg; John Iliffe,
A Modern History of Tanganyika (Cambridge, 1979), 168–202; Nigmann, Geschichte der Kaiserlichen
Schutztruppe; and Nuhn, Flammen über Deutschost. Less useful: Kurt Büttner and Heinrich Loth, ed., Philosophie
der Eroberer und koloniale Wirklichkeit (Berlin, 1981).
30. Bülow to Foreign Office, Nr. 84, Wilhelmshöhe, 19 Aug. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 721, p. 74; Undersecretary Twele to Bülow, Nr. I. 6114, 19 Aug. 1905, ibid., p. 82.
31. Bülow to Richthofen, Nr. 102, Norderney, 23 Aug. 1905, ibid., p. 149.
32. Götzen to Col. Dept., Nr. 61, Dar es Salaam, 26 Aug. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 722, p. 13; Naval Office
(signed v. Ahlefeld) to Col. Dept., Nr. A I e 8171, Berlin, 5 Sept. 1905, ibid., p. 80; Götzen to the “eldest officer” of
the Bussard, Dar es Salaam, 10 Sept. 1905, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 443; Glatzel, “Bericht über die mit den
Marinetruppen in Ostafrika gewonnenen Erfahrungen,” Dar es Salaam, 28 Mar. 1906, MA-Freiburg, RM 5/Nr.
6036, pp. 344–52.

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
139

Riﬂe practice in Morogoro, German East Africa. Courtesy of Stadt- und Universitätsbibliothek,
Afrikaabteilung, Frankfurt am Main, Nr. 042-1388-06.

tering occupied land, providing for the wounded and for prisoners of war, even provisioning troops, were all ancillary activities; no ambitious officer could make a successful
career specializing in them. As a result, they simply withered from lack of attention.
The lack of training that troops received regarding enemy civilians and prisoners of
war had its analogue at the highest levels. In 1894 the Administrative Department suggested to Chief of Staff Schlieffen that the old rules for the treatment and provisioning of
prisoners of war, which dated from the beginning of the campaign against France in 1870,
be updated. Schlieffen found this unnecessary. In 1870, he replied:
One hundred ﬁfty to one hundred sixty thousand prisoners were provided for
without our having made any peacetime preparations. It is unlikely that we
would take more prisoners in a future war. I therefore suggest that in peacetime
we restrict ourselves to very general regulations, as we have done for clothing,
pay, and provisioning, and refrain from special preparations.
The result was, as a later Reichstag committee investigating the subject put it, “Germany
entered [the First World War] completely unprepared” regarding prisoners of war (a situation common to other European armies, too).33 The handling of enemy civilians was
equally neglected.
33. Fischer et al., Völkerrecht, 3.1: 179; Alon Rachamimov, POWs and the Great War (Oxford, 2002), chs. 1–2.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
140

Ignoring the defeated enemy might be understandable, given the institutional ﬁxation
on pure ﬁghting, but neglecting the basic maintenance of one’s own troops is much
harder to explain. This is especially true given the universal agreement in the late nineteenth century that military superiority rested on numbers of men plus their technicalmaterial support. The worship of matériel is visible in the arms race, which grew to
fetishistic proportions, and in the fatal insistence of all European colonial armies on burdening their troops with “kitchen ranges, pianos, and harmoniums,” as Lord Kitchener
put it.34 Indeed, the huge amount of stuff and the thicket of regulations, tables, and lists at
ﬁrst glance makes it hard to see the basic inadequacy of German preparations; it seems instead that overpreparation might have been the fault. But, in fact, underplanning (lack of
investment of time and reﬂection) was the problem, visible in all aspects of provisioning
from choice and amount of goods to packing and transport to distribution and administration. Fabled German efficiency is one of the myths one must drop to understand how
the military (and for that matter the civilian) bureaucracy actually worked.35
It is true that some bad planning resulted from lack of experience. Packing freighters
“backward,” that is, putting the immediately necessary items in ﬁrst, which meant they
were inaccessible on arrival, was a mistake one could expect from a land power in its ﬁrst
overseas campaign (in China).36 The gleaming silver buttons on the Schutztruppe uniforms, which made such splendid targets, and the inappropriate riding boots were both
youthful errors of a new colonial power.37 However, the absence of anything in the rations
to counteract scurvy (a problem solved by a well-known British reform in 1870),38 the
wholly inadequate medical provisions (especially in SWA), “the complete chaos at the beginning, concerning mobilization, substitution, and replacement,” as Maj. Arnold Lequis
characterized it (in SWA),39 the blithe trust of the Schlieffen Plan that men and horses
could subsist off what they found in Belgium and France in 191440—all these examples
point to much deeper problems. They were a result of inveterate disdain for practical,
economic management.
To some extent all militaries are un-, or even anti-, economical. They produce nothing except destruction; they remove people from productive labor; they live from subsidies (at home) or requisitions (abroad); their soldiers do not “work,” they serve; the military has no competitors inside the nation, and so forth.41 Military principles are thus in
many ways antithetical to economic ones. Nevertheless, the Prussian military’s rejection
34. Eversley Belﬁeld, The Boer War (London, 1975), 137.
35. From the inside, German organization appeared as “overorganization” according to Quartermaster
General v. Eisenhart-Rothe during World War I: Eisenhart-Rothe, Im Banne der Persönlichkeit (Berlin, 1931), 129.
On the European myth of German efficiency, see Pick, War Machine, 100–110, 138.
36. Germany, Admiralty, Kaiserliche Marine, 171–84.
37. Lettow-Vorbeck diary entry, 3 June 1904, MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 73.
38. Brian Bond, “Editor’s Introduction,” in Victorian Military Campaigns, ed. Brian Bond (London, 1967),
23.
39. Arnold Lequis, “Meine Erfahrungen in Südwest Afrika” (written in Aug. 1905), MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lequis, Nr. 35, 361.
40. Van Crefeld, Supplying War, 115–40.
41. Bahrdt, Die Gesellschaft und ihre Soldaten, 31, 70–74.

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
of economic management was overwhelming and overdetermined. Economic proﬁciency 141
was associated not just with civilians in general but with the bourgeoisie and with political liberalism in particular—both directly at odds with the convictions and identiﬁcation
of the officer corps. The Wilhelminian epithet that summed up everything civilian, unheroic, militarily inept, and consequently anti-Prussian was “British commercialism,”
characteristic of that “nation of shopkeepers,” those “military amateurs and dilettantes”
from whom nothing worthwhile militarily could be expected.42 Major Lequis, the General
Staff officer assisting the commander of the rear and thus in charge of provisioning during the war in SWA, fulminated against the incompetence he diagnosed as willful. Lequis
was a Rhinelander who referred to himself as an “involuntary Prussian [Musspreussen].”
The Prussian convictions he identiﬁed as responsible for the conduct of the war and the
failure of provisioning were cheapness, short-sightedness, devotion to destruction (Vernichtung) instead of to the economic future of the colony, impatience at the kind of longrange planning a well-fought war required, and haughty disregard for “experts.” In his
eyes, all of this compared very unfavorably with the way any well-run business (for example, in his Rhenish homeland) would have administered things.43
The rejection of economically realistic planning saturated practices sufficiently to become an enduring part of Prusso-Germany’s military culture.44 That made this habit especially resistant to change. Even before the wars of uniﬁcation, Prussian maneuvers were
held as if provisioning would take care of itself, so that, in the words of one student, “the
officer corps barely worried about provisioning and busied itself almost exclusively with
exercise and combat training.”45 In the 1866 campaign against Austria, the resulting food
shortfalls caused a near military disaster and provoked hungry troops to unusually violent behavior.46 Consequently, more attention was spent on provisioning, and the beginning of the 1870 war saw much improved handling of the problem. But as the war lengthened, the army reverted to living from requisitions, rather than from its own supplies, and
so the brief lesson of 1866 was forgotten again.47 Afterward, maneuvers reverted to type,
and living off the enemy, supplemented by some of one’s own provisions, became again
the (non)planning norm. In 1913, the Reichstag raised the issue of inadequate provision42. Hence, the ubiquitous belief in German military circles that England could not possibly win the Boer
War: Belﬁeld, Boer War, 67. “Dilettantes” was Gustav Stresemann’s phrase applied to the entire Entente, 22 Oct.
1918: Gustav Böhm, Adjutant im preussischen Kriegsministerium Juni 1918 bis Oktober 1919, ed. Heinz Hürten and
Georg Meyer (Stuttgart, 1977), 44–45.
43. Lequis, “Meine Erfahrungen in Südwest Afrika,” MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lequis, Nr. 35, 337–45, 353.
44. Van Crefeld, Supplying War, 231–37, who remarks that Germany was not unique in this regard; Schulte,
Die deutsche Armee, 306n3; Deist, “Remarks,” 321–23; Goerlitz, Geschichte, 83, 131; Lothar Burchardt,
Friedenswirtschaft und Kriegsvorsorge (Boppard am Rhein, 1968), who shows civilian-political restraints on logistical planning, as well.
45. Major Renner, “Wechselwirkung zwischen Herreszucht und Verpﬂegung im Kriege,” Vierteljahrshefte
für Truppenführung und Heereskunde 6:3 (1909), 413–420, here 417.
46. Ibid., 418.
47. Despite a logistical war game held in 1906, Renner mentions no institutional or training changes since
1870 and concludes that modern mass armies would be forced to live partly off the land, even though he believed
self-sufficiency and one’s own administration were far preferable. Ibid., 419. 1906: Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen,
250–54.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
142 ing and recommended reforms, which the army rejected, clinging instead to the 1870
model.48 The degree to which provisioning was left to circumstances is suggested in the
Felddienst-Ordnung, which instructed that all officers had the duty “unfailingly to see to
the most adequate possible provisioning of their troops and to secure this, if necessary,
through their own, independent measures.”49 Lequis thought it hopeless to try to change
the entrenched view. He had been in China, too, and noted later in his SWA diary that
“it’s funny, how many experiences we had in China and how little we learned from them.”
He concluded, “There is really no reason for me to fashion a sharply logical, well-styled
report [on deﬁciencies in provisioning],” since it would not make any difference; so he
kept his notes to himself.50 Lequis’s despairing silence is a nice example of the power of
military culture (unintentionally) to stiﬂe internal criticism.
The result of lack of realistic planning was that adequate provisioning and medical
services for German troops depended largely on luck. In China, the richness of the countryside masked the organizational deﬁciencies.51 In East Africa, the governor, wiser because of the SWA example, saved the situation by radically restricting the number of white
troops, drilling the few newcomers in stringent hygiene measures, and successfully pushing to raise the monetary allotment for food.52 But in SWA the full measure of inadequacy
had been bared for all to see. Both medical and food provisioning were catastrophic. Twothirds rations were the rule in the ﬁeld, with the result, as the military committee later
charged with investigating the failures laconically put it, that “malnourishment and resulting illnesses, especially scurvy, were not unusual among ﬁeld troops.”53 They were not
unusual among troops in the rear, either. The ratio of losses (casualties, not deaths) by
disease to losses by wounds or death in battle was 25:1.54 Twenty percent of the ill had to be
returned to Germany.55 The ill and wounded received little, late, or poor medical attention: even in late 1904, after almost a year of war, the sick in Windhuk, where vegetables
were available, were receiving none to counteract their scurvy.56 The gigantic size and

48. Anonymous, “Der Train in den Verhandlungen der Kommission für den Reichshaushaltsetat,” MilitärWochenblatt 98:72 (1913), cols. 1643–45. For inadequate planning to feed German civilians in wartime see Burchardt, Friedenswirtschaft, 193–231.
49. Prussia, War Ministry, Felddienst-Ordnung (1900), 126; Prussia, War Ministry, Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung
(KEO), para. 23 and 26, pp. 17, 19; typical, also Eiswaldt, Handbuch, 256; Germany, General Staff, Heeresverpﬂegung (Berlin, 1913), 285–86, 288, 297.
50. Lequis, diary (in SWA), no date, MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lequis, Nr. 16, 73, 74.
51. Lequis, “Allgemeine Erfahrungen,” ibid., Nr. 30, 94; Scheibert, Krieg in China, 469.
52. Götzen, “Befehl für das Detachement Merker,” Dar es Salaam, 26 Sept. 1905, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I,
Nr. 441, Doc. 7, point 8; “Sanitäre Vorschriften für die an Land beﬁndl. Marinemannschaften,” Dar es Salaam, 16
Sept. 1905, ibid., Nr. 443; Ahlefeld to Col. Dept., Nr. M. 4440, Berlin, 19 Sept. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 722,
137.
53. “Ergebnis der Arbeiten der durch AKO vom 14.11.1908 berufenen Kommission zur Beratung aufgrund
der bei der Entsendung von Verstärkungen für die Schutztruppen in SWA gesammelten Erfahrungen,” 1908,
MA-Freiburg RW 51, vol. 19, 69.
54. Kommando der Schutztruppen, Sanitäts-Bericht, 2:404.
55. Ibid., table 13, p. 30. Of the 73% who returned to the troops, few of them (even officers) were sent to their
original unit, which increased the administrative chaos that already reigned: Lettow-Vorbeck diary entry, 27
Nov. 1904, MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 34.
56. Lettow-Vorbeck diary entry, 17 Nov. 1904, ibid.; also, Heinrich v. Welck to his father, copy, Okomiparum near Waterberg, 16 Dec. 1904, MA-Freiburg, MSg. 2, Nr. 3039.

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
staggering pedantry of the later official report on the medical situation (Sanitäts-Bericht) 143
is a perverse measure of the lack of resources expended at the time.
Unrealistic planning had real consequences in unnecessary suffering and death for
German troops and in preprogramming their failure to fulﬁll their original military goals.
The combination of frustration at one’s own failure and physical suffering commonly
leads to greater violence among soldiers.57 As Captain Bayer remembered about his experiences in SWA, “Pain and anger are related, because they come from the same source of
sensation.”58 Faulty planning had the unintended consequence of at least preparing
troops to accept gratuitous violence, even if they did not initiate it themselves.
If the consequences of unrealistic planning were often unintended, it is still important
to recall that defective preparation had a systematic character and was produced on several different levels. It reﬂected the valuation of ﬁghting over every other consideration. It
was supported by the inherent cleft between the unrealistic, racialist-inspired expectations
of colonial warfare and that warfare’s intractable reality. Both of these situations were
common to other European militaries. But in the German case, systematic underplanning
was strengthened by two further forces: the political convictions and traditional values of
the officer corps, and what one scholar of provisioning calls “the conﬂict between strategic and logistic considerations.”59 That is, the (politically inspired) requirements of grand
victory exceeded the ability to fulﬁll them. Realistic planning would have revealed the impossibility of the grand goals; rather than give these up, planning itself was truncated.60
The resulting gap between goal and grasp was to be bridged by virtues: “discipline,”
“will,” “self-sacriﬁce.” Because the gap was not the product of happenstance (or mere incompetence or bad luck) but of system, the saving virtues were systematically encouraged
through training, mythmaking, models, and rewards. Once again, the German army was
not alone in its predicament; one can recognize analogues in the French army’s devotion
to élan and the British army’s promotion of pure stubbornness. But the national importance of the army and, above all, the grandiosity of the Wilhelminian goal of becoming a
World Power produced a qualitative difference in degree, while the virtues had a different
valence in the German system.

Extremism and the Virtues of the Officer
If we return to Kaiser Wilhelm’s Hun speech, we can see the virtues German soldiers
were expected to embody in the order in which the Kaiser enumerated them: “ﬁrst, your
traditional German efficiency, second, the sacriﬁce, braveness, and joyful bearing of all
discomfort, and, third, the honor and fame of our weapons and ﬂags. You should give an
example of discipline [Manneszucht und Disziplin], but also of overcoming and self-control [Ueberwindung und Selbstbeherrschung].”61 What I have translated as “efficiency”
57. On this phenomenon in the Boer War: Spies, Methods of Barbarism? 115; in French Indochina: Fourniau,
“Colonial Wars before 1914,” 83–84; generally, Ervin Staub, The Roots of Evil (Cambridge, 1989), 35–50.
58. Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 21.
59. Van Crefeld, Supplying War, 115.
60. Vagts, History of Militarism, 354; Wallach, Das Dogma der Vernichtungsschlacht, 55–56, 71–72, 81, 84.
61. Sösemann, “Die sogenannte ‘Hunnenrede,’ ” 349–50.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
144 (Tüchtigkeit) is more accurately rendered as experienced, energetic activity. Neither
braveness nor upholding honor and fame are surprising in a list of military virtues. But
the repeated call for sacriﬁce, joyful bearing of discomfort, overcoming (in the sense of
surmounting obstacles), and self-control (in the sense of self-denial) is remarkable for its
gloriﬁcation of suffering. The immediate movement in the speech from this list to avenging and taking no prisoners follows an emotional logic in which one’s own suffering justiﬁes the greater suffering and punishment of one’s enemies (the twinning of “pain and
anger” that Captain Bayer noted).
The Kaiser’s speech occurred at a symbolically signiﬁcant moment: the ﬁrst sending
out of German troops overseas. That his list of virtues was canonical is conﬁrmed by the
myth of Captain Klein. Myths are cultural lessons repeated and believed because they exemplify truths for groups to live (or die) by. They may be inconsistent, illogical, or even
untrue, but that does not matter: “Myths are too important for people to be embarrassed
about factual inaccuracy.”62 The event that ought to have epitomized soldierly virtue in
SWA was Franke’s relief of Omaruru. Accomplished with few resources, much bravery,
and only seven deaths, this battle saved the strategically important railroad for German
use.63 But Franke was an old Schutztruppler, not a regular officer; and, besides, he survived. And so it was the exploit of Captain Klein that became the most repeated “story” of
the war.
Captain Klein’s patrol (26–31 October 1904) occurred under the aegis of Trotha’s October proclamation, before Berlin had rescinded it. Exercising his own initiative, Klein
decided to attack a band of Herero reported to be at the last waterhole before the Omaheke Desert, a place dubbed by the soldiers “Orlogsende”—war’s end. Arriving at Orlogsende on the 27th, Klein and his thirty horsemen, artillery, and twenty-ﬁve foot soldiers had a brief ﬁreﬁght with Herero at the well. The survivors, as usual, scattered into
the desert. Lacking water, Klein was forced to divide his unit, sending some south and
leaving others at Orlogsende. Klein led a small band in pursuit of the Herero eastward
into the desert. As they were setting out, a captive Herero woman told them that Chief
Tetjo and his clan (whom they were now pursuing) had already died of thirst. But Klein
pressed on. After ﬁfty kilometers with no water anywhere, Klein was forced to send more
men and horses back. Klein forged ahead, ﬁrst with four and then with two riders, farther
and farther into the waterless desert, until “only a few footsteps and no [dead] animals”
could be found.64 And still Klein continued another thirty kilometers, to a rise that afforded him an unobstructed view toward the east and south. He saw nothing. Only then
did he break off the pursuit and struggle back. The units he had left behind were in such
desperate straits that they had to abandon their munitions and artillery. Their horses and
donkeys died of thirst. The men sickened. But, as the official history says, they were
“saved” by the heroic efforts of other troopers, who brought them in from the desert.
Klein and his two companions also made it back alive. But, like the rest of their men, they
62. Ott, Organizational Culture, 31.
63. Casualties: General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 2:228.
64. Ibid., 1:204.

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
had contracted typhus at waterholes contaminated by dead animals. Klein died of the dis- 145
ease a few weeks later, in a miserable desert hut, without adequate medical attention.65
“The same sad fate struck a great number of his soldiers.”66
Despite this admission, the official history placed its imprimatur on the myth of Captain Klein: “The daring pursuit [Verfolgungszug] of Captain Klein, which went to the outermost limit of human capacity, put the crown on everything that German soldiers had
suffered and accomplished in the war against the Herero.”67 It is hard to avoid concluding
that it was the very extravagant uselessness of Klein’s action that merited such praise. For
Klein had accomplished nothing, except his own suffering and death and that of many of
his men. He was told at the beginning that his quarry had died, a message conﬁrmed
again and again by the bodies of people and animals he discovered along the way. And
how effective would he and two men have been against the Tetjo clan, had it still existed?
But Klein nonetheless exempliﬁed the virtues necessary to hopeless endeavors: “restless
energy,”68 boundless initiative, inordinate capacity for suffering, and blind self-sacriﬁce,
matched only by the willingness to sacriﬁce others. He had gone literally and ﬁguratively
beyond “war’s end” and had died of his exemplary attention to pure duty for its own sake.

Standard Practices in the Treatment of Enemy Soldiers
German Southwest Africa was exceptional in that practically every systemic deﬁciency inherent in training, planning, and basic assumptions became visible; everything
that could go wrong did go wrong. When one examines the other military campaigns the
Kaiserreich conducted, however, one discovers very similar treatment of enemy soldiers
and civilians and the same general conduct of war.
Actual operations differed in each instance, depending on the particular situation.
German Southwest Africa was the only place where conventional operations (the single
battle of annihilation) seemed possible. In China, most of the ﬁghting was already over
when the bulk of German troops arrived; in East Africa, guerilla war raged almost from
the beginning of the revolt. Both China and East Africa offered opportunities for energetic pursuit and punitive sweeps, however. These typically involved much exemplary violence that was seldom limited to enemy ﬁghters. But even the treatment of armed men
showed the tendency we saw in SWA to become steadily more violent.
One of the most striking features of the surviving accounts, archival and published, of
the German campaigns in China and East Africa is the widespread practice of shooting
captured enemy soldiers or warriors. In Africa, exemplary executions could be justiﬁed
by the warriors’ status as “rebels.”69 Their status of being outside the law was further con65. Lettow-Vorbeck diary, 1 Dec. 1904, MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 34.
66. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:206. Naturally, the official report is silent on medical
care.
67. Ibid. Emphasis in original. For similarly approving contemporary accounts: Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 204–5; Schwabe, Krieg in Südwest-Afrika, 298–300; Deimling, Aus der alten in die neue Zeit, 68–69;
Deimling, “Südwest-Afrika,” 30–31.
68. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:204.
69. Bald, “Afrikanischer Kampf,” 40.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
146 ﬁrmed by the general assumption among Europeans that international law, as a compact
among the “civilized” organized into states, did not apply to colonial conﬂicts.70 But this
principle was weakening, even in Germany. In response to a query of December 1904, the
Colonial Department, for example, explicitly recognized the enemy warriors in SWA as
prisoners of war, though it seems not to have understood the full implications of such
status.71 Reichstag members argued on both sides of the question.72 In China, shooting
prisoners could not be justiﬁed by the same arguments. Nevertheless, the practice was
commonplace.
In East Africa, shooting those suspected of being rebel leaders began immediately as
legally sanctioned policy. Already on 4 August 1905 the official war diary of Navy Lieutenant von Paasche recorded that “at the suggestion of [the local administrator] Keudel,
Captain Merker arrived [at a village near Mohorro] and proclaimed a state of war so that
he could immediately hold a court-martial and hang three main magicians [rebel leaders], whom Keudel feared might be freed. The execution is said to have made a good impression on the populace.”73 Executions could be ordered by the local administrator
(Bezirksamtmann), the commander of the naval troops, or the unit military commanders.74 Executions were routinely reported in the war diaries and reports sent in to the governor and naval commander, who then sent digests on to the Foreign Office and the naval
administration, respectively. All of these offices approved the practice implicitly—I have
found no archival record of a higher authority criticizing it, and in an early message, Governor Götzen explicitly expressed his “thanks and recognition to [Paasche] and [his]
men” for their work in August 1905.75
As in SWA, legally sanctioned exemplary executions of rebel leaders opened the
ﬂoodgates to executions for all sorts of reasons. It is difficult to believe, for example, that
the “almost one hundred” men executed in Jakobi on 6 October 1905 were all rebel leaders, or the forty-seven whom Bezirksamtmann Richter had put to death on 27 February
1906 in Ungoni.76 Captain Kleist shot over ﬁfty men at a single time for being unsatisfactory guides, and the war diary of Ensign Schröder simply notes, “8 September 1905: execution of twenty rebels by shooting,” and then, one week later, another thirty-seven.77
70. Meurer, Die Haager Friedenskonferenzen, 2:250; Lueder, “Landkriegsrecht,” 395–96; Germany, General
Staff, Kriegsbrauch im Landkriege (Berlin, 1902), 53; Stenzel, Kriegführung, 25; Büttner and Loth, Philosophie,
54–55.
71. Col. Dept. to governor of the Kamerun, Berlin, 7 Jan. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 12.
72. Ledebour (SPD), 25 May 1905, Sten. Ber., vol. 204, pp. 6159–60, versus Erzberger (Catholic Center), 2
Dec. 1905, ibid., vol. 214, p. 111.
73. War diary of Lt. Paasche, 6 Aug. 1905, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 452, p. 7; Nuhn, Flammen über
Deutschost, 30.
74. War diary of v. Jastrzembski, Kilwa, pt. 2, entries of 8 and 9 Aug. 1905, ibid., Nr. 448, pp. 2–3; Götzen to
Foreign Office, Nr. 249, secret, Dar es Salaam, 12 Dec. 1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 723, p. 191.
75. Paasche to Cdr. Back (cdr. of the Bussard), Mayenge, 3 Sept. 1905, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 448.
76. Mission Superintendent Schumann, “Die Schreckenstage auf der Missionsstation Jakobi,” Missionsberichte der Gesellschaft zur Beförderung der evangelischen Missionen unter den Heiden zu Berlin für das Jahr 1906
(Feb.), 62–76, here 75; Nuhn, Flammen über Deutschost, 141.
77. Nuhn, Flammen über Deutschost, 148; war diary of Ensign Schröder, 8 and 15 Sept. 1905, near Lindi, MAFreiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 441, Doc. 55.

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
War diaries note that prisoners were executed “for participation in the uprising,” for giv- 147
ing false information, for having killed a German soldier in battle, and for spying; sometimes they say simply “people shot,” which makes it impossible to know whether these
were prisoners or battle casualties.78 The colonial administration estimated in 1913 that
twenty-six thousand Africans had been shot during the rebellion.79
There are nonetheless many accounts of prisoners taken but not later shot, so the
goal of troop practice did not become, as it did in SWA, the complete annihilation of the
male population.80 Other aspects of war conduct against an armed enemy were identical
to those used in SWA, however, such as bounties and using prisoners as guides or as
workers.
In China the picture was much the same. Sometimes executions of Boxer prisoners
were preceded by courts-martial that gathered Chinese testimony via interpreter and targeted only leaders or Boxers guilty of massacring Chinese Christians.81 At other times,
when those executed numbered twenty-ﬁve or even one hundred seventy, it appears that
all suspected Boxers were summarily executed.82 These executions were not spontaneous
“excesses”; they were policy, ordered by the commanders of the different divisions. The
General Staff ’s official reporter on the China expedition, Baron Binder-Krieglstein, faithfully recorded executions of large numbers of Boxer prisoners, including those guilty of
nothing more than sniping at German troops during a battle. He ends his account by noting that “discipline, thank heavens, was so excellent that no excesses on marches occurred.”83 Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, who, like Lothar von Trotha, also served in China,
noted the ﬁnal act of a punitive expedition west of Peking, which shows that many officers
and troops regarded executions as an unfortunate part of their duty.
The next morning a court-martial was held. The three principal accused were
condemned to death, the other guilty ones received whippings. “Jenowitsch, will
you be so good as to have these people shot?” was Zajetz’s unintentionally
grotesque order. A group of sailors pulled the condemned men out of the crowd
and forced them to kneel. A fat man screamed horribly for his “Ma” (mother).
Four men aimed at each head. When the salvo came, those who were shot ﬂew into
the air. Two were dead at once, another received another shot. It was the man who
78. War diary of v. Jastrzembski, 6 Sept. 1905, Kilwa, pt. 8, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 448; Report of Ensign Dollmann to cdr. of the Thetis, ca. 15 Nov. 1905, ibid., Nr. 439, Doc. 204; war diary of Paasche, 18 Aug. 1905,
Hirnsee, ibid., Nr. 448; war diary of Paasche, 12 Jan. 1906, Kitanga, ibid., Nr. 452, p. 39; report of Lt. Baron v.
Stengel, 4 Oct. 1905, Kilwa, ibid., Nr. 450, p. 14; war diary of Paasche, 19 Aug. 1905, Utete-Mayenge, ibid., Nr. 452,
p. 13.
79. Noske, Kolonialpolitik, 123.
80. For example, the one hundred male prisoners mentioned in “Report on the condition and events of the
detachment Lindi-Massassi,” signed Lt. Stieler v. Heydekampf, 26 Nov. 1905, Massassi, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I,
Nr. 439, Doc. 275.
81. Scheibert, Krieg in China, 481–82; Lettow-Vorbeck personal diary, 5 Nov. 1900, MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 44; E. Baron Binder-Krieglstein, Die Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps in China und ihre
militärischen Lehren (Berlin, 1902), 64, 67.
82. Binder-Krieglstein, Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps, 11, 57, also 190.
83. Ibid., 233.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
148

had screamed. This executioner’s work must be done, but it is repulsive. I thought
I saw on most faces as they marched by afterward an expression of repulsion.84
In addition to mass executions of prisoners, the Boxer campaign saw much indiscriminate shooting. It recalled the 1870 war because of the difficulty Europeans had in
distinguishing innocent farmers from Boxers who had thrown off their identifying armbands and ﬂed to the ﬁelds. Many, many civilian males were shot as Boxers, because, as
Lettow-Vorbeck put it, “in such a franc-tireur’s war, who can tell?”85 It is impossible to
determine how much the Kaiser’s Hun speech encouraged troops to shoot at everything
before them.
Germany was by no means alone in wreaking massive destruction on Boxers and
civilian Chinese alike. The other nations (Britain, France, Russia, the United States, Japan,
Austria, and Italy) engaged in killing of innocents, limitless plunder, repeated rape, and
widespread, vindictive property destruction—the uprising brought out the worst in all
the armies present.86 German troops played a very limited role in the ﬁrst two phases of
the war—British Admiral Seymour’s unsuccessful attempt to relieve Peking in June 1900
and the successful race among the allied contingents in August to do so. It was only in the
last phase of the war, when the East-Asian Expeditionary Corps arrived under the command of Field Marshal Alfred von Waldersee, that German troops began to distinguish
themselves from their allies. By the time Waldersee and his troops arrived in Peking in
mid-October 1900, the war was virtually over; Peking had been taken and thoroughly
plundered. Only the humiliating demands of the allies and the diplomatic maneuvering of
the Chinese government prevented a quick conclusion of peace.
It was in this period from October 1900 through spring 1901 that the Germans
launched seventy-ﬁve punitive expeditions, designed to end all Boxer resistance in the
countryside and force the Chinese government to sign a peace treaty.87 The Germans’ zeal,
exemplary violence, and policy of widespread execution were recognized, and condemned, by contemporary observers as unique.88 The official reporter for the German
army expressed the difference: “Whereas the German grasps the casus belli with joy, the
Briton [elsewhere, he adds Frenchman] postpones the decision as long as possible and
tries to move the opponent to retreat by negotiation.”89 The casus belli had largely disappeared, of course; German action was designed instead to demonstrate allied armed
might and to take revenge in areas where Chinese Christians had died at Boxer hands.
German violence was therefore exemplary, in two senses, and that largely accounts for its
ferocity.

84. Lettow-Vorbeck, “Diary-like entries,” MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 43.
85. Ibid.
86. See the excellent brief account of Paul A. Cohen, History in Three Keys (New York, 1997), 15–56.
87. Mombauer, “Wilhelm,” 109.
88. Ibid., 184–85; Sabine Dabringhaus, “An Army on Vacation?” in Anticipating Total War, 459–76, here 475;
Binder-Krieglstein, Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps, 204.
89. Binder-Krieglstein, Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps, 265; same thing concerning France, 144,
202–4.

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu

Standard Practices in the Treatment of Civilians
Trying to separate analytically the treatment of enemy soldiers from that of enemy
civilians, as I have done, is somewhat artiﬁcial and hence inaccurate. The fate of civilians
and ﬁghters was bound together; in all these engagements, German troops could not, or
would not, distinguish them. All males were suspected of being actual or potential soldiers. During skirmishes, German soldiers tended to ﬁre at whatever targets revealed
themselves, and often enough these were noncombatant women, children, and unarmed
men trying to ﬂee.90 In engagements where prisoners were interned, as in SWA and East
Africa, civilians were equally reckoned as “prisoners.”91
Noncombatants in all these wars suffered the same treatment as had the French in
1870–71: recruitment as guides (and punishment if they misled); execution as spies; punitive ﬁnes and “contributions”; and the routine destruction of their houses, villages, and
places of worship.92 These practices were not isolated atrocities; they were systematic policy, openly reported in official war diaries and published accounts. Obviously, the exceptional methods of 1870 had become simply routine.
In addition to these systematic practices endured by civilians, however, there were indeed atrocities, or “excesses” as they were called at the time. “Excesses” were examples of
90. Some typical examples: War diary, Saamanga [sic], signed Lt. Cdr. Konis, 9 Aug. 1905, MA-Freiburg,
RM 121 I, Nr. 448; Lettow-Vorbeck, report on his second punitive expedition in China, Dec. 1900–Jan. 1901, MAFreiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 43.
91. Paasche to Glatzel, Utanza, 4 Oct. 1905, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 439, Doc. 135; Report of Ensign
Dollmann to cdr. of Thetis, 15 Nov. 1905, Mtumba, ibid., Doc. 204; “Report on the condition . . . ,” Lt. Stieler v.
Heydekampf, 26 Nov. 1905, Massassi, ibid., Doc. 275.
92. Guides: China: Scheibert, Krieg in China, 475, 511; Rudolf Giehrl, China-Fahrt (Munich, 1903), 39–40,
70; Binder-Krieglstein, Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps, 37–38, 93, 97, 122–23.
Collective ﬁnes and “contributions”: East Africa: Bald, “Afrikanischer Kampf,” 41; Paasche war diary, 7
Sept. 1905, Mayenge, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 452, p. 18; Götzen, Runderlass Nr. 8040, Dar es Salaam, 13 Nov.
1905, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 724, p. 118; Götzen to Foreign Office, copy, 7 Dec. 1905, Dar es Salaam, ibid., Nr. 723,
p. 188; in China: Giehrl, China-Fahrt, 143; Binder-Krieglstein, Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps, 31, 53.
Destruction of individual houses, East Africa: war diary of detachment of Lt. Cdr. Konis, 30 Aug. 1905, MAFreiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 448; war diary of Paasche, 3 and 27 Oct. 1905, ibid., Nr. 452, pp. 23–24, 27; war diary of detachment of SMS Seeadler, signed Sommerfeld, 25 Nov. 1905, Mtingi, ibid., Nr. 439, Doc. 271; in China: BinderKrieglstein, Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps, 64–65, 67.
Destruction of villages, China: Scheibert, Krieg in China, 290, 299; Giehrl, China-Fahrt, 41; BinderKrieglstein, Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps, 50–51, 56, 80; Germany, Admiralty, Kaiserliche Marine, 41,
190; Westermayer diary, 22 Nov. 1900, MA-Freiburg, MSg. 2, Nr. 5196, p. 28; Lettow-Vorbeck, diary, 4 Dec. 1900,
MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 44; in East Africa: Nuhn, Flammen über Deutschost, 121; Jastrzembski
diary, 28 and 29 Aug. 1905, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 448; Schumann, “Die Schreckenstage,” 1 Oct. 1905, p. 74;
war diary of Lt. Stieler v. Heydekampf, 5 Oct. 1905, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 459; war diary of Lt. Paasche, 3
and 27 Oct. 1905, ibid., Nr. 452, pp. 23–24; “Military-political report on the activity of the cruiser and marines
stationed in East Africa (20 Oct. to 30 Nov. 1905),” 7 Dec. 1905, MA-Freiburg, RM 5/Nr. 6036, 20R-21; Götzen to
Foreign Office, Nr. 118, Dar es Salaam, 11 Nov. 1905, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I/Nr. 438, p. 32; war diary of sailor detachment Wachtel, 10 Nov.–25 Dec. 1905, Lindi-Kiswere, ibid., Nr. 455; Report of Lt. Baron v. Stengel, 10 and 13
Nov. 1905, Kilwa, ibid., Nr. 450, pp. 4–6; Report of Ensign Dollmann to cdr. of Thetis, ca. 15 Nov. 1905, ibid., Nr.
439, Doc. 204; war diary of Paasche, 30 Nov. 1905, ibid., Nr. 452, p. 35; “Official Report of the Government on the
Rebellious Districts,” 26 Nov. 1905, ibid., Nr. 439, Doc. 236.
Destruction of temples, China: Giehrl, China-Fahrt, 59; Binder-Krieglstein, Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps, 31, 64.

149

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
150 indiscipline, dreaded by officers who feared being unable to reestablish control over their
troops. The line separating “excesses” from purposive policy is not always easy to draw.
For one thing, contemporaries often used “excess” or “atrocity” to refer to acts we can in
retrospect identify as widespread and accepted behavior, or even the result of orders. For
another, armies tolerated some kinds of “excesses” but punished others. Toleration made
certain “excesses” systemic; they became latent policy but were never officially acknowledged.
The German army was especially sensitive to the issue of plunder. Judging from the
attention devoted to property offenses, the Military Penal Code mimicked the Criminal
Code in placing a higher value on protecting property than life and limb—a characteristic of nineteenth-century law generally. The Felddienst-Ordnung was equally emphatic
about reducing the occasions for plunder, especially in requisitioning: “Contact between
individual soldiers and inhabitants is to be avoided as much as possible,” and it, too, devoted more space to the protection of civilians’ belongings than to the protection of the
civilians themselves.93 (Exempt from the rubric “plunder” were enemy state property and
items deemed necessary to maintain the army.) The orgy of looting that characterized allied behavior in China was therefore very disturbing to Field Marshal v. Waldersee, the
titular head of the allied troops in China after mid-October 1900. On 27 November 1900
he admonished German officers to “be strict regarding crimes against property and cruelty against defenseless and peaceful Chinese,” as Lettow-Vorbeck noted in his diary that
day.94 Waldersee later admitted his lack of success: the type of warfare in China, he wrote,
“made people coarse and insensible and confused their conceptions about property.”95
Waldersee’s intervention may not have privileged life over property, but it was at least a
clear statement that not everything was permitted.96
Unlike plunder, the rape and sexual coercion of women appears to have been widely
tolerated in non-European theaters of war.97 It was a standard feature of the war in China
among all the allied troops.98 It appears to have been ubiquitous among German soldiers
in SWA, too. The memoirists always denied it, but there is contemporary testimony from
missionaries and later evidence given to British investigators by Africans that nightly rape
was common in the internment camps and that soldiers routinely forced women captives
to act as concubines.99 The best corroborating evidence comes from the Sanitäts-Bericht,
93. Prussia, War Ministry, Felddienst-Ordnung (1908), 137–38; Felddienst-Ordnung (1900), 134–36; also, Germany, General Staff, Heeresverpﬂegung, 297.
94. Lettow-Vorbeck diary, 27 Nov. 1900, MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr. 44.
95. Cited in Spraul, “ ‘Völkermord,’ ” 718.
96. The German diarists and memoirists are univocal in their condemnation of plunder (as opposed to
massive destruction and loss of life), and the other armies may indeed have plundered more extensively than the
Germans. Scheibert, Krieg in China, 317; Binder-Krieglstein, Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps, 35.
97. In general: Ruth Seifert, “Krieg und Vergewaltigung,” in Massenvergewaltigung, ed. Alexandra
Stiglmayer (Freiburg, 1993).
98. Cohen, History in Three Keys, 182–83; Esherick, Origins, 189.
99. Denials: Rohrbach, 27 Feb. 1904, Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen, 122; Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier,
99; Hermann Alverdes, Mein Tagebuch aus Südwest (Oldenburg, 1906), 21. Missionaries: August Kuhlmann to
Gov. Lindequist, 28 Feb. 1906, Omburo, VEM-Wuppertal, B/c II 72, 28–29; Kuhlmann, “Mitteilung für die
Gesellschaft,” 15 May 1906, Omburo, ibid., 36–37; Fritz Meier, “Bericht,” 1 Feb. 1906, Windhuk, BA-Berlin, R 151
F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 2, p. 35. African testimony: Union of South Africa, Report on the Natives, 9, 65, 67, 99–102.

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
which detailed the troops’ medical condition. It lamented the astonishing venereal disease 151
rate among soldiers. The contemporary Bavarian army at home had a VD rate of 19.4 percent; during the 1870–71 war, the percentage of infected soldiers had risen to 42.6 percent,
approximately the same as for British soldiers during the Boer War (1900). In SWA, the
ﬁgure was 93.3 percent; in China, 140 percent (including those infected more than
once).100 Normally, troops in the rear areas were much more at risk for venereal disease
than ﬁghting units. In SWA, however, this ratio was reversed: ﬁeld troops had infection
rates over twice as high as those in the rear guard.101 The monthly medical report for April
1906 located the cause when it noted “the remarkable rise in venereal diseases in the last
ﬁve months in the northern lines. It obviously stands in a certain relation with the rise in
prisoners.”102 The Sanitäts-Bericht admitted the source was “free and captive native
women,” but it would only describe the circumstances as “the generally great ease with
which sexual relations could be undertaken with the female native population, even when
they were not prostitutes.”103
The unwillingness of the military to acknowledge endemic sexual “excesses” is an example of the typical discrepancy between stated beliefs or values and actual behavior.104
As opposed to the oft-repeated claims of male chivalry, the basic assumptions that motivated actual behavior and encouraged the army to tolerate sexual excesses included the
following: male dominance and female inferiority, with its corollary, the right of soldiers
to display domination over defeated peoples in a sexual manner; the myth of the “easy”
sexuality of the “uncivilized”; the hydraulic model of male sexual functioning, in which
male sexual activity was an unquestioned imperative; the desirability of male bonding and
camaraderie via sexual display; and so forth.105 These convictions, which one rarely ﬁnds
articulated, were not conﬁned to common soldiers but shared throughout the military
system. One sees this in the Sanitäts-Bericht’s assumption, for example, that “long periods
of forced sexual abstinence” would invariably result in the ﬁeld troops engaging in “indiscriminate” sex, or in the army’s solicitude for presumptive sexual necessity by erecting ofﬁcial bordellos with “mostly white inmates,” whose venereal health was regularly
checked.106 In the rare instance when someone protested sexual “excess,” as missionary
Fritz Meier did in February 1906, the army bureaucracy quickly closed ranks to protect its
comrades.107
“Excesses,” or atrocities, could be so pervasive as to qualify as unarticulated policy.
But for analytical purposes, it is important to distinguish them from official policy, whose
100. Kommando der Schutztruppen, Sanitäts-Bericht, 2:339.
101. Ibid., 2:341.
102. Ibid., 2:343. Also, staff doctor Kuhn, “Die Gesundheitsverhältnisse in unseren Kolonien,” Jahrbuch
über die deutschen Kolonien 1 (1908), 42–61, here 54.
103. Kommando der Schutztruppen, Sanitäts-Bericht, 2:340.
104. Schein, “How Culture Forms,” 19–20, 22–23; Ott, Organizational Culture, 39–44; Sapienza, “Believing
Is Seeing,” 60.
105. Cf. Stoneman’s discussion for 1870: “Bavarian Army,” 276–81.
106. Kommando der Schutztruppen, Sanitäts-Bericht, 2:341, 343.
107. Meier, “Bericht,” 1 Feb. 1906, Windhuk, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 2, p. 35; Capt. Baumgärtner,
“Bericht über Missionar Meyer [sic],” 6 Feb. 1906, ibid., pp. 36–37; Etappenkommando to governor, 4 Mar. 1906,
Windhuk, ibid., p. 39.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
152 sources were somewhat different. The official policies regarding civilians we have examined so far—ﬁring on civilian populations, forced services, collective ﬁnes, punitive
destruction of houses and whole villages—could have a tremendous impact on civilian
survival. Dabringhaus estimates German punitive expeditions made “hundreds of thousands” of Chinese homeless; the number of Chinese dead from allied actions is thought to
be many tens of thousands.108 The percentage of dead is even more staggering in the two
African wars. This resulted from the last two standard practices we shall consider: internment and “hunger war.”
The internment of large numbers of civilians is a hallmark of colonial ﬁghting. Because internment became so widespread during the First World War, it is important to
put German colonial practices in their European context. Military motives were mixed:
on the one hand, internment removed noncombatants from the perils of warfare against
guerrillas and made it easier to feed them; on the other, it permitted control of them as
potential enemies. Despite the more and more frequent recourse to civilian internment
camps after 1898, no European army appears to have examined the logistic and hygiene
problems connected with this new institution, nor were administrators trained to deal
with it. They took no account of the differing food requirements of nursing mothers,
small children, or the sick as against healthy young men; they forgot that internment
camps tended to become permanent and erected them instead like temporary bivouacs;
they allotted no more space to civilians who lived all day in the tents than they did to soldiers who merely slept there at night; they ignored elementary hygiene rules of every sort;
and they chose camp administrators with no regard to the extraordinary practical skills
(in engineering, plumbing, medicine, nutrition, hygiene, and so forth) that the position
required.109 Consequently, civilian internment camps compiled high death rates. Nonetheless, before the First World War, they remained unmentioned and unregulated by international law.
Before World War I the most infamous internment camps were those run by the
British army from July 1900 to summer 1902 in South Africa to house Boer noncombatants (with separate camps for black Africans). These camps featured the same lethal combination of maladministration, lack of attention, and “lovelessness” that characterized the
German camps in SWA.110 Poor sanitation, inadequate rations, and inferior medical care
produced epidemics of pneumonia, measles, and dysentery. At their highest, monthly
death rates in the winter of 1900–1901 compare to those in the German camps. In the end,
almost twenty-eight thousand Boer women and children died in these camps: a death rate
of between 17 and 24 percent, probably nearer the latter.111 In addition, fourteen thousand
108. Sabine Dabringhaus, “Anticipating Total War?” paper presented at the conference “Anticipating Total
War? The United States and Germany, 1871–1914,” Augsburg, 27–29 July 1994, 6; Cohen, History in Three Keys, 51,
174–75. German losses were 188 dead in battle, 409 wounded, 8,070 ill: Roland Felber and Horst Rostek, Der
“Hunnenkrieg” Kaiser Wilhelms II (Berlin, 1987), 36; Sanitäts-Bericht 2: Beilage 1, 426–27.
109. These deﬁciencies are pithily summarized in Great Britain, Parliament, Report on the Concentration
Camps in South Africa, by the Committee of Ladies Appointed by the Secretary of State for War, Cd. 893 (London,
1902), 1–24.
110. Estorff, Wanderungen, 118.
111. Spies, Methods of Barbarism? 265 (numbers dead); S. Burridge Spies, “Women and the War,” in The
South African War, ed. Peter Warwick and S. B. Spies (London, 1980), 161–85, 169 for total number of inmates

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
blacks died—a death rate of 12 percent.112 Obviously, general European military culture 153
tended to produce catastrophes when armies attempted to “concentrate” large numbers
of civilians, which, in colonies, they were tempted to do.
If the British army is quite comparable in its fatal ineptitude, there is still one striking
difference between it and the German military administration in SWA.113 This difference
is visible in table 1, which sets out various contemporary model rations for adults. The
most punitive meat ration the British military doled out to enemy civilians was still ﬁve
times greater than the official ration for African prisoners in SWA.114 The official prisoner
ration was set in September 1905 under Lieutenant General v. Trotha’s regime. When he
departed, the ration was minimally raised by the addition of under an ounce of dried vegetables and under an ounce of extra fat per day. The total meat portion remained unchanged.115 When one recalls that the Nama were a primarily meat-eating people (and the
Herero a dairy-dependent people—and there was no set milk allotment), that most prisoners were ill or severely debilitated, that they were expected to work, and that in some
cases food was allotted to the male head of the family only (who then had to share it with
his dependents), then one must conclude that the original rations as set under Trotha
were intentionally designed to produce extreme suffering and that starvation, disease, and
death were acceptable outcomes. Even an inattentive military administrator would have
had to have noticed that the rations were deadly. Field troops already experienced undernourishment and scurvy as a result of the two-thirds rations they received, and these contained (at least theoretically) six times more meat than what African prisoners received,
twice as many carbohydrates, plus fruit jam that contained vitamin C, which was not
present in the official prisoner ration. The amelioration ordered by Lieutenant Colonel
Mühlenfels after Trotha’s departure shows that not all officers regarded death as an acceptable result, but the minimal changes equally show how reluctant officers were to
break with the whole system and introduce new principles of rationing.
In short, general European military culture can account for some of the horrendous
conditions in the SWA internment camps, but German policy must be held responsible
(over 116,000). Spies’s ﬁgures make a death rate of 24%. The ﬁgure of 160,000 internees, which seems high
(Smuts estimated a total Boer population of 200,000, of whom 87,000 fought in the war), would give 17%: Andrzej J. Kaminski, Konzenstrationslager 1896 bis Heute (Munich, 1990), 35. Smuts: Spies, “Women and War,” 170;
number of Boer ﬁghters: Thomas Pakenham, The Boer War (London, 1979), 572.
112. Peter Warwick, “Black People and the War,” in The South African War, 204.
113. The military erected an internment camp for surrendering women and children in East Africa in September 1905, near Kibata. Gov. Götzen claimed that this camp made it easier to provide the inmates with food.
I have discovered no further information on the camp. Götzen, Deutsch-Ostafrika, 133; Nigmann, Geschichte der
Kaiserlichen Schutztruppe, 98; Seeberg, Maji-Maji-Krieg, 83; Büttner and Loth, Philosophie, 282.
114. Furthermore, the meager meat ration was supposed to consist of “fresh meat or inferior but still edible
meat, ham, or sausage conserves.” The rice was also to be second, not ﬁrst, class. Stellvertr. Kommando, 5 Apr.
1906, Windhuk, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 2, p. 149.
115. The original ration was set on 2 Sept. 1905 through regulation IVa 8821. In Jan. 1906, to combat scurvy,
Lt. Col. Mühlenfels ordered substituting legumes for rice if possible and adding fruit jam, conserved fruit, or
chocolate. But these were sharply limited to 30 grams per day and cancelled if provisioning for German troops
was not “completely secured.” Mühlenfels to governor, Nr. IVa 17486, 24 Jan. 1906, Windhuk, BA-Berlin, R 151
F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, p. 189. Mühlenfels’s order to permit sick prisoners to have corned beef or boiled beef was
silently dropped and the original language of “inferior but still edible” meat conserves reinstituted in Apr. 1906:
Stellvertr. Kommando, 5 Apr. 1905, Windhuk, ibid., vol. 2, p. 149.

Meat

—

—

Salt

25 g.

25 g.

—

—
—

—

17 g.

28 g.

28 g.

1/12 tin

—
—

—

56 g.

—

—

—
—
—
336 g.

224 g.

375 g.

125 g.
1500 g.
250 g.
—
or
750 g.
or
150 g.

1901
Ofﬁcial

Feld-Ord
1900
Ofﬁcial

28 g.

28 g.

1/12 tin

—
—

—

56 g.

—

—

—
—
—
224 g.

224 g.

1901
Actual Avg.

28 g.

28 g.

1/7 tin

—
limes

—

56 g.

224 g.

—

—
—
—
448 g.

320 g.

1901
Ladies’ Recomm.

Britain, S. Africa

31 g.

26 g.

—

46 g.
—

80 g.

80 g.

64 g.

—

33 g.
400 g.
80 g.
—

428 g.

1904–7
Ofﬁcial Whites

40 g.

30 g.

—

—
—

50 g.

50 g.

—

—

333 g.
—
533 g
—.

266 g.

1904–7
Ofﬁcial Blacks

21 g.

17 g.

—

31 g.
—

53 g.

53 g.

44 g.

—

22 f.
268 g.
54 g.
—

287 g.

1904–7
Actual Field

Germany, SWA

30 g.

30 g.

—

—
—

30 g.

40 g.

—

—

400 g.
—
—
—

43 g.

1905
Ofﬁcial POWs

30 g.

30 g.

—

30 g.b
—

50 g.

40 g.

20 g.

—

400 g.
—
—
—

43g.

Jan. 1906
Ofﬁcial POWs

Sources: Meurer, Die Haager Friedenskonferenz, 2:273 (German 1870 Ofﬁcial); Felddienst-Ordnung(1900), 126–7 (Feld-Ord 1900 Ofﬁcial); Spies, Methods of Barbarism? 357n210, 186 (South Africa 1901
Ofﬁcial; South Africa Actual Average); Report on the Concentration Camps, 2, 23 (South Africa 1901, Ladies’ Recommendations); Ergebnis der Arbeiten, Anlage 8, pp. 121–22, BA-MA Freiburg, RW
51, vol. 19 (SWA 1904–7 Ofﬁcial Whites; SWA 1904–7 Ofﬁcial Blacks); ibid., p. 69 (SWA 1904–7 Actual Field); Stellvertr. Kommando, 5 April 1906, Windhuk, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol. 2,
p. 149, and Mühlenfels to Governor, Nr. IVa 17486, 24 January 1906, Windhuk, ibid., D.IV.L.3., vol. 1, p. 189 (SWA 1905 Ofﬁcial POWs; SWA Jan. 1906 Ofﬁcial POWs).
a
28 g.  1 oz. bIll prisoners only cChildren only

30 g.

—

Milkc

Coffee

—
—

Fruit jam or
Lime juice

250 g.

Sugar

Fat

—

750 g.

Vegetables

Bread

—
—
—
—

500 g.a

Food Item

Rice or
Potatoes or
Flour or
Meal

German
1870
Ofﬁcial

Germany

Table 1. Rations for One Adult per Day

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
for the rest. As we have seen, this policy developed out of a number of premises that in all 155
probability were never explicitly examined, and certainly never examined together. The
ration system for troops assumed that even allied African soldiers ought to receive less
food than white troops, reﬂecting the basic assumptions that white superiority must be
reﬂected in better treatment and that blacks required less food to survive than did whites.
Rations for prisoners were then depressed even further by two additional principles: that
prisoners must never be treated better than one’s own (in this case, African) troops,116 and
that rebels deserved punishment. Withholding food, or sharply reducing its variety, were
classic methods (and signs) of punishment in Germany, widely used in prisons and even
in families. The military’s punitive role applied these usages to warfare. Starvation was the
logical extreme of punishment by hunger. Most higher officers and civilian administrators, when their attention could be momentarily redirected from what they regarded as
more important matters than prisoners’ conditions, rejected starvation as official policy.
But they did not reject the minipolicies and working assumptions that produced this end
effect. And some few accepted explicitly the logic of the ration system, of punishment, and
of racially inspired indifference, and were led to the position pithily expressed by Deputy
Governor Tecklenburg when he learned that the Witbooi prisoners were dying in great
numbers in Togo: “[Their] rapid mortality is not considered surprising here; it must be
seen as a retaliation for the uprising.”117
The greatest mortality in numbers occurred not in SWA but in German East Africa. It
was the result of a type of total war Europeans regarded as peculiarly colonial: the destruction of all dwellings, food stores, domestic animals, and planted ﬁelds. Kriegsbrauch
(the semi-official manual of war conduct) speciﬁcally permitted such a war only against
“wild people and barbarians”; the British expert on “small wars” thought these tactics
“unfortunate,” but sometimes necessary.118 A “hunger war” of this type appears to have
been conducted by Germans for the ﬁrst time in East Africa in 1897 against holdouts in the
Wahehe rebellion.119 The Maji-Maji rebels used this tactic themselves, and it was obviously widely enough appreciated that just two weeks into the German response, detachment leader Lieutenant Paasche already regarded it as the key to stopping the uprising.120
As the rebels abandoned large-scale attacks for guerrilla warfare, unit commanders immediately adopted the tactic. As Lieutenant von der Marwitz reported on 23 September
1905, “The systematic search of the bush is time-consuming, but next to the destruction of
116. Germany, General Staff, Kriegsbrauch, 15; Lueder, “Landkriegsrecht,” 435; Meurer, Die Haager Friedenskonferenz, 122.
117. Tecklenburg to Col. Dept., Nr. 65, tel., 4 July 1905, Windhuk, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 22. Tecklenburg’s view was not held by everyone: one Col. Dept. official underlined the word “retaliation” and put a
question mark in the margin.
118. Germany, General Staff, Kriegsbrauch, 53; Charles Callwell, Small Wars, 3rd ed. (London, 1976 [orig.
1906]), 41; the Felddienst-Ordnung (1900), 136, placed destruction of food stores solely in the hands of higher
commanders.
119. “Even the last adherents will leave [the Wahehe dynast], when the new manner of conducting the war,
which consists only in the systematically repeated destruction of planted ﬁelds, works in the long run.” Gov.
Liebert to Col. Dept., Nr. 1005, 15 Oct. 1897, Dar es Salaam, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 6467, p. 383.
120. Paasche notes, sent to Cdr. Back on 19 Aug. 1905, Mohorro, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 448,
pp. 25–26.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
156 food supplies, it is the only way to become master of the fanatical rebels.”121 Thereafter,
total war against dwellings, ﬁelds, and food stores became the norm.122 Only several
months later, however, after the uprising had been broken in a number of districts, was
this tactic recognized as the normal method of warfare and elevated to the level of operation. The “military-political report” (7 December 1905) of the commander of the naval
forces in East Africa described the new operative task in the relieved districts as “forcing
the rebels to a lasting capitulation through permanent harassment, destruction of their
villages (which they rebuild again and again), and removal of livestock and food
stores.”123 By the summer of 1906 there were only a few isolated regions where the revolt
still smoldered, but German units, seeking a kind of total victory, pursued every single remaining leader until the last was killed in 1908.124
As in SWA, so in East Africa a tactic came to determine operations. Unlike in SWA,
however, the result of this tactic, mass death, never became proclaimed as policy. The policy remained “lasting capitulation,” a total solution of a different sort. It consisted in the
elimination of all leaders, which in practice meant the destruction of the indigenous political infrastructure of the rebellious areas.125 It meant also the ritual humiliation of the
population, which was thus made to demonstrate its subservience to the German government.126 And it meant the transformation of the population from traditional pastoralists
into an available wage-labor workforce.
Where “lasting capitulation” occurred, military units and local civilian administrators distributed grain and encouraged rebuilding.127 Governor Götzen’s successor, Baron
Albrecht von Rechenberg, was probably not assiduous enough in doing so, and some
local military leaders and administrators were more worried about food production for
themselves than for the local population.128 Nevertheless, partly because East Africa was
not a settler colony, and thus had no cause to ﬂirt with visions of a colonial tabula rasa,
121. Cited in war diary of detachment leader Jastrzembski, 23 Sept. 1905, Kilwa, ibid., Nr. 441, Doc. 56.
122. War diary of Paasche, 30 Sept. 1905, Mtanza, ibid., Nr. 452, p. 22; war diary of Jastrzembski, 30 Sept.
1905, Kilwa, ibid., Nr. 448; Report of Lt. Baron v. Stengel, 5 Oct. 1905, Kilwa, ibid., Nr. 450, pp. 14–15; Götzen,
Deutsch-Ostafrika, 132, 139–40, 135; Bald, “Afrikanischer Kampf,” 40.
123. Military-political report on the activity of the cruisers and marines stationed in East Africa (20 Oct. to
30 Nov. 1905), signed Glatzel, cdr. of the Thetis, sent to Kaiser Wilhelm II, 7 Dec. 1905, Dar es Salaam, MAFreiburg, RM 121 I, RM 5, Nr. 6036, pp. 20–36, here 20–21; also cited in Bald, “Afrikanischer Kampf,” 40.
124. Bald, “Afrikanischer Kampf,” 36–37.
125. Seeberg, Der Maji-Maji-Krieg, 89–90.
126. Kommando der Schutztruppe, “Order to the troop leaders in the rebellious areas,” 11 Nov. 1905, Dar es
Salaam, which gives the conditions for capitulation and the demand for penal labor, in BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr.
724, p. 119; Götzen to Col. Dept., 7 Dec. 1905, Dar es Salaam, where he refers to ﬁnes as “signs of capitulation”:
ibid., Nr. 723, p. 188; Dep. Gov. Haber to Col. Dept., Nr. 860, Dar es Salaam, ibid., Nr. 724, pp. 115–17, where he
insists on methods “to keep their capitulation permanently awake in the minds of the natives.”
127. Military-political report Nr. 4 (1 Jan. to 6 Feb. 1906), 6 Feb. 1906, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 438, p. 112;
Gov. Rechenberg to Col. Office, Nr. 606, 24 May 1907, Dar es Salaam, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 725, pp. 176–77.
Götzen was interested in economic recovery from the beginning: Götzen to Foreign Office, Nr. 120, Dar es
Salaam, 16 Nov. 1905, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 438, Bl. 33.
128. Rechenberg to Col. Office, Nr. 382, 25 Mar. 1907, Dar es Salaam, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 771, p. 166;
idem, Nr. 606, 24 May 1907, Dar es Salaam, ibid., pp. 176–77; Nuhn, Flammen über Deutschost, 157.

Standard Practices
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
and partly because Governor Götzen had learned from the SWA debacle, mass death 157
never became the intentional goal of warfare.
But mass death is what the hunger tactic achieved. A German trader described the catastrophe in a letter from March 1907:
People are dying like ﬂies in the area around Ssongea; in Ssongea itself dead bodies are often discovered in the deserted, collapsing structures only because of the
pestilential odor. . . . The population has gone down from probably 30,000 . . . to
3,000, which proves that Ssongea exists in name only—and it was such a rich district!129
The government at ﬁrst estimated the African dead at seventy-ﬁve thousand, but the last
governor of the colony, Heinrich Schnee, later believed “it seems more accurate to assume
much higher estimates of the victims of the Maji-Maji uprising and to compare it in cause
and effect with the Hottentot and Herero uprising in SWA.”130 One contemporary scholar
estimated a death toll of one hundred and ﬁfty thousand; a modern estimate is two hundred and ﬁfty to three hundred thousand, or one-third of the population of the rebellious
areas.131 Whole districts were so thoroughly depopulated and the human ecology so transformed that they were later turned into reserves for big game.132
Given the extensive human devastation, it is perhaps surprising that East Africa never
became a cause célèbre like SWA. In fact, East Africa barely made it into the headlines.
Here Governor Götzen’s strategy of circumventing Reichstag appropriations paid off;
without Reichstag scrutiny, the military was much freer to pursue its tactics to the bitter
end. Götzen and the Colonial Department also became clever manipulators of the news,
and that, too, had a soporiﬁc effect.133 But the main factor was probably that the public
focused on a different death statistic: during the entire revolt, rebels killed just ﬁfteen Europeans, only ﬁve of whom were soldiers.134

Standard Practices and Going to Extremes
We have been examining operations in the three wars Germany fought between its establishment and the outbreak of World War I. All of these took place in colonies, and only
129. Richard Peter to retired Bezirksamtmann Richter, 5 Mar. 1907, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 771, pp. 169–70.
130. Sten. Ber., 1907–9 session, vol. 239, Anlage Nr. 622, p. 3693; Schnee cited in Bald, “Afrikanischer
Kampf,” 45.
131. Noske, Kolonialpolitik, 123; Iliffe, Modern History of Tanganyika, 200.
132. Iliffe, Modern History of Tanganyika, 199–202.
133. Götzen to Col. Dept., Nr. 173, “secret,” 26 Aug. 1905, Dar es Salaam, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 722,
pp. 109–10: this early news summary was carefully edited for public reaction by a colonial official. Other examples of controlling the news: Stübel to Götzen, tel. Nr. 84, Berlin, 12 Oct. 1905, ibid., Nr. 723, p. 24; Col. Dept.
to Götzen, tel., 17 May 1906, ibid., Nr. 724, p. 77.
134. Iliffe, Modern History of Tanganyika, 200; Nigmann, Geschichte der Kaiserlichen Schutztruppe, 136. Seventy-three black soldiers ﬁghting for the Germans died, and seventy more were missing (Nigmann, p. 144).

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u r e
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
158 one, in SWA, permitted a large, European-style battle. The rest of the operations in SWA,
and those in China and German East Africa, were all disjointed pursuits. Their course was
strongly inﬂuenced by unexamined basic assumptions that were a mixture of the typically
European and the speciﬁcally German. These assumptions concerned expectations (of
easy, unequivocal victory and of perfect postvictory order and docility), wishful thinking
(which ignored the systematic shortfalls in planning and provisioning), and characterological expedients (the virtues of extreme self-sacriﬁce to overcome all real obstacles). The
course of the pursuits was also determined by tactics: widespread shooting of males and
extensive instrumentalization and punishment of civilians. To those tactics of European
origin were added hunger war and internment, which until 1914 were conﬁned to the
colonies.
Both the SWA and East African cases make clear that standard practices can have devastating consequences that de facto amount to extinguishing human life in entire areas.
In neither case, however, was the original military intention to destroy the entire rebel
population but, instead, to end the uprisings. The “ﬁnality” of the solution developed
from the smaller logics of the organizational apparatus, its tactics, and its (hidden) basic
assumptions. Once mass death had occurred, however, the perpetrators faced a choice:
they could reject these consequences and change the habits of organization and mind that
had created them; they could accept the consequences tacitly, while publicly regretting
them (as in East Africa); or they could accept the consequences openly, as the logical result of priorities and techniques so important that they should remain above criticism,
and make annihilation the stated goal of policy (as Trotha did in SWA, using the ideological template of “race war”).
Berlin ultimately rejected Trotha’s path. But, as operations in World War I made
clear, no basic organizational rethinking occurred. That omission raises the question of
doctrine and its relation to the unthinking scripts, tactics, and automatisms of practice.
For standard practices to tend toward extremes of destruction and mass death, and in one
case to reach acknowledged extermination, they must have found support on the level of
military doctrine. Otherwise, their deadly development would have been cut short from
above, from inside the military itself. We therefore must now turn to doctrine, where we
might expect some of the basic assumptions of military culture to be made explicit and
thus the objects of reﬂection.

71
Doctrines of Fear and Force

Doctrines and Military Culture

W

ith doctrine, we move from operations and tactics to the level of strategy.
Wilhelminian Germany’s strategic military doctrine is most clearly visible in the Schlieffen Plan. It is tempting to suppose that standard practices, as technical-administrative means to an end, would result from
doctrine, but in Imperial Germany, the reverse seems truer. At least, military doctrine
after 1890 was both astonishingly technical and formally remarkably similar to the principles behind standard practices at the tactical and operational levels.1 Explicit doctrine, on
the one hand, and the (often unconscious) basic assumptions of military culture and unexamined standard practices, on the other, seem to have been in a dialectical relation.
They affected and changed each other constantly, but unevenly, over time.
Against this messier view is one that might be termed “doctrinalism,” which sees doctrine as the prime mover of militaries and understands it as a more or less rational product of the real situation of the military (“realism”), its function (“functionalism”), or its
1. Distinguishing the tactical, operational, and strategic levels of military planning and action is difficult. Barry
Posen deﬁnes tactics as “the study of how ﬁghts are fought,” operations as how battles are conducted and coordinated, and strategy as the overarching political-military security goal that a war or subsequent peace is supposed to
ensure. He vacillates as to whether military doctrine belongs to operations or strategy. Posen, Sources of Military
Doctrine, 13–14, 245n3. Clausewitz deﬁned tactics as “the theory of the use of military forces in combat. Strategy is
the theory of the use of combats for the object of the war.” Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. Anatol Rapaport
(London, 1982), bk. 1, p. 173, cited and discussed in Wallach, Vernichtungsschlacht, 15. Wilhelm Deist uses Andreas
Hillgruber’s sensible deﬁnition of strategy as “the integration of domestic and foreign policy, of military and psychological planning, and the administration of the economy and armaments by the top-level leadership of a state,
in order to carry out a comprehensive ideological and political design.” Deist, “Strategy and Unlimited Warfare in
Germany,” in Great War, Total War, ed. Roger Chickering and Stig Förster (Cambridge, 2000), 265–79, here 266.
From my perspective, doctrine is codiﬁed organizational knowledge that might apply to any level of functioning.

159

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
160 organizational structure (“structuralism”).2 Following this logic, Barry Posen has adduced excellent bureaucratic reasons why militaries might favor offensive doctrines such
as the Schlieffen Plan. Because the aggressor initiates action to which the opponent must
respond, the offensive is easier to plan; because it is expensive, the offensive permits one to
claim more resources; and because it is difficult to execute, it enhances the status of the
military’s expertise.3 Jack Snyder, writing more historically, examined the different security reasons impelling Germany, France, and Russia to adopt the offensive before 1914.4
But as Elizabeth Kier has pointed out, all the advantages the offensive offers can also accrue to the defensive, and in fact, militaries do not always choose the offensive. She advocates a more organizational-cultural perspective, because it is freer to account for diversity
among militaries, multiple determinants of policy, and policy irrationality.5 The cultural
perspective is especially useful because it raises questions about doctrine; that is exactly
what Imperial Germany’s offensive doctrine, the Schlieffen Plan, requires, for it poses
enormous problems of interpretation. It was grander, riskier, more extreme, and above all
more unrealistic than anything comparable in Europe at the time. It had a long history of
development, which reveals it to have been a codiﬁcation and intensiﬁcation of Germany’s military culture, not a cause of it, and certainly not a “rational” policy decision.

The Schlieffen Plan
Prussia had a long history of favoring the offensive or, in Dennis Showalter’s phrase,
“total force applied in limited wars for limited objectives.” Concentrating the entire military potential aggressively at a single point for a brief time was the policy most suited to
a middle-sized power with limited means.6 Chief of the General Staff Helmuth v. Moltke
built on this tradition, but transformed it. The modern history of Prusso-Germany’s military doctrine began with him and the wars of uniﬁcation. Moltke, like his predecessors,
sought a solution to Prussia’s limited ﬁnancial and manpower resources; he, too, found it
in the offensive. But Moltke’s solution became with time a prescriptive template. It contained virtually all of the particular characteristics that later deﬁned Schlieffen’s plan, and
that the reader has already seen at Waterberg, a kind of sedentary version of Moltke’s
conception.
Moltke began from the premise that the goal of battle was the annihilation of the
enemy’s military forces, that is, a complete, purely military victory. This conception was
2. Kier, Imagining War, 10.
3. Posen, Sources, 46–50.
4. Jack Snyder, “Civil-Military Relations and the Cult of the Offensive, 1914 and 1984,” International Security 9:1 (summer 1984): 108–46. See also Stephen van Evera, “The Cult of the Offensive and the Origins of the
First World War,” International Security 9:1 (summer 1984), 58–107; and Herrmann, Arming of Europe.
5. Kier, Imagining War, chs. 1 and 2.
6. Showalter, “German Grand Strategy,” 66, 68–69. Showalter may exaggerate offensive tendencies before
1870; see, for example, a typical handbook from 1840 that only slightly prefers the offensive: Ferdinand von Bentheim, Leitfaden zum Unterricht in den Kriegswissenschaften: Für Lehrer und zum Selbstunterricht (Berlin, 1840),
143–44.

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
originally Clausewitz’s, but Moltke revived it and then seemed to demonstrate its validity 161
at Königgrätz (1866) and Sedan (1870). He counterbalanced Prussia’s resource deﬁciencies
by meticulous, detailed prewar planning relying on Prussia’s technical advantages (the
railroads and superior infantry ﬁrepower). He foresaw a single battle of annihilation in
which the enemy was enveloped and attacked at its ﬂanks “in one continuous strategicoperational sequence combining mobilization, concentration, movement, and ﬁghting.”7
Such a battle risked everything in a single event. It blurred the distinction between strategy and operations; in fact, it cultivated operations in a kind of ﬂight from strategy.8 In
1866 Moltke ignored logistics. He learned from his mistake, however, and prepared for the
war against France in 1870; but as that war lengthened, he reverted again to living off the
enemy’s land. Finally, Moltke’s way of war depended for success on aggressive, independent commanders (the beginning of mission tactics). In the unexpectedly longer war of
1870–71 two further characteristics developed. One was Moltke’s insistence that in
wartime the military should have sole power to conduct the war, which he conceived of in
a purely military way.9 The other was the chief of staff ’s (reluctant) conclusion that republican France must be defeated totally. That is, in extreme circumstances, where annihilation of the army had not defeated the state, society became a legitimate target for terror in pursuit of unconditional and permanent defeat of the enemy.10 It is these last
tendencies that moved one military historian to conclude that “a Moltke without a Bismarck would very possibly have been a prototype Ludendorff.”11
After the war was safely won, Moltke stayed on as chief of staff until 1890. Several
times between 1871 and 1890 Moltke yielded to the military logic of extremes. He twice advocated preventive war to offset Germany’s numerical weakness against its potential foes.
And he continued to distrust political solutions to security problems, for example, by not
letting Germany’s alliance with Russia deter him from imagining, and even proposing, a
preventive war against it.12 In 1879 Moltke even planned for a war against Germany’s ﬁrm
ally, Austria!13
In the last two years of his tenure, however, Moltke abandoned the purely military-aggressive way of thinking. His basic realism caused him to conclude that Germany’s manpower and resource limits, plus its position in central Europe potentially facing a twofront war, made it impossible for Germany to win such a war against France and Russia,
7. Rothenberg, “Moltke,” 296; Stig Förster, “The Prussian Triangle of Leadership in the Face of the People’s
War,” in On the Road, 115–40, here 124.
8. Förster, “Prussian Triangle,” 127; Hugo Frhr. von Freytag-Loringhoven, Heerführung im Weltkriege
(Berlin, 1920), 45–46.
9. Deist, “Remarks,” 325; Stadelmann, Moltke, 208, 392.
10. Stadelmann, Moltke, 238–60. Moltke was not as bloodthirsty as Bismarck, however (260–61). See also
Stig Förster, “Optionen der Kriegführung im Zeitalter des ‘Volkskrieges,’ ” in Militärische Verantwortung in
Staat und Gesellschaft, ed. Detlev Bald (Koblenz, 1986), 83–108, here 92–94, and Förster, “Prussian Triangle,”
137–38.
11. Dupuy, Genius, 109.
12. Förster, “Optionen der Kriegführung,” 96; Michael Schmid, Der “Eiserne Kanzler” und die Generäle
(Paderborn, 2003), 371–78, 403–18.
13. Rothenberg, “Moltke,” 306.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
162 no matter how audacious, well-planned, or well-executed an offensive it tried. The best he
foresaw was a stalemate in which a defensive Germany protected its territory while ending
the war diplomatically.
Why did Moltke’s realistic insight not become doctrine? After all, Moltke was by far
the most prestigious ﬁgure in modern German military history. Stig Förster points out
that Moltke did little to secure his viewpoint by, for example, lobbying for a successor
who agreed with him.14 But Moltke would have had trouble ﬁnding one. Even sober-sided
senior officers, like Wilhelm von Blume, Prince Kraft zu Hohenlohe-Ingelﬁngen, or Colmar von der Goltz believed that an initially successful defense needed to shift to the offensive, because only that promised a true victory.15 Moltke’s successor, his longtime assistant Alfred v. Waldersee, was an energetic proponent of offensive preventive war.
Younger officers were even less ready to embrace dour military self-abnegation; instead,
they considered the existential situation of 1870–71 to be rule setting and, therefore, the
norm; the solutions Moltke had earlier discovered then remained valid for them.16 Moltke
was, therefore, practically alone, because his late views ran counter to twenty years of institutionalized military culture that he had helped to create. Indeed, the very lateness of
Moltke’s realization, his vacillation in expressing it, and his continued underestimation of
diplomacy (in the form of alliances) as against military solutions to security issues—all
show how much he was still in the grip of Germany’s military culture, even at the end of
his career.
Waldersee’s adventurism cut short his tenure as chief of the General Staff in 1891.
Nonetheless, his response to growing French and Russian military strength anticipated
the drift of German strategic thinking under his successors Alfred von Schlieffen and
Moltke’s nephew Helmuth von Moltke the younger, chief of staff from 1906 to 1914. Expanding on the elder Moltke’s model, Waldersee emphasized greater concentration of
forces, more detailed premobilization planning, and heavier emphasis on operations. But
Waldersee also moved down the road of wishful thinking. His reckoning on quick, seriatim defeats of France and Russia relied on two assumptions: German technical superiority and strategic errors by his opponents (namely, that they too would abandon the
stronger defensive for the riskier offensive).17
Schlieffen followed Waldersee as chief of staff and remained in that office through
1905, time enough to train an entire generation of officers. Schlieffen himself had been
carefully prepared by both Moltke and Waldersee for the post,18 so Schlieffen, too, was a
reﬁned product of post-1870 German military culture as interpreted by the General Staff.
Recent scholarship has revised our view of Schlieffen, emphasizing his ﬂexibility and
raising questions about the relation of his plan to Germany’s war plan of 1914.19 Schlieffen
14. Förster, “Optionen,” 103.
15. Rothenberg, “Moltke,” 310.
16. Stadelmann, Moltke, 238–39.
17. Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen, 102–3, 124; Schmid, Der “Eiserne Kanzler,” 704, 716.
18. Dupuy, Genius, 129.
19. Terence Zuber, “The Schlieffen Plan Reconsidered,” War in History 6:3 (1999), 262–305; idem, “Terence
Holmes Reinvents the Schlieffen Plan,” ibid. 8:4 (2001), 468–76; idem, “Terence Holmes Reinvents the Schlieffen

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
(like all the chiefs of staff) revised Germany’s war plans yearly in response to the changing 163
military situation, and he routinely honed two alternatives, an eastern and a western offensive, to suit different political circumstances.20 Like all chiefs of staff, he tested the
plans in war games and staff rides. Schlieffen’s rigidity thus lay not in cleaving to a single,
ﬁxed blueprint but rather in how he deﬁned and went about “solving” Germany’s strategic dilemma.
What has gone down in history as the Schlieffen Plan is more accurately a memorandum probably written in 1906 at the very beginning of Schlieffen’s retirement. This memorandum proposed to defeat France and then Russia, beginning with a single, swift encircling movement involving almost all of Germany’s troops, which were to sweep through
neutral Belgium, go around Paris, and defeat the entire French army in six weeks, before
turning against the slower-moving Russian armies in the east.21 Moltke the younger’s
subsequent plans naturally took account of growing French and Russian strength, just as
did Schlieffen’s later revisions written up until his death in 1912.22 Schlieffen’s 1906 memorandum was, therefore, not identical with the plans with which Germany entered the
war in 1914.
Much of the disagreement, both in the latest and in earlier scholarship, revolves
around how to deﬁne the essence of the Schlieffen Plan. There are two narrow constructions: one that deﬁnes it as the sweep around Paris and another that understands it as
grand encirclement.23 In my view both are too narrow to apprehend the enormous continuities stretching from Moltke the elder through Waldersee, Schlieffen, and even Moltke
the younger. Except for Moltke the elder’s brief apostasy in 1888 (when he embraced the
strategic defensive), all planners attempted to solve Germany’s strategic problems in the
same way: they advocated an offensive (to occur on one front, be it east or west) that demanded concentration of force ﬂanking around fortiﬁed or strong fronts—an offensive
that aimed for a decisive battle of annihilation requiring speed, risk, and minute prewar
planning and that focused on operations rather than actual strategy. This is the sense in
which the following analysis understands Schlieffen’s thinking, but it is equally true of
both Moltkes and of Waldersee. “Schlieffen” is therefore shorthand for a remarkably consistent institutional view of how to wage war.
Schlieffen elaborated on and developed the principles that Moltke the elder had
worked out, going farther in the same direction, as Waldersee had done. Schlieffen graduPlan—again,” ibid. 10:1 (2003), 92–101; Terence M. Holmes, “The Reluctant March on Paris,” ibid. 8:2 (2001),
208–32; idem, “The Real Thing,” ibid. 9:1 (2002), 111–20; Robert T. Foley, “The Origins of the Schlieffen Plan,”
ibid. 10:2 (2003), 222–32. Zuber’s argument has now appeared in book form, which I have not seen: Inventing the
Schlieffen Plan: German War Planning, 1871–1914 (Oxford, 2002).
20. Zuber, “Schlieffen Plan Reconsidered,” 284–85.
21. Gerhard Ritter, Der Schlieffenplan (Munich, 1956); Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 2:193–206; Wallach,
Dogma; Rothenberg, “Moltke”; Martin Kutz, “Schlieffen contra Clausewitz,” in Kutz, Realitätsﬂucht und Aggression im deutschen Militär (Baden-Baden, 1990), 12–48; Förster, “Optionen”; Förster, “Dreams and Nightmares,”
343–76.
22. On Moltke’s tactical/technical changes: Storz, Kriegsbild, 167–206; Mombauer, Moltke, 94–100.
23. Paris: Zuber, “Schlieffen Plan Reconsidered,” 299; encirclement: Otto, Schlieffen, 120. On Zuber’s narrowness: Holmes, “Reluctant March”; Strachan, First World War, 170.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
164 ally shifted the ﬁrst offensive from east to west (Russia to France) in response to the development of Russian railroads; in order to avoid French fortiﬁcations, he grasped at an ever
larger envelopment to the north, which brought him eventually to advocate violating Belgian (and even Dutch) neutrality.24 The ﬂanking maneuver developed as an idea inside the
General Staff and was honed and strengthened in response to war games and staff rides.25
All of these modiﬁcations were technical responses to what planners perceived as changing
technical situations. They did not engage in fundamental rethinking. Schlieffen’s memorandum of 1906, despite its audacity in concentrating 87 percent of Germany’s forces in the
west, “was merely the logical continuation of a plan of operation that had been in effect
since 1899,” as one historian remarks.26 Chief of Staff Moltke studied Schlieffen’s memorandum closely in 1911.27 After the Marne debacle in September 1914, disappointed generals
pilloried Moltke for his famous emendations to the basic plan (strengthening the center
and thus diminishing the ratio of troops engaged in the encirclement)—changes that were
the result of usual staff work and of which Quartermaster General Erich Ludendorff approved.28 From the historian’s perspective, the continuities in strategic thinking are overwhelming; both Schlieffen’s plan and Moltke’s were modiﬁcations of the same basic strategic thought. Furthermore, even with Moltke’s changes, the Schlieffen Plan remained the
conceptual war plan on which Germany gambled in 1914.29
Schlieffen’s plan was so audacious that one is tempted to think it the product of
hubris or expansionism.30 But it was the reverse. For, despite all the differences in Germany’s actual political and strategic situation between the 1870s and 1914, the General
Staff built its plans to overcome the same dilemma, namely, the German military’s numerical weakness vis-à-vis France plus Russia and its inability to sustain a war of attrition.31 Much of this dilemma was self-made. The army’s internal task to defend the
monarchy against revolution, plus the desire not to plead for more money from the democratically elected Reichstag, caused the Prussian War Ministry to oppose army expansion, lest unreliable socialists ﬂood the ranks and undesirable bourgeois, the officer corps.
The same sort of thinking shied away from long wars that, in the absence of popular legit-

24. Railroads: Schmid, “Eiserne Kanzler,” 660–61; fortiﬁcations: ibid., 666, and Foley, “Origins,” 223.
25. Zuber, “Schlieffen Plan Reconsidered,” 280; Holmes, “Reluctant March,” 217–20.
26. Foley, “Origins,” 223. Zuber disagrees (“Schlieffen Plan Reconsidered”), but the only researcher (Dieckmann) who saw the original documents before their destruction in 1945 also concluded that the memorandum
ran seamlessly from previous planning (Zuber, “Schlieffen Plan Reconsidered,” 271). Strachan also rejects
Zuber’s view; First World War, 167.
27. Zuber, “Schlieffen Plan Reconsidered,” 298–99.
28. On Moltke’s decisions regarding Paris, see Holmes, “Reluctant March,” 222–24. On Moltke as an outsider, who never grasped Schlieffen’s ideas: Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen, 223, 242–43; Strachan, First World War,
176–78.
29. Hence the frequent criticism among officers of Moltke and his staff after the Marne, that they “were
only capable of reeling off the ‘Schlieffen ﬁlm,’ and were perplexed and distraught when the roll got hung up.”
Diary entry of Lt. Gen. Karl Ritter von Wenninger, 6 Sept. 1914, cited in Holger Afflerbach, Falkenhayn (Munich,
1984), 185n178.
30. Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 2:199; Kutz, “Schlieffen,” 30; Holger Herwig, The First World War (London,
1997), 47.
31. Wallach, Dogma, 59; Förster, Doppelte Militarismus, 158–65.

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
imation, would encourage civil unrest or even revolution. Finally, the General Staff re- 165
garded alliances as being of negligible strategic help; it reckoned danger by adding up the
troop strengths of its neighbors, regardless of whether they were allied or not (after 1894,
of course, the Russo-French alliance conﬁrmed this bleak view).32 In short, the “weakness” that promoted aggressive planning, and that seemed to the General Staff to be a natural given, was in fact both political and self-generated.
Fear of weakness (a trope we shall consider shortly) was thus a powerful source of
Germany’s obsession with the offensive. As Gen. Friedrich von Bernhardi explained in
1911, “The offensive offers greater chances for success, especially for the weaker [power].”
This is why “only the offense [was] suitable to a state like Germany, which is ringed with
enemies and which must perish [zugrunde gehen] if it were to regard the defensive as the
stronger form of pursuing war.”33 For the same reason, the offensive had to be huge and
deﬁnitive. In Schlieffen’s words, “Complete annihilation [of the enemy’s military capacity] is necessary in order to stop once and for all the possibility that the opponent will recover and his allies rush to his aid.”34 The Schlieffen Plan allowed Germany to concentrate
its strength against one enemy at a time; the offensive allowed it to determine the timing
and place of attack and to offset its deﬁcits by meticulous planning; the single battle of annihilation promised a short war.
There seems little doubt that in the years after 1890 the elder Moltke’s knowledge of
how to think about problems was lost in the search for what Schlieffen called the “prescription for victory.”35 Moltke’s solutions became ﬁxed laws rather than contingent answers. According to Schlieffen, “The basic laws of warfare remain the same.”36 Not all of
that hardening occurred under Schlieffen; it was a continuous process to which the
younger Moltke also contributed, for example, by stressing the ineluctable timetable and
the technical integration of the various parts in war games.37 Therefore, only part of what
the elder Moltke “knew” survived as a permanent part of Germany’s military culture.

The Schlieffen Plan as Organizational Knowledge
The Schlieffen Plan, as the retiring chief of staff set it down in 1906, gives us the clearest distillation in a single source of the army’s organizational knowledge and thus represents a summary at the doctrinal level of Wilhelminian military culture. It clearly shows
how the dynamic toward extremes was (unintentionally) built into the system, and it reﬂects and accounts for the actual conduct of Germany’s wars in the colonies and during

32. Schmid, “Eiserne Kanzler,” 371–73.
33. Friedrich von Bernhardi, “Clausewitz über Angriff und Verteidigung,” Beiheft of Militär-Wochenblatt 12
(1911), 399–412, here 407, 411, 412.
34. Cited in Wallach, Dogma, 73, also 89–90.
35. Schlieffen’s phrase, cited in Wallach, Dogma, 129; see also 69, 73.
36. Cited in Otto, Schlieffen, 114.
37. Timetable: Holmes, “Reluctant March,” 228n71; timetable and war games: Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen,
242. On Schlieffen’s rigidity: Wallach, Dogma, 53, and passim; Otto, Schlieffen, 111–37; Strachan, First World War,
172.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
166 the First World War. Furthermore, it illustrates how explicit doctrine can also be riddled
with implicit, but unacknowledged, basic assumptions.
The essence of Schlieffen’s plan consisted of these points:
1. The plan was purely military. It accepted and built on the constitutional split of
civil from military policy. Foreign policy, economics, and domestic politics played no role
in it. It would unroll regardless of the cause or goal of the particular war that broke out. So
encapsulated was military planning that Chancellor Theobald v. Bethmann Hollweg
(who came to office in 1909) ﬁrst learned of its vague outlines in December 1912. The
plan’s most famous aspect from the standpoint of diplomacy was its violation of Belgian
neutrality, which virtually assured Britain’s entry into the war. Both Chancellors Bülow
and Bethmann silently accepted this enormous subordination of the political to military
convenience. Political considerations, therefore, did not interrupt the self-replicating
solipsism of military thinking.
2. Risk was the heart of the plan, at once its most astonishing feature and its most
consequential. The most daring military plan of its age, the Schlieffen Plan required feats
of marching, provisioning, resupply, and coordinated communication that were unparalleled at the time and that the German army was in fact unable to accomplish in 1914. More
than this, the plan proposed not merely to defeat the two major powers that surrounded
and outnumbered Germany but to defeat one of them in merely six weeks (it had taken
the elder Moltke, with numerical superiority, seven months to do so). And it proposed to
do so without the necessary material base or logistical planning.38 Finally, it risked Germany’s entire future on the outcome of a single battle. In the words of one scholar, the
Schlieffen Plan “made no sense.”39 That is true in the larger sense of strategy and politics.
But it made perfect sense in the smaller world of organizational knowledge and practical
techniques. The plan was a coherent extension and application on a large scale of what
every officer knew to be true at the level of combat. The extreme risk produced the other
deﬁning features of the plan, which may be understood as basic assumptions about the
nature of warfare and compensatory techniques to overcome (relative) weakness.
3. The plan assumed the elder Moltke’s deﬁnition of victory: the complete military annihilation of the enemy’s force. This Vernichtungsgedanke (idea of annihilation) had been
hegemonic in German military circles since the early 1870s.40 It was limited to destruction
of enemy troops, but as we have seen, when that goal was frustrated, it slipped easily to
encompass civilians and society, as in 1870–71 and in 1904–5.41 Annihilation was victory;
everything short of it was unacceptable. That included “ordinary victories,” such as even
38. The German army never had the troops necessary to execute the Schlieffen Plan: Förster, “Militär und
staatsbürgerliche Partizipation,” 62–63, 68; Herwig, First World War, 49.
39. Förster, “Dreams and Nightmares,” 361. On the impossibility of the plan see Rothenberg, “Moltke,”
318–20.
40. Messerschmidt, “Völkerrecht und ‘Kriegsnotwendigkeit,’ ” 196–97; Rothenberg, “Moltke,” 296.
41. Otto believes that “criminal acts” were inherent in its very conception of “Blitzkrieg”; Schlieffen, 138–41.
See also his list of essential features, 113.

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Königgrätz (1866), in Schlieffen’s view.42 And it certainly included negotiated settlements, 167
which were tantamount to military failure. The struggle to achieve annihilation tended to
lengthen combat, as in SWA, and therefore it perpetuated the cycle of violence.
4. The plan was purely offensive. The “cult of the offensive” was a European phenomenon that gripped all the Continental armies before 1914.43 But it was nowhere more assiduously cultivated or more thoroughly adopted as the single foundation for all military
training and planning than in Germany.44 It was so ubiquitous that writers unabashedly
identiﬁed it with the very essence of Germandom: “We love the offensive and want to hold
tight to it because it has its origin and justiﬁcation as much in the character of the German
people as in purely tactical considerations.”45 Germany consequently spent less on defensive measures (such as fortiﬁcations) than any other European major power; knowledge
of how to wage defensive war atrophied among officers and in Germany’s military handbooks, and troops were not trained in defensive techniques (such as trench building).46 As
we saw, Governor Leutwein in SWA was removed from command for engaging in a strategic retreat; in World War I at least one officer was sacked in 1915 simply for mentioning
retreat as a possibility.47 But the offensive is both riskier and bloodier than the defensive,
as Clausewitz had long ago noted. The conviction that the offensive was the only way to
ﬁght war, and that mastery of it was Germany’s chief military advantage, predisposed ofﬁcers to choose bloody actionism over other alternatives.
5. The plan was designed to end the war quickly, at a single blow, before it developed
into a war of attrition that Germany would surely lose (in the sense of being unable to annihilate the enemy). All contemporary European armies indulged in the “short war illusion,” which predicted that wartime disruption of sensitive commercial-industrial
economies would simply prevent a long war.48 However, short wars had been the Prusso-

42. Hughes, “Schlichting,” 271; Rothenberg, “Moltke,” 313.
43. Storz, Kriegsbild, 143–53, 226–31, 254–57, 371–72, and passim; van Evera, “Cult of the Offensive”; Snyder,
Ideology of the Offensive; Posen, Sources of Military Doctrine, 46–50, 69–71; Herrmann, Arming of Europe.
44. Wallach, Dogma, 43–44, 85–88; Schulte, Europäische Krise, 61–64; Immanuel, “Der offensive Geist in unserer neuen Felddienst-Ordnung,” Militär-Wochenblatt 93:71 (1908), cols. 1664–67; Friedrich von Bernhardi,
Deutschland und der nächste Krieg (Stuttgart, 1912).
45. Major v. François, Lehren aus dem Südafrikanischen Kriege für das Deutsche Heer (Berlin, 1900), 54,
also 57.
46. Hew Strachan, “From Cabinet War to Total War,” in Great War, Total War, ed. Chickering and Förster,
19–31, here 20; compare sections on attack with those on defense in Prussia, War Ministry, Exerzir-Reglement,
2nd ed., 117–23; Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 150; Rupprecht Kronprinz von Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, 3
vols., ed. Eugen von Frauenholz (Munich, 1929), diary entry of 10 Dec. 1914, 1:274; Wild, Briefe, 23; Burchardt,
Friedenswirtschaft, 39–41.
47. Karl von Einem, Ein Armeeführer erlebt den Weltkrieg, ed. Junius Alter (Leipzig, 1938), 184.
48. Lancelot L. Farrar, The Short-War Illusion: German Policy, Strategy, and Domestic Affairs, August–December 1914 (Santa Barbara, 1973). Stig Förster points out how many German officers expressed anxiety that the
war might not in fact be short, but their fears did not materially change Germany’s lack of preparation for a long
war. Fear of failure was in any case an ever-present emotion in the officer corps. Förster, “Der deutsche Generalstab und die Illusion des kurzen Krieges, 1871–1914,” in Lange und kurze Wege in den Ersten Weltkrieg, ed. Johannes Burkhardt et al. (Munich, 1996), 115–58; see also Lancelot L. Farrar, Arrogance and Anxiety (Iowa City,
1981).

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
168 German ideal for decades before the “illusion” became current. In Germany’s case, the
short war was probably more the result of military wishful thinking than a cause of it. The
important aspect is the tight timetable that placed terriﬁc pressure on officers and troops
to accomplish unrealistic goals swiftly.49 Unrealistic expectations of rapid, smooth success
replayed the colonial dilemma on the European continent and helped precipitate the
massacre of French and Belgian civilians in 1914. When the race ran late and the war
lengthened, desperate searches for shortcuts and quick solutions became a hallmark of
war conduct and encouraged the use of experimental wonder weapons (such as poison
gas or the submarine), whose lethality could not be controlled.
6. Having eschewed strategic planning, the Schlieffen Plan codiﬁed the tendency, already partly visible under the elder Moltke, to overvalue operations. It focused organizational strength away from strategy and the level of war, downward to the level of the individual battle, operations, or even tactics.50 The lack of political-military coordination
made this drift likely, but not inevitable. The victories of 1864, 1866, and 1870–71 seemed
to conﬁrm the success of narrow operational planning.51 And, after all, planning was the
General Staff ’s main task, so it is hardly surprising that it imagined it could solve fundamental strategic problems at that level.52 Framing problems in this way encouraged solutions discovered at the level of practice to rise upward and be applied to larger issues.
Practices, standard and newly minted, might then become signiﬁcant and even policy-setting in the absence of overarching policy or principle. World War I was replete with examples of this process.
7. The hegemony of the operative encouraged reliance on technique to bridge over
deﬁcits of various kinds. So, for example, the Schlieffen Plan codiﬁed two of Moltke’s operative maxims: envelopment with ﬂanking attacks, and ruthless pursuit should that fail.
These techniques hardened into unquestioned truths. Even in colonial warfare, where the
single concentric battle of annihilation and ruthless pursuit were almost impossible to accomplish, German officers attempted them again and again.53 Abandoning these methods
required detailed justiﬁcation, not just to military authorities but before the public, too,
which shared these expectations of correct military action.54 World War I saw German of49. Even Moltke the younger, who feared war might be long, polished and tightened the timetable to keep
it short. Förster, “Dreams and Nightmares,” 364–67; on Moltke’s other preparations, all of which increased pressure to succeed, see Annika Mombauer, Helmuth von Moltke and the Origins of the First World War (Cambridge,
2001), 106–81.
50. Kutz, Realitätsﬂucht, 27–30; Showalter, “From Deterrence to Doomsday Machine,” 708; Showalter,
“German Grand Strategy,” 76–77; Bruno Thoss, “Militärische Entscheidung und politisch-gesellschaftlicher
Umbruch,” in Kriegsende 1918, ed. Jörg Duppler and Gerhard P. Gross (Munich, 1999), 30; Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 173; Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch 2: 58, 270, 372, 429, 436.
51. Dupuy, Genius, 110.
52. Michael Geyer, “German Strategy in the Age of Machine Warfare, 1914–1945,” in Makers of Modern
Strategy, ed. Paret, 527–97. Geyer emphasizes the central role in German strategic thought played by the General
Staff ’s desire to retain its position as the sole expert manager of war.
53. In SWA, Trotha never gave up trying. These had been Leutwein’s tactics, too: operation order of 11 Mar.
1904, MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 423, p. 41; Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 33. In China: Binder-Krieglstein,
Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps, 231–31. In East Africa, Nigmann, Kaiserliche Schutztruppe, 115, 117–18.
54. Amtliche Nachrichten des Gouvernements aus den unruhigen Gebieten vom 11 October 1905, MAFreiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 441, Doc. 78; Militärpolitischer Bericht . . . (26 Sept.–20 Oct. 1905), Dar es Salaam, ibid.,

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
ﬁcers attempt concentric attacks repeatedly, in the west, the east, and the Balkans.55 The 169
hegemony of the operative meant that repeated failure did not lead to rethinking, which
would have required rising to the level of strategy, but to more repetition. Germany’s very
tactical and operative strengths disinclined the military to question or abandon them.
8. The ﬂight into technique is also visible in the Schlieffen Plan’s detailed planning.
Overcontrol was the pendant to extraordinary risk; control through planning was meant
to lessen risk by preempting problems—a method common to organizations.56 But in the
Schlieffen Plan this technique reached astonishing heights.57 It was clearest in the fantastically detailed railroad planning for mobilization, which inspired such conﬁdence that its
chief, Gen. Wilhelm Groener, was “not even particularly excited” when war was declared.58 And it continued in the timetable for the sweep through Belgium and northern
France. But how could one expect to eliminate the accidental, the very “friction” that
Clausewitz had identiﬁed as one of the deﬁning characteristics of war?59 Furthermore, on
the battleﬁeld the taut central planning necessary to keep to the timetable clashed with the
principle of mission tactics. And it ignored the enemy’s response, not to mention the long
lines and consequent difficult communication that a sweeping battle of movement would
surely produce. In short, planning had moved into unrealism while keeping the semblance of rationality. In addition to everything else, the husk of planning without its content promoted self-delusion. Having organizational talent was a national stereotype that
Wilhelminians commonly held of themselves, and that also encouraged faith in detailed
planning. We shall see that during the world war, as things went wrong, supreme commanders grasped at this straw and lost themselves in minutiae. Planning drifted farther
down to the level of mere tactics, which were supposed to function in the place of operations and strategy (as in the German offensives of 1918).
9. Among the detailed plans that were never made were those concerning logistics
and provisioning. As in 1866 and in the colonial campaigns, these central elements of
preparation were left largely to luck.60 Logistics had frequently been eclipsed by the narrow focus of resources and creative energy on pure combat. The General Staff found it
easy to continue this focus because material resources were not in its province but beNr. 438, p. 12. Also, Götzen, Deutsch-Ostafrika, 75; Leutwein, Elf Jahre, 532–37. Public expectations: v. Gädke,
“Die militärische Lage in Deutsch-Südwestafrika,” Berliner Zeitung 63 (4 Feb. 1904), 1. The public was subjected
to a ﬂood of publications by military men extolling these methods; e.g., Curt v. François, Kriegführung in SüdAfrika (Berlin, 1900), 44–45; Capt. Frhr. v. Maltzahn, “Der Abschluss des Burenkrieges,” Vierteljahrshefte für
Truppenführung und Heereskunde 6:3 (1909), 435–67; Major General v. François, “Der Herero-Aufstand,” Militärisches Wochenblatt 89:1 (1904), Heft 33, col. 837, 840; Heft 34, col. 863; Heft 40, col. 987, 989.
55. Max von Gallwitz brings many examples: Meine Führertätigkeit im Weltkriege 1914–1916, 266, 377–78,
462–63; see also Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch 1: 208, 236–37.
56. Turner, “Organizational and Interorganizational Development of Disasters,” 378; Snook, Friendly Fire,
230.
57. Van Crefeld, Command in War, 142.
58. Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 143. On the impact of railroads on General Staff functioning: Bucholz,
Moltke, Schlieffen, 149–50, 173–75, 287–300, 318–20.
59. Clausewitz, On War, bk. 1, ch. 7, 164–67.
60. Van Crefeld, Supplying War, ch. 4; Burchhardt, Friedenswirtschaft; Wallach, Dogma, 81, 84, 89; Schulte,
Europäische Krise, 275.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
170 longed to the War Ministry.61 The Schlieffen Plan, therefore, proposed to live off the occupied territory, leading to extreme exploitation of civilians in the First World War. Lack
of genuine preparation is another mark of the wishful thinking that permeated the Schlieffen Plan.
10. In place of realistic planning the Schlieffen Plan relied not only on clever techniques but on the qualitative superiority of the army’s officers and men, which it took to be
axiomatic.62 The effectiveness of the German army when compared with other European
forces lent substance to this view. But the assumption of superiority was impervious to revision, for example, in colonial warfare, where new arrivals were decidedly not superior
to native ﬁghters, or in the world war after November 1914, when the original army had
been destroyed, wiping out the training, planning, and preparation advantages that officers always cited. And the assumption of superiority operated the same way that racialism
did in the colonies: it built in expectations of easy success, and it encouraged foolhardy
underestimation of the enemy. The ﬁrst set in motion vicious spirals of violence, the second discouraged learning from mistakes.
11. Finally, the Schlieffen Plan depended for success on speciﬁc moral and emotional
qualities in its officers. It risked so much—the gap between its reach and its grasp was so
great—that daring to carry it out required ignoring its huge improbabilities. This was no
job for the cautious or contemplative. The plan demanded of its practitioners optimism
bordering on the foolhardy, will, daring, and ruthless determination. General Groener, a
south German and political moderate, was nonetheless utterly typical in his conclusion,
expressed in a letter during World War I, that “one cannot be hard enough in war to be
successful. . . . One must always go to the end; one cannot be satisﬁed with halfway measures: there is no golden mean in war.”63 Crown Prince Rupprecht, Bavarian and a politically astute critic of pure Prussianism, is for that very reason an excellent witness. In August 1914 he opined that “pessimists and excitable people don’t belong in the General
Staff.” After four years of reaping the consequences of military optimism, he recognized
his own and his organization’s error: “It was a false mental orientation, especially visible
in Prussian military circles, that one did not want to hear doubts. Anyone who expressed
doubts or an opinion different from what was desirable was all too easily taken to be a
pessimist, weakling, or faint-hearted, and if possible was removed.”64 Will, extreme daring
(Kühnheit), optimistic recklessness, and one-sided actionism were not simply self-selected among officers (who could not serve unless approved by their fellows in the regiment) but were systematically inculcated by Schlieffen into a generation of General Staff
officers.65 At the time of Schlieffen’s retirement in 1905, his successor, the younger Moltke,
61. Förster, “Dreams and Nightmares,” 360–61.
62. Kutz, Realitätsﬂucht, 37.
63. Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 157–58.
64. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 25 Aug. 1914, 1:48, and of 21 Sept.
1918, 2:448.
65. On Schlieffen as Erzieher: Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 2:200; Goerlitz, Kleine Geschichte, 129–30; Dupuy,
Genius, 132–34; Rothenberg, “Moltke,” 313–14; Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 69, 93; Freytag-Loringhoven, Menschen und Dinge, 135; Freytag-Loringhoven, Heerführung im Weltkriege, 47, 152; Eisenhart-Rothe, Im Banne der
Persönlichkeit, 28–45. Will as characteristic: Dieter Storz, “ ‘Aber was hätte anders geschehen sollen?’ ” in
Kriegsende 1918, 51–95, here 82–83. Ernst von Wrisberg held this characterological schooling responsible for the

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
recognized this achievement as Schlieffen’s ﬁnest. Schlieffen, he told his audience, had di- 171
rected everyone’s eyes toward the single goal. “All energy should be directed to this highest goal, and the will that leads to it was the will to victory. This unrelenting, emotional
will to victory is the legacy that Your Excellency has left to the General Staff. It is up to us
now to hold it sacred.”66 The emotional or nonrational was thus fundamental to the
Schlieffen Plan. It also helped cement the romantic picture of the military commander as
intuitive genius, nowhere more clearly expressed than by General Ludendorff, who remarked in his memoirs that “during the entire war I did not think as much as I have in
writing these memoirs. Waging war is an art, not a science.”67 The image of the ideal officer incorporated these emotional and characterological traits that determined the professional officer’s expectations of himself and his fellows. And ﬁnally, joy in risk taking, relentless willpower, and obligatory optimism had far-reaching cognitive effects for those
who had internalized them.
This list of characteristics might seem to suggest that German military culture and its
expression in the Schlieffen Plan were static. They were not, though the principal assumptions operating in them were quite constant. As Schlieffen reﬁned his war plan from 1892
to his retirement in 1905, it became steadily grander and riskier. The assumptions behind
it produced a dynamism that tended toward expansion, a movement if anything encouraged by the political situation after 1905.68 His successor, the younger Moltke, tried to
dampen this internal dynamism by lessening the risky, one-sided deployment and by paying more attention to logistics. But the essential features of the Schlieffen Plan still remained Germany’s main war plan (and after April 1913 its only war plan);69 its tenets
guided Germany’s war conduct in World War I, as they had in the colonies. What accounts for their dominance over twenty-ﬁve years?

The Durability of the Schlieffen Principles
There were strong internal military-organizational reasons to enshrine Schlieffen’s
principles. His plan elaborated on, and made into explicit doctrine, the wisdom about
ﬁghting that had developed as Germany’s military culture since the wars of uniﬁcation.
The Schlieffen Plan, therefore, rested on ﬁrm foundations. Its principles, which the historian Gunther Rothenberg has summed up as “the offensive, maneuver, mass, and economy of force,” made sense to the junior-most officer, because these were operative, or
high death rate of War Ministry officers, most of whom had passed through the General Staff, when they reached
the front in World War I: “Most of the comrades in the War Ministry soon died heroes’ deaths on the battleﬁeld.
Actionism [Tatendrang] and inexperience . . . will have been mostly responsible.” Heer und Heimat, 1914–1918
(Leipzig, 1921), 140.
66. Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 91.
67. Cited in Hans Meier-Welcker, “Die deutsche Führung an der Westfront im Frühsommer 1918,” Die Welt
als Geschichte 21 (1961), 164–84, here 176. See also Kutz, “Schlieffen,” 42–44.
68. Förster says that in 1905 Schlieffen succumbed to popular expansionary fervor and no longer viewed his
plan as purely security oriented but as providing the basis for Germany’s world-power status. “Dreams and
Nightmares,” 362.
69. Mombauer, Moltke, 100–105.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
172 even tactical, principles that were now said to apply at the strategic level.70 The experience
of battle, maneuvers, and war games—the palpable reality of actual combat—made the
plan seem real, even as it developed more and more into the realm of wishful thinking
and unreality. On top of this came Schlieffen’s assiduous training in the General Staff of
the most meritorious young officers in the army. Only a few future military leaders escaped this thorough schooling. Schlieffen’s own reputation and personal charisma added
to the effect of his lessons. The German military was obviously susceptible to the myth of
the romantic military genius; it idolized ﬁrst Moltke, then Schlieffen, and then the duo
Ludendorff and Hindenburg. The more daring, even foolhardy, the plan the more it ﬁtted
the trope of intuitive genius. On the more prosaic level, the very effort the General Staff
poured into the meticulous plan increased its incentive to hang on to it. And then there
were the other standard military-bureaucratic reasons that Posen has enumerated for preferring an offensive war plan.
The mutually supporting logic of its parts also protected the Schlieffen Plan from criticism from within the military. One can begin with almost any of the eleven points above
and derive the others from it. For example, if one assumed the necessity for a quick victory, then one recognized the utility of a risky offensive aiming at achieving it unequivocally. Or, one could begin by believing that only military victory “counted,” which also
required the offensive to destroy the enemy. Or, if one believed in the qualitative superiority of German troops and organization, then the risk of the all-out offensive seemed
lower and the expectation of quick, purely military victory was heightened, predisposing
you to choose these, and so on. Historians have entered these circular thoughts at different points and adduced different causal explanations for the Schlieffen Plan. But the
Schlieffen Plan was not “caused” in a logical-functional way. Its logic is historical; it is the
logic of development out of a series of interlocking practices and organizational experience, which ended up intensifying and then freezing organizational knowledge in a solipsistic doctrine.71
The details of the Schlieffen Plan were, of course, secret. But its basic principles (the
single, offensive, swift concentration of force to produce a [probably] ﬂanking battle of
annihilation) were well known; they were discussed publicly in military journals and
books, and they were embodied in the actions of German officers in the colonies and during maneuvers and war games. In a remarkable example of organizational mimicry, the
German navy also adopted these principles. The navy was new; in its modern form it was
the creation of Kaiser Wilhelm II in 1897–98. It is not surprising that, in its efforts to ﬁnd
legitimacy, it should have patterned itself after the model of the established, successful,
and prestigious army. The navy also shared the fundamental dilemma that Schlieffen addressed: it was much weaker than its chosen opponent, the British navy. Admiral v. Tirpitz, head of the Naval Office and father of the new battleship ﬂeet, foresaw a single battle
of annihilation in the North Sea. He called this battle “the unmovable goal of our tactics,
70. Rothenberg, “Moltke,” 314; Kutz, “Schlieffen,” 32.
71. Travers points out that, while Britain and France also developed offensive plans, only in Germany was
the offensive actually doctrine: Tim Travers, The Killing Ground (London, 1993), 254, 257.

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
always to be kept in mind in our training and organization.”72 Tirpitz was as good as his 173
word; the navy, like the General Staff, trained its officers and sculpted its organization in
the same tradition of reckless offensive as found in the Schlieffen Plan, to which it held
ﬁrm to the very end of World War I.
There was thus little incentive inside the armed forces to criticize the principles embedded in the Schlieffen Plan (and its naval equivalent). Of course, not every officer was a
Schlieffen acolyte. We have seen the opposition of the “old Africans” in SWA, and we will
meet more examples in World War I. More important, we shall see that it was possible to
subscribe to the basic operational tenets of the Schlieffen Plan and still resist its dynamic
toward extremes and unrealism. A ﬁrm grip on practical goals, political interest, regard
for world opinion, or humanitarian values (whether encouraged by religion or otherwise)
are some of the reasons for such resistance. But the example of the silence of Major Lequis reminds us how hard it was to buck the organizational tide; and the interlocking dynamism of the plan’s parts made it difficult to accept some of its tenets while rejecting
others.
Organizational cultures may sometimes be corrected by negative experiences, in this
case by war. Before 1914 that meant colonial war. Yet Germany’s colonial experience also
seemed to bear out the assumptions embedded in the Schlieffen Plan. The colonial situation replicated perfectly in real life the imagined world of danger and its triumphant, daring overcoming through technical superiority and élan. In all the European colonies, the
offensive leading to total victory was an unquestioned maxim. In 1909, for example, German First Lieutenant Prager reviewed and summed up the message of the official French
guidebook to colonial warfare:
The main goal of operations is to force the foe to a decisive battle in which one
can utilize one’s superior weapons and the better military training of one’s troops.
Each operation should be crowned at the end with the complete submission of the
opponent.73
Colonial warfare thus put the same premium on speed, the decisive, demonstrative victory of force, the exploitation of technical and organizational advantages, the assumption
of one’s own superiority, and the vision of perfect victory followed by perfect order
(“complete submission”) that animated the Schlieffen Plan. The correspondence between
colonial methods and those embedded in the Schlieffen Plan removed this source of potentially salutary feedback. And the dogma that “small wars” were irrelevant to European
warfare, anyway, was a further shield to learning from the unpleasant reality of unsuccessful campaigns.
72. Tirpitz, “Denkschrift über die Neuorganisation unserer Panzerﬂotte” (1892), cited in Gerhard P. Gross,
“Eine Frage der Ehre?” in Kriegsende 1918, 349–65, here 358; and Volker R. Berghahn, “War Preparations and National Identity in Imperial Germany,” in Anticipating Total War, 307–26, here 317.
73. Oberlt. Prager, “Ein französisches Reglement für die Kriegführung in Afrika,” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und Heereskunde 6:3 (1909), 475–92, here 477–78 and 491. See also the standard British handbook,
Callwell, Small Wars.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
174

If all these reasons meant that the military was unlikely to produce much healthy selfcriticism, it received little from outside, either. Although the Schlieffen Plan had developed without coordination with the Reich political leadership, it nonetheless seemed to
ﬁt two different, almost antithetical, contemporary interpretations of German foreign
policy. The ﬁrst was Weltpolitik (world policy), the not very clearly worked out pursuit of
elevating Germany from a merely European Great Power to a world power. World policy
is particularly associated with Bernhard v. Bülow (foreign minister from 1897 to 1901 and
then chancellor until 1909). Germany was not large, rich, or powerful enough to revolutionize the world order as the propaganda for Weltpolitik suggested, so Bülow tried to ﬁnesse it through a combination of bluff and opportunism.74 The Schlieffen Plan resonated
with both the dilemma and the goals. It was similarly a prescription for producing the absolute maximum power effect from a (relatively) weak position. Had it succeeded, it
would indeed have revolutionized the world order by establishing a single continental
hegemonic nation for the ﬁrst time since Napoleon. Bülow and Bethmann could not publicly give up Weltpolitik, even when it had palpably failed after 1905, because the legitimacy of the monarchy was too strongly identiﬁed with it. General Staff officers were in a
similar position. If they had accepted the elder Moltke’s conclusion that only diplomaticpolitical means, not military victory, could save Germany, then they would have delegitimized the supreme place of the army in the constitutional order.75
Once France, Russia, and Britain responded to the threat that Weltpolitik seemed to
pose by establishing the Entente, a second interpretation of German foreign policy began
to displace that cheery one. It was the paranoid vision of the Pan-Germans who saw Germany encircled by its envious enemies, bent on destroying the newcomer. Beginning in
1905 and accelerating after 1911, wider circles of the German public adopted this anxious
view. Its negativity dovetailed better with the Schlieffen Plan, whose purpose was defensive, even if its means were offensive. But the Schlieffen Plan’s combination of ostensible
security-mindedness and aggressive means suited the vague possibilities inherent in Wilhelminian foreign policy, as it did the various competing versions of social Darwinism,
which ranged from conservative-protectionist to a racialist Hobbesian war of all against
all.76 It is worth remembering that the Schlieffen Plan antedated the advent of Weltpolitik
and the heyday of social Darwinism. But their existence helped conﬁrm its precepts.

The Hidden Dynamism of Violence
The Schlieffen Plan was not a lifeless, preprogrammed script. Its unusual mix of daring and desperation contained an explosive dynamic that the plan’s unrealism and imperviousness to reexamination made worse. Only when one understands the link between
74. Peter Winzen, Bülows Weltmachtkonzept (Boppard am Rhein, 1977).
75. Förster, “Dreams and Nightmares,” 360.
76. Bernard Semmel, Imperialism and Social Reform (Cambridge, Mass., 1960); Hans-Günter Zmarzlik,
“Social Darwinism in Germany,” in The Human Creature, ed. Günther Altner (Garden City, N.Y., 1974), 346–77;
Daniel Gasman, The Scientiﬁc Origins of National Socialism (London, 1971); Storz, Kriegsbild, 79–81, 373, and passim.

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
aggression and fear, and between fear and the panacea of order, does the systematic drift 175
implicit in doctrine toward extremes in practice make sense.
Planning is normally a way organizations handle and defend against anxiety.77 Plans
give the comforting illusion of control; they reduce the number of irritating options and
the necessity to think or to choose. The Schlieffen Plan, however, had anxiety built into its
very premise. On the one hand, Schlieffen promised that his plan was a “prescription for
victory”; on the other, the plan forced its practitioners to overcome Germany’s perceived
weakness by risking everything. The technique of overcoming weakness by the daring use
of force did not diminish anxiety, it fed it, unleashing in practice a spiral of aggression,
anxiety, and more aggression that officers experienced as compulsive.
Organizational technique is one way to account for pervasive anxiety and the wish for
perfect order visible in the Schlieffen Plan. But like most durable characteristics, these
idées ﬁxes were overdetermined. A military’s task of wielding violence and the hyperbolic
conception of discipline and order that it develops to manage its task predispose it to
these preoccupations. In the German case, the political framework added to these
propensities. The army’s privileged position seemed under attack by growing hordes of
socialists; the monarchical order seemed the only bastion against them; but Germany’s increasing foreign-political “encirclement” imperiled the monarchy and threatened fatal
weakness at the national level. Thus, implicit, unconscious features of the Schlieffen Plan
seemed conﬁrmed by structures beyond the plan.
We turn now from Schlieffen’s doctrine to the practices of fear and force that developed logically from it. The fear of weakness and the panaceas of victory and order were as
hidden from most officers as they were ubiquitous and deadly in their dynamism. The resulting spiral of violence before 1914 was clearly visible in the colonial engagements,
which then became a kind of dress rehearsal for the world war.

The Fear of Weakness
The fear of being thought weak by the enemy surfaces again and again as a determinant of military policy in the ﬁeld. To some extent, fear of weakness is a general military
predisposition, in that the military’s métier is the successful use of force. Furthermore,
giving the appearance of strength was entrenched colonial policy. The British expert on
small wars, Charles Callwell, warned officers against delaying a march, because “every
pause is interpreted as weakness,” and he spoke for most Europeans when he supported
harsh treatment of native rebels, because “uncivilized races attribute leniency to timidity.”78 The conviction that the colonial opponent “always takes leniency and forbearance
for weakness and cowardice” was simply universal among German officers and policy-

77. Posen, Sources, 44–45.
78. Callwell, Small Wars, 72–73, 148. The same point: the French guidebook “Guerre d’Afrique, guide-annex
des réglements sur le service en campagne et de manoeuvres,” cited in Prager, “Ein franzöisches Reglement,”
476; Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit,” 466.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
176 makers.79 It accounted for a great number of decisions at the micro and macro levels. For
example, fear of appearing weak moved officers to chance risky marches, premature attacks, or especially difficult operations in order to impress the opponent with German
strength.80 More important, however, far-reaching decisions to prolong or escalate combat were taken from this same motive.
The reluctance of German commanders to end conﬂict by negotiation is one of the
most noteworthy characteristics of prewar German military culture. In SWA, the Kaiser
had forbidden negotiations without his approval, and public opinion supported his forceful stance. Still, no contemporary ever expressed doubt that Lieutenant General v. Trotha
would have been permitted to open negotiations after the battle of Waterberg. But Trotha
refused to do so, later explaining that “there could be no question of negotiations if one
did not wish to testify to one’s own weakness and embarrassment.”81 Fear of showing
weakness was not just an idiosyncrasy of Trotha’s. His decision not to negotiate was entirely consistent with basic assumptions permeating the military, which one of Trotha’s
staff officers clearly expressed in his defense of Trotha’s decision:
Was the pursuit really necessary? Some voices have declared it an unnecessary
cruelty. Surely, every pursuit is a harsh measure, but often, as here, it was the lesser
of two evils, because it ended the war more quickly and with less bloodshed than
a long, drawn-out war would have.
Imagine that, out of false humanity, we had not pursued [the enemy]. Then
the ﬂeeing foe, instead of giving up resistance, would have gathered and organized. He would have interpreted our lack of pressure as weakness, and strengthened [by this thought], he would have recovered and armed for a new, energetic
battle. . . . Then the war would have gone on indeﬁnitely, and for each Herero
whom we spared, a German soldier would have fallen, and in the end, we would
still have had to force the enemy down with weapons. Instead of dying of thirst
and hunger, the enemy would have died of lead. An energetic pursuit was therefore more humane than a long struggle in which both warring parties would have
slowly bled to death.82
Here we see the familiar chain of assumptions: pursuit is an unquestioned dogma; war is
existential, it cannot be interrupted (by “false humanity”) in its development toward the
extreme; the foe will interpret humane policy as weakness and continue ﬁghting for total
victory; and, therefore, only total victory or total defeat (death) is possible.

79. Schwabe, Krieg in Südwestafrika, 70, emphasis in original. Other examples of virtually the same sentence: Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 33, 279; Lettow-Vorbeck, Mein Leben, 81; Rohrbach, Aus Südwestafrikas
schweren Tagen, 113–14.
80. Nuhn, Flammen über Deutschost, 64, 109; Leutwein to General Staff, tel., 10 June 1904, Okahandja, BABerlin, R 1001, Nr. 2115, p. 13; Lettow-Vorbeck diary, 4 Dec. 1900 (China), MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lettow-Vorbeck, Nr.
44.
81. Trotha, “Politik und Kriegführung,” Berliner Neueste Nachrichten 60 (3 Feb. 1909), 1.
82. Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 159–60, emphasis in original.

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
There was another version of total defeat held open by German officers; however, it 177
was not more conducive to negotiated settlements in that it demanded unconditional surrender. This kind of total defeat required the enemy to publicly demonstrate that it did not
interpret settlement as German weakness; that is, it required ritual humiliation acknowledging the Germans’ superior position and authority. In China, where the allies joined
Germany in demanding a humiliating settlement, the terms included the following measures symbolic of allied strength: the execution or suicides of several high-ranking court
ﬁgures, official apologies to Germany and Japan (for assassinations of their representatives), a monument to Germany’s murdered ambassador, and the stationing of more allied
troops in China.83 These demands delayed peace for almost a year, during which time
Germany carried out forty-eight punitive expeditions of exemplary destructiveness.84
The surrender terms offered in East Africa similarly show that ritual humiliation of
the enemy was necessary to overcome the fear of having shown weakness by settling a
conﬂict by any means short of ultimate force.85 In addition to complete disarmament and
the handing over of rebel leaders (who were, of course, the political leaders of the districts), Governor Götzen also insisted on a “punishment ﬁne” for each warrior and the
deliverance of large groups of laborers “for punishment and forced labor on the coast.”86
Eight months later (in July 1906), the deputy governor had to inform Berlin that “the surrender conditions demanded by the government could not be fulﬁlled to the degree one
expects of an unconditional surrender.” In fact, leaders and rebels had to be captured, and
almost no ﬁnes or work gangs materialized. “This way will not serve to rebuild the authority of German power vis-à-vis the natives,” he wrote. Instead, he suggested “a punishment that will keep their subjection permanently awake in the natives’ memory”—
namely, expropriating their usufruct rights to the products of the land. This measure
happily combined administrative feasibility with proﬁtability, but, above all, it demonstrated the Africans’ dependency and subjection with nearly every economic transaction.87 In the end, however, the war did not end by negotiated settlement or voluntary
surrender but by force. The pursuit of rebel leaders in East Africa continued for another
two years, until the very last one was dead, along with probably hundreds of thousands of
other Africans. The Felddienst manual for East Africa (1911) summed up the lessons of
power and weakness the military had found conﬁrmed in the revolt: “The Negro does not
love us but only fears our power. Any sign of weakness that he thinks he sees in us will be
a temptation to him to take up arms and to drive us from his country.”88
83. Cohen, History in Three Keys, 55–56.
84. Felber and Rostek, Der “Hunnenkrieg” Kaiser, 31.
85. Demonstrating “the required military display of power”: Militärpolitischer Bericht über die Tätigkeit
der in Ostafrika beﬁndlichen Kreuzer und Marinetruppen, 7 Jan. 1905, Dar es Salaam, cited in Bald, “Afrikanischer Kampf,” 40.
86. Götzen, “Befehl an die Truppenführer im Aufstandsgebiet,” 11 Nov. 1905, Dar es Salaam, MA-Freiburg,
RM 121 I, Nr. 438, p. 60.
87. Dep. Gov. Haber to Foreign Office, 16 July 1906, Nr. 860, Dar es Salaam, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 724,
pp. 115–17.
88. Introduction to Felddienst in Deutsch-Ostafrika (Dar es Salaam, 1911), 2, cited in Iliffe, Tanganyika under
German Rule, 28–29.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
178

Real negotiations were thus basically out of the question for the military.89 This stance
prolonged war, while the methods of pursuit, punishment, and demonstration of authority meant that prolongation equaled escalation. Fear of appearing weak undermined
every opportunity to stop the process of spiraling escalation, as SWA showed. Even after
Chief of Staff Schlieffen had agreed with Chancellor Bülow that Trotha’s October proclamation had to be rescinded, he still refused to support any further efforts to encourage the
Herero people’s voluntary submission:
To go further in our invitation seems to me not undangerous. At the moment we
are completely unable to harm the Herero. . . . If we choose the course of appealing, after our threats [Trotha’s proclamation] have been in vain, then the Herero
will recognize in our shift an admission of weakness. Every sign of weakness will
ignite in one place or another a new uprising.90
Efforts to ameliorate the appalling conditions in the internment camps met with the same
reluctance, born of fear that the inmates would extract revenge; thus the fear of appearing
weak became the fear of being weak.91 Even in 1908, nine months after Germany had officially declared victory in the war, one still ﬁnds a county administrator arguing that the
Herero must not be freed from camps lest “too much conciliation awaken the appearance
of weakness and bring out the dominating nature of the Herero.”92
In terms of military policy there was not much to distinguish fear of appearing weak
and fear of actually being weak; they both resulted in deadly conduct. The atmosphere of
pervasive fear fosters decision making that runs toward extremes; fear is, therefore, one of
the inciters of the genocidal process.93 The extreme toward which fear impelled German
military policy was not at ﬁrst intended as mass death, however, but as complete victory
and total order.

The Imperative of Absolute Victory and Order
For modern military organizations victory means the successful establishment of
order through force. This is true of all militaries, not just the German. As the sociologist
Maury Feld has observed, “The emergence of armed forces into their modern professionalized, disciplined form has had the effect of transforming violence into a mode of order
and making its victims appear to be destructive threats.”94 Because militaries are state bu89. As Estorff discovered in SWA, the negotiated settlements individual commanders reached with the various Nama clans were often abrogated by superior officers who preferred the more complete solution of mass
imprisonment to whatever minimal compromises the commanders had worked out.
90. Schlieffen to Bülow, Nr. 13297, 16 Dec. 1904, Berlin, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, p. 107.
91. Report of Director Fenchel, 26 Dec. 1906, Keetmaanshoop, copy, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140, p. 18.
92. Bezirksamtmann (Seitz?) to governor, Nr. 1164, 30 Jan. 1908, Windhuk, BA-Berlin, R 151 F/D.IV.L.3., vol.
6, p. 99.
93. Peter du Preez, Genocide (London, 1994), 29–30; Smelser, “Some Determinants of Destructive Behavior,” 19; Chalk and Jonassohn, “Conceptual Framework,” 40.
94. Feld, Structure of Violence, 16–17.

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
reaucracies, the order they tend to envision is a bureaucratic one: a hierarchy consisting 179
of authorities, who administer, and passive objects of administration, who accept as legitimate their subordination to those in command. Colonialism provided the perfect threat
to such a vision of order, with the rebel who rejects state authority and disrupts bureaucratic functioning. Rebels are, therefore, in Governor Götzen’s words, “representatives of
anarchy.”95
In 1870, before war against France had become a desperate, guerrilla war, the international lawyer Felix Dahn deﬁned the goal of war as “peace, the establishment of a relation
between the warring parties that approximates, better than did the prewar situation, reason and political requirements and, therefore, that holds the prospect of longevity.”96
Dahn, like Clausewitz before him, placed political considerations at the center of military
victory. General v. Hartmann, summing up the lessons of 1870–71, typically divided the
political from the military. The political goal concerned the conﬂict that had led to war.
“The military goal rests in what the act of violence of war immediately creates—overcoming the enemy’s will by smashing the personnel and material means by which the enemy
seeks to carry out or uphold his will.”97 After 1870, the narrow military understanding of
victory as the destruction of the enemy, not the establishment of viable peace, became
dominant. Just as German jurists had accepted military necessity as the realistic and binding limit to international law, they and civilian leaders accepted the military deﬁnition of
victory that focused on eliminating the threat. In doing so, they weakened the autonomy
of the political sphere and helped reinforce the military’s fatal autism.
When the uprising in SWA broke out, leading government spokesmen, such as Colonial Director Stübel, deﬁned the terms of war and of victory by making the rebellion a
matter of the “reputation of the Reich,” by characterizing the Herero as “opponents of the
state and social order,” and by calling for a “quick and complete vanquishment of the uprising,” which would eliminate the “political quasi-independence” of the Herero people.98
These phrases found a wide echo in National Liberal, Conservative, and procolonial circles, and in nonsocialist newspapers generally. The threat to German sovereign authority,
and thus to “national honor,” was taken seriously: “Our sovereignty,” averred the National Liberal Deputy Patzig, “has been severely damaged and must be restored to full authority.”99 Calls for “punishment” were ubiquitous. Stübel’s words “complete vanquishment” or “complete subjection” became epithetic, and the drift toward the extreme is also
clear in the call for sending the natives a message “that they won’t forget for generations.”100 As one might expect, settler opinion was even more rabid. Where it did not ex95. Götzen, Deutsch-Ostafrika, 224.
96. Dahn, Das Kriegsrecht, 32.
97. Hartmann, “Militärische Nothwendigkeit,” 121. Emphasis in original.
98. Col. Dir. Stübel before the Bundesrat, 12 Mar. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2113, p. 36; Stübel before the
Reichstag, 19 Jan. 1904, Sten. Ber., 6th legisl. per., 1st session, vol. 197, col. 363.
99. Patzig, 17 Mar. 1904, Sten. Ber., vol. 199, col. 1895. “National honor”: “Koloniales,” Tägliche Rundschau,
Nr. 111, 6 Mar. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2112, p. 172.
100. “Die künftige Rechtsstellung der Hereros,” National-Zeitung, Nr. 209, 29 Mar. 1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001,
Nr. 2113, p. 98; “Koloniales,” Tägliche Rundschau, Nr. 111, 6 Mar. 1904, ibid., Nr. 2112, p. 172; General Staff,
Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 1:4.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
180 press itself in racist terms, such as calling for the “unlimited maintenance of the supremacy of the [white] race,” or in a mood of “terrible revenge” and “bloodthirstiness,”
as one missionary described it, it demanded “the establishment of a new order of things,
such that the rebels will lose once and for all the desire and possibility” of rebelling.101
Government policy became the prisoner of the sentiments it had, in part, helped to
unleash. It was not possible later, when the war was going badly, to demote the uprising
from an issue of national security and sovereignty. Chancellor Bülow’s dilemma is clear in
his speech before the Reichstag on 5 December 1904. He had just ﬁnished days of arguing
with Chief of the General Staff Schlieffen and Chief of the Military Cabinet Hülsen to get
Trotha’s October proclamation rescinded. An extreme policy of Vernichtung was the last
thing he wanted. He set out the government’s modest war aims in SWA as “the reestablishment of law and order [Ruhe und Ordnung] and security for life and property.” He denied that the surviving Herero would be shot down. “There can be no question of that,”
he told the Reichstag. But he felt impelled in the very next sentence to say, “Certainly, gentlemen, I consider it our holy duty to make a repeat of such an uprising impossible for all
time.”102 The phrase “for all time,” like “once and for all” or “for generations,” is the language of ﬁnal solutions. Despite his clear opposition to such policies, Bülow, one of the
most gifted orators of his day, could not escape the compulsion to pander to extremity.
If civilians in ever wider circles had adopted the vision of unlimited victory and perfect order, it is not surprising that the military continued to live by this creed. “The ﬁnal
paciﬁcation of the former Herero area,” the “complete securing and domination of the
occupied area” (in China), “the ﬁnal paciﬁcation of the Matumbi Mountains” (in East
Africa) were the repeated goals of military policy.103 The requirements of “ﬁnal paciﬁcation” were high; they were equivalent to the expectations military guidebooks held for
enemy civilians in occupied zones, and they were not far from the Kaiser’s injunction that
no Chinese should dare look askance at a German. In SWA, even cattle rustling was
enough to make officers regard an area as “unsecured” or even, as one put it, “to place
everything we have accomplished into question.”104
The world of total victories and perfect order in the end rested completely on force,
on the demonstration of it in punitive expeditions and exemplary destructions and executions, and on the philosophy of it. Although not many Wilhelminians were simpleminded, brutally logical, or desperate enough, before World War I, openly to embrace the
endpoint, genocide, the developmental logic was nonetheless clear. One of the desperate
was Deputy Governor Tecklenburg in SWA, who, in a masterpiece of projection onto the
Herero, expressed the logic running from fear to force:

101. “Zu den Unruhen in Deutsch-Südwestafrika,” Flugblätter des Deutschen Kolonial-Bundes, Nr. 9, Jan.
1904, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2111, p. 27; Missionary Elger, 10 Feb. 1904, cited in Drechsler, Aufstände, 66; DeutschSüdwestafrikanische Zeitung 6, Nr. 3, 19 Jan. 1904, p. 1.
102. Bülow, 5 Dec. 1904, Sten. Ber., vol. 201, col. 3376.
103. Schwabe, Krieg in Südwestafrika, 303; Waldersee to General Staff, Nr. A 8886 I, 28 Oct. 1900, Peking,
MA-Freiburg, RM 121 I, Nr. 399, p. 17; Götzen to eldest officer of the Bussard, 22 Sept. 1905, Dar es Salaam, ibid.,
Nr. 443.
104. General Staff, Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen, 2:282; Estorff, “Kriegserlebnisse,” 96.

Doctrines of Fear and Force
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Even when the uprising will have been put down, security of life and property as
they existed before the uprising will not have returned. We cannot hide one thing.
Our prestige among the natives, the prestige of the white man, is completely gone.
Our enemies have too often had the opportunity of testing their strength . . .
against our troops. Our black helpers have too often been able to laugh at the
clumsiness of the white newcomers. . . . Yes, a “personality” would still be able to
arouse respect and submission from the natives. But these feelings will simply not
be forthcoming to every white man. What [the natives] respect is only our power,
our “machines,” our guns.105
Where Tecklenburg set all his stock and store on power (Macht), his addition of machines
and guns makes clear he actually meant violence (Gewalt). As Hannah Arendt has observed, “Power and violence are opposites; where the one rules absolutely, the other is absent.” Power in this sense means political, legitimate government that is expressed when
people “act in concert.” “Rule by sheer violence comes into play where power is being
lost,”106 as was the case in SWA. The military’s métier is violence, not power, and where
military doctrine and practices unfold without limit, violence crowds out government.
105. Letter of Tecklenburg, 15 Oct. 1904, cited in “Auszüge aus jüngst eingegangenen Berichten über die
Lage der Dinge in Südwest-Afrika,” BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2089, pp. 105–6.
106. Arendt, On Violence, 56, 44, 53.

181

81
Stopping the Process

T

he Imperial German patterns of military practice and doctrine differed only in
degree from those operating in the armies of other major European powers.
The German army placed itself under greater pressure to succeed, held a more
extreme conception of order and of victory, and was less mindful of the limits
set by international law. But other armies facing the frustrations of colonial conﬂict
showed the same tendency to drift toward ﬁnal solutions. The French army in Sudan
shook off metropolitan shackles and erected a virtual slave empire with itself as master.1
French Indochina suffered systematic, gratuitous devastation at the hands of the army.2
But the best example of the temptation to wage war to extremes is the British conﬂict with
the Boers from 1899 to 1902. The Boer War shows how extreme war practices developed,
but also how they could be stopped.
Militaries generally had a hard time exercising effective self-criticism or braking their
tendencies toward extremes. It fell, then, to extramilitary sources (civil government, public
opinion, political parties, private groups, etc.) to counter military extremism. This was Germany’s greatest disadvantage and the factor that most distinguished it and fed the cycle of
military destructiveness. Germany’s constitution (governmental lack of coordination, the
chancellor’s dependence on imperial favor, the Kaiser’s untrammeled Kommandogewalt,
the weakened Reichstag) and the political culture that developed from it (weak political parties, “double militarism”) crippled effective extramilitary intervention. Nothing illustrates
this better than comparing two colonial disasters, the Herero Revolt and the Boer War.
1. Kanya-Forster, “French Marines,” 121–45. On French colonial methods generally, see Porch, “Bugeaud,
Galliéni, Lyautey,” 376–407.
2. Fourniau, “Colonial Wars before 1914.”

182

Stopping the Process
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu

The Boer War
The Boer War pitted the world’s largest empire against two hundred thousand descendants of Dutch settlers in the Boer republics in southern Africa. After two and a half
years of war, Britain annexed the Boer republics, but it cost over two hundred million
pounds, over four hundred thousand troops (against sixty to eighty thousand for the
Boers), and twenty-two thousand British dead to do so.3 After a poor beginning, new
leadership under Frederick Sleigh Roberts managed to control the main towns by early
1900, and most people believed the war was over. In June 1900, however, the Boers
shifted to a highly successful guerrilla war, which elicited greater and greater severity
from British commanders. Horatio Herbert Kitchener, who had recently subdued the
Sudan, succeeded Roberts in November 1900 and determined to end the war no matter
what it took. What it took, he thought, were three extreme tactics that he resolutely applied: the removal of the entire civilian population to internment camps; the systematic
sweeping of the republics with ﬂying columns, whose job was maximum destruction of
property and food; and the erection of a grid of cement blockhouses linked by barbed
wire, which was to expand to cover the entire area of the republics.4 Together, these tactics were supposed to conﬁne guerrilla warfare to an ever smaller space, until the last
guerrillas were killed, gone, or had surrendered. Kitchener’s methods were indeed
total.5
There are many similarities between the Boer War and the Herero Revolt. The British
effort was poorly organized and badly provisioned, and many of the technical problems
were identical: naval troops were especially ill-prepared and suffered high losses; the infantry never learned to ride or handle horses; the loss by death of horses and pack mules
was tremendous; intelligence was poor; the Boers were frustratingly brilliant at using and
reading the landscape; death by disease was three times greater than death in battle; and
so forth.6 These failures were made worse by high expectations at home for a quick and
glorious victory. The Boer War elicited the ﬁrst sustained criticism of modern imperialism. Two of these lasting monuments were John Hobson’s famous polemic, Imperialism,
and Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness, both published in 1902.
The tactics British commanders used to counter guerrilla warfare were also very similar to those the Germans had used in 1870 and later.7 Under Roberts, selective burning of
farms began in March 1900 as reprisal and then swiftly expanded into the wholesale destruction of Boer farms and villages. To protect railroads from sabotage, British officers
3. Between six and seven thousand British soldiers died in battle, the rest of disease. Pakenham, Boer War,
572; Belﬁeld, Boer War, xxiv, 10, 148; Howard Bailes, “Military Aspects of the War,” in South African War, 67; also
J. F. Maurice and M. H. Grant, ed., History of the War in South Africa, 1899–1902, 8 vols. (London, 1906–10), and
L. S. Amery, ed., The Times History of the War in South Africa, 7 vols. (London, 1900–1909).
4. An early form of blockhouses and sweeps was used by French General Joseph Simon Galliéni in Tonkin
in the 1890s: Porch, “Bugeaud, Galliéni, Lyautey,” 388.
5. Du Preez, Genocide, 18.
6. Belﬁeld, Boer War, 29–30, 36–38, 108, 115–18.
7. My discussion of British war conduct follows S. B. Spies’s thoughtful and thoroughly researched account,
Methods of Barbarism?

183

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
184 took civilians hostage, citing precedents from the Franco-Prussian war.8 Prisoners of war
were deported to camps abroad.9 Collective ﬁnes were levied against communities near
sabotaged facilities. At ﬁrst as reprisal and later to prevent guerrillas from getting food,
the British pursued a policy of “laying waste.” Asked what that meant, one commander
replied, “Gather all food, wagons, Cape carts, sheep, oxen, goats, cows, calves, horses,
mares, foals, forage, poultry. Destroy what you cannot eat or remove . . . burn all houses
and explain reason is that they have harboured enemy and not reported to British authorities as required. Give no receipts.”10 Civilians made destitute by this policy began to be
gathered up in internment camps (July 1900), where the British thought they could be
more easily fed and, in any case, better controlled.
These tactics were all in use by the time Kitchener replaced Roberts in November
1900. Along with introducing the blockhouse and the sweeps, or “drives,” Kitchener
transformed the civilian internment camps. Not just refugees created by the drives, but all
Boer and even black African civilians were now to disappear from the landscape. A whole
network of camps administered by the military sprang up. When these tactics of totality
still did not end the war, Kitchener could think of no other solution than to introduce
more extremes. In the summer of 1901 he demanded the deportation of recalcitrant Boer
women and the punitive conﬁscation of the property of all Boers who refused to surrender. By that time, however, civilian leaders and public opinion had grown skeptical of severe methods, and Kitchener’s push to go further down the road of extremism was halted.
Nonetheless, the costs of severity were high. Along with the tens of thousands of
deaths in the internment camps came the widespread destruction of farms. After the war,
Boers submitted sixty-three thousand claims for restitution of property.11
Occasionally, opposition to severe methods arose from within the military itself. One
of Roberts’s motives for curtailing indiscriminate farm burning in November 1900 was the
protest of an officer about its effects.12 Roberts also struggled to keep reprisals from developing into exemplary cruelty. One of his ﬁeld commanders, Lt.-Gen. Sir Archibald
Hunter, wished to hang those caught destroying railroads, kill ten prisoners of war for
every British soldier hurt in sabotage attack, deport the wives and children of Boer guerrillas, and put them and prisoners of war on half rations as reprisal for sabotage. Roberts
ﬂatly rejected the suggestion.13 Nevertheless, even under Roberts the military tended
toward greater harshness against civilians and totality of method.
If in the last six months of the war no further extreme measures were adopted and the
conditions in the internment camps were remedied, the reason was intervention from
outside the military. Britain’s political culture broke the development toward ﬁnal solutions fostered by its military culture. The elements of political culture most active in stopping the process were strong civilian oversight of the military, effective parliamentary in8. Ibid., 104.
9. Bailes, “Military Aspects,” 98.
10. Lt. Gen. Sir Archibald Hunter, cited in Spies, Methods of Barbarism? 122.
11. Pakenham, Boer War, 572.
12. Spies, MetBarbarism? 126.
13. Ibid., 115.

Stopping the Process
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
tervention, and robust public criticism. One aspect of British military culture contributed 185
to this outcome: greater willingness to permit civilian scrutiny of military conduct.
Civilian oversight came primarily from Secretary of State for Colonies Joseph Chamberlain, the high commissioner in South Africa, Sir Alfred Milner, and War Secretary
Lord Lansdowne (until November 1900) and his successor, St. John Brodrick. Prime Minister Lord Salisbury left matters to these men, while the cabinet remained ill-informed—
and complained about it.14 The civilian leadership gave the military substantial leeway for
a long time. Milner, who was nearest the ﬁghting and best informed, complained neither
about hostage taking nor farm burning when Roberts announced these as policies in June
1900. The cabinet, the Colonial Office, and Milner all acquiesced to the establishment of
internment camps for civilians, but apparently none of them knew or approved of Kitchener’s intent to expand the camps to swallow up all civilians.15 Two things seem to have
moved the civilians to intervene more energetically in military policy: public criticism and
their own observation that severity was ineffective, or even counterproductive.
By September 1900, High Commissioner Milner urged Roberts to stop farm burning,
population clearance, and laying waste, and concentrate on the ﬁghters instead. Two
months later, Milner repeated his views to Chamberlain:
There has been a great deal too much burning of farms. As a punishment I feel that
the destruction of a homestead is fully justiﬁed. . . . But such discriminating destruction which really has a deterrent effect is one thing. The indiscriminate burning of
all houses in a particular district simply to make it untenable by the enemy is quite
another. To that I object thinking it 1) barbarous and 2) ineffectual. By making a
large number of people homeless, you increase the army of desperadoes roaming
the country which it is our object to reduce. For my part, I am going as soon as I
take over the civil administration, to set my face against wholesale destruction.16
Partly as a result of Chamberlain’s and Milner’s interventions, Roberts formally rescinded
the policy of indiscriminate farm burning in November 1900. However, Chamberlain (and
Milner) speciﬁcally recognized that military necessity “must of course be dealt with according to circumstances,” meaning that “discriminating destruction” was still permissible.17
Some farm burning therefore continued under Kitchener, though most of it was already
over by November 1900.18 Milner continued to protest the practice when it occurred.19
Once the civilian leaders had become skeptical of military promises, they were energetic in stopping policies before they began. Kitchener’s repeated request for banishment
of oppositionist Boer civilians and prisoners of war, and conﬁscation of their property,
was rejected out of hand by War Secretary Brodrick. “Hitherto the effects of severity have
14. Ibid., 300–301.
15. Ibid., 152, 190.
16. Cited in ibid., 126, emphasis in original.
17. Ibid.
18. Ibid., 118.
19. Ibid., 177.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
186 not been all we could have hoped,” he noted. “Those who knew South Africa best expected the same results from farm burning as are now claimed for conﬁscation—but we
were led quite wrong in this.”20 Chamberlain agreed. Conﬁscation “is contrary to the laws
of the Cape Colony and Natal and also contrary to international usage,” he noted. Permanently banishing all prisoners of war he termed “absurd.” “What are we to do with the
twenty thousand more or less who are not in the colonies? Are we to keep them there [in
camps abroad] for life or where are we to dump them?” Chamberlain continued:
I do not blame [Kitchener] for these absurd proposals, but they show that he was
too much occupied with military matters to be able to give his mind to other
things, and we poor civilians have therefore to think for him. . . . We have shown
ourselves ready to adopt every reasonable suggestion, but we cannot authorize
proclamations which would make us ridiculous in the eyes of the Home and Foreign nations.21
The (civilian) secretary of war arrived at his position a month before Chamberlain
added his views. Both men judged extreme military policies as both ineffective and illegal.
It is possible that British civilian leaders would have permitted continued severity had it
been effective—the acute spasm of cruelty that German writers repeatedly equated with
true humanitarianism.22 As it was, civilian leaders showed themselves ready and willing to
subject military policies to criticism and, if they found them wanting, to stop them. And
they were concerned about domestic and foreign public opinion, which they identiﬁed as
supporting the limits of international law.23 The cabinet, too, swung away from permitting extremism in the name of military necessity. In July 1901, it officially disapproved of
Kitchener’s military policies; it blocked the commander’s deportation scheme for women
and children; it rejected his suggestion to pay for the internment camps by expropriating
Boer property; and it protested the execution of Cape rebels.24
Public opinion played an important role in abandoning military harshness. It was the
crucial element in reforming the horrible conditions inside the internment camps. These
were exposed by a Liberal reformer, Emily Hobhouse, who gained access to the camps
through party political connections to High Commissioner Milner.25 Kitchener and the
20. Brodrick, 20 July 1901, cited in ibid., 237.
21. Chamberlain to Brodrick, 20 Aug. 1901, cited in ibid., 237.
22. “True humanity requires a quick end and therefore energetic conduct of the war”; Lueder, “Krieg und
Kriegsrecht,” 193; also 277. “Apparent harshness and severity become the opposite, if they hasten the foe’s decision to sue for peace; mercy and leniency become cruelty if . . . they prolong the conclusion of war”; Hartmann,
“Militärische Nothwendigkeit,” 123–24; also 465–66. “Even the most complete, most dangerous, and most massively deadly means are permitted in war, indeed, because they achieve the goal of war quickest, they are indispensable and, strictly speaking, they are the most humane”; Germany, General Staff, Kriegsbrauch, 9. The same
sentiment: Bayer, Mit dem Hauptquartier, 159–60; Deimling, “Südwest-Afrika,” 13.
23. Brodrick worried that “Europe would be needlessly scandalized” by Kitchener’s policies; Spies, Methods
of Barbarism? 237. Best has found that there was widespread European public opinion favoring the extension of
international law to curb cruelty in warfare: Best, Humanity in Warfare, 132–34, 139–40.
24. Pakenham, Boer War, 512–14.
25. Ibid., 503–4.

Stopping the Process
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
military commanders of the camps cooperated with Hobhouse, who visited several of 187
them early in 1901. On her return to England in May, she informed War Secretary Brodrick of her ﬁndings. Even before receiving Hobhouse, Brodrick had been uneasy about
reports of poor conditions in the camps and had intervened to improve rations. But his
suggestions for further reforms had met resistance from both Kitchener and Milner, who
cited technical problems.26 Meanwhile, Hobhouse had alerted Liberal MP Henry Campbell-Bannerman to the misery in the camps. In a famous public address, Campbell-Bannerman pilloried the military’s “methods of barbarism.”27 A few days later Parliament received statistics on civilian deaths in the internment camps. If these had remained steady,
they would have reached 12 percent per annum, which was high enough for a leader of the
Liberal Party, David Lloyd George, to accuse the government of pursuing a “policy of extermination” against women and children.28
Because the radical Hobhouse was dismissed in some quarters as prejudiced, War Secretary Brodrick appointed an official commission of “ladies” to inspect the camps and
recommend reforms. These women were mostly upper-class Conservatives, headed by
Millicent Fawcett, though two of them were doctors. The Fawcett, or Ladies’ Commission, as it was popularly called, inspected only the white camps from August to December
1901, but their report to Brodrick was thorough, candid, and unsparing. Referring to the
Aliwal North Camp in the Orange River Colony, for example, the report’s pithy recommendation was: “Remove the Superintendent, and thoroughly re-organise the camp.”29
The “ladies” did not shrink from practical details; the Mafeking camp hospital required
the following, they wrote: “disinfectants, mosquito netting, drugs, already indented for,
urine-testing apparatus, waterproof sheets.”30 In general, the Ladies’ Commission recommended higher and better rations (including milk and vegetables), better sanitation and
hygiene, and more attentive and professional camp administration.
Even before the commission’s report arrived, Chamberlain (November 1901) removed
the camps from the military’s administration and ordered Milner to spare no expense in
reforming them and reducing the death rate.31 Milner followed the commission’s recommendations; the death rate promptly fell to 6.9 percent in February 1902 and soon thereafter to 2 percent.32

Comparing Disasters
The comparison between the Boer War and the Herero Revolt illuminates important
structural differences in how the political cultures of Britain and Germany handled disas26. Spies, Methods of Barbarism? 198–200, 216.
27. Pakenham, Boer War, 508.
28. Ibid. Spies’s careful study concludes that the high death rate (of about 24%, twice as high as what
shocked Lloyd George) was due to maladministration and militaristic inattention, not an intention by military
or civilian leaders to exterminate the Boers. Spies, Methods of Barbarism? 268.
29. Great Britain, Parliament, Report on the Concentration Camps, 56.
30. Ibid., 183.
31. Spies, Methods of Barbarism? 256.
32. Pakenham, Boer War, 518.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
188 ters caused by military extremism. Beginning at the top, the British cabinet may have
been ill-informed, slow to counteract pernicious military policies, and not always effective against military obstructionism, but Germany did not even possess a cabinet. This
was a double deﬁciency. There was no institution where elected officials accountable to a
parliament oversaw military policy. Worse, there was no institution where civilian government officials met to coordinate military with national, economic, or foreign policy.
The thinness of civilian institutions was compounded by the Kaiser’s decision, spurred by
his military advisors, to suspend civilian administration in SWA, ﬁrst by restricting it to
nonmilitary matters (beginning with Trotha’s arrival in June 1904), and then by making
Trotha acting governor. Thus there was also no SWA equivalent of a high commissioner,
who might have provided the viewpoint that Milner expressed when he said, “In the
upper ranks of the army there is nothing like sufficient ability to manage their own business properly, much less to do other people’s.”33
Robbed of institutional allies within government, a chancellor seeking to rein in the
military would have been forced to rely even more heavily on the Reichstag or public
opinion. Here, too, he was blocked, but not for institutional reasons (for example, because the Reichstag lacked the budgetary power to throttle military policies). The Reichstag was as powerful as the British Parliament in that regard. Rather, a chancellor who
openly used the Reichstag against the military would have been instantly dismissed for
encouraging the growth of democracy against the monarchical principle. In 1908, Chancellor Bülow’s seeming attempt to strengthen the Reichstag as an ally against the Kaiser’s
quixotic political interventions led to his dismissal barely eight months later.34 Criticism
by the Reichstag was equally powerless on its own. In Britain, even hyperbolic and unfair
criticism, like Lloyd George’s claim of “extermination,” would be likely to have a more
sympathetic hearing than would, in Germany, the reasoned criticism of Socialists such as
August Bebel or Georg Ledebour, or even of Center Party leaders such as Matthias
Erzberger. Decades of systematic official calumny of Socialists and—even after the end of
the Kulturkampf—of Catholics as traitors made it impossible for government officials to
agree with their viewpoints publicly (even if they did so privately) and predisposed other
parties, and presumably wide circles of voters, to reject whatever they said out of hand.
This strategy of divide and rule had the corollary of identifying the government (and especially the military) with the nation tout court. That, too, made it hard for Reichstag critics to present themselves successfully as patriots, whereas in Britain opposition was not a
priori denigrated as unpatriotic.
Public critics in Germany faced similar obstacles. Germany did not lack its own Emily
Hobhouses. Socialist, Left Liberal, Roman Catholic, and some Protestant circles produced
very similar denunciations of harsh, gratuitous military policy. In SWA the best informed
and most outspoken critics were Protestant missionaries. Their early reports that settlers’
misdeeds had caused the uprising and that the Herero had not been indiscriminate killers
raised a furor in the right-wing and nationalist press. Typically, Bülow felt compelled to
33. Spies, Methods of Barbarism? 73.
34. Katherine Lerman, The Chancellor as Courtier (Cambridge, 1990).

Stopping the Process
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
attack the missionaries in the same way he dismissed Socialist and Roman Catholic crit- 189
ics—as traitors. He told the Reichstag, “In a war, the place of missionaries is on the side of
their fellow countrymen. I can grant them neither the right of neutrality between Germans and Herero nor the office of complainant or judge.”35 When the Rhenish Missionary Society complained, Bülow repeated these views and placed himself on the side of “the
justiﬁed national sentiment of indignation and fury over the [Herero] atrocities.”36 In
doing so, Bülow contributed to the climate of revenge he would later try to stem, and he
weakened the only organized force in SWA capable of pursuing an alternate course to
Trotha’s Vernichtungspolitik.
The missionaries were forced to spend a great deal of energy combating their new national reputation as traitors.37 The largest source of their weakness as critics of military
policy, however, was their dependence on government goodwill. Unlike Emily Hobhouse,
who traveled to South Africa as a private person, the missionaries worked at the government’s sufferance. The Rhenish Missionary Society had received the privilege of missionizing in SWA without competition from Roman Catholics, a privilege it fought to retain.38
Nothing illustrates the missionaries’ resulting paralysis better than the last example of
gratuitous death that security mania dealt to the surviving Nama.
Oskar Hintrager had distinguished himself as deputy governor during the uprising by
appropriating Trotha’s extreme views on the colony’s security. In March 1910, three years
after the uprising had ended, three Nama prisoners serving criminal sentences in Karibib
escaped. Deputy Governor Hintrager claimed that such escapes were “a constant, unpredictable danger for the security of the colony.” The only solution was a ﬁnal one—deportation. “I am urgently renewing my request for the deportation of all the Hottentots interned in Grootfontein to another colony. That is 120 in all, 42 of them men.”39 At least
ninety-six Witbooi Nama were thereupon deported to the Cameroons, where the identical
scenario of incarceration, poor treatment, and widespread death repeated itself.40 By June,
the Witboois had started to die. Although they received twice the meat and ﬁsh ration of
native prisoners during the uprising (87 g per week), it was not enough for survival, especially since it was not supplemented with oil or fat. The lack of variety alone would have resulted in malnutrition. And, once again, no clothing or blankets seem to have been provided.41 At the urging of military doctors and missionaries, Cameroon authorities
improved conditions, but in the end, only thirty-seven Witboois survived their captivity.42
35. Bülow, 9 May 1904, Sten. Ber., vol. 200, col. 2788.
36. Bülow letter to Rheinische Missionsgesellschaft, cited in “Aus Inland und Ausland,” Berliner
Lokalanzeiger 308 (4 July 1904), 1.
37. See VEM-Wuppertal, C/i 22, for their many documents of defense.
38. See correspondence in BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2140, pp. 20–39.
39. Hintrager to Col. Dept., Nr. 4669, “secret,” 1 Mar. 1910, Windhuk, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 119.
40. J. Spiecker to Gov. Lindequist, Auszug, 26 June 1910, VEM-Wuppertal, C/i 17, says ninety-six Witboois
were deported. Later government correspondence refers to ninety-three; director of Col. Office to Governor
Seitz (SWA), 18 Mar. 1913, Berlin, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 178.
41. Chief staff doctor Ziemann, report of 21 June 1910, Duala, and chief doctor Friese, report of 30 June 1910,
Duala, ibid., pp. 130–31.
42. That is a total death rate of 60%, or 24% per year. Colonial Office to Seitz, 18 Mar. 1913, Berlin, BABerlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, p. 178.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
190

The missionaries began an immediate campaign to free their parishioners. The director of the mission intervened with Colonial Secretary Lindequist in June 1910. “It surely
cannot be the intention of the government and the Colonial Office to send these people to
their certain deaths,” he wrote, especially since no legal proceedings or charges seemed to
have preceded the deportation.43 But neither his intervention nor the request of the
Cameroon government for repatriation persuaded SWA to relent. For Hintrager it was
unthinkable “that humanitarian considerations relating to these few should make us forget the same considerations toward thousands of whites in the colony.”44 As long as SWA
remained adamant, the Colonial Office bowed to its “political” reasons, though it expressed sympathy for the counterargument based on “pity and Christian charity.”45 Finally, at the end of 1912, the mission’s director lost his patience and threatened to make a
public scandal. This brought a sharp reply and counterthreat from the otherwise sympathetic colonial official Karl Heinrich Berner. The mission, he wrote, “must leave the decisive judgment to the government alone, in that it alone bears responsibility for the security of the colony.” The mission would merely be accused “of intervening in a dangerous
way in matters of state. That this would disturb the good understanding between the government and the mission not only in SWA but in Cameroon is obvious.”46
Faced with this threat, the mission went behind closed doors to several Reichstag
members, who raised the issue in session and petitioned the chancellor for repatriation in
March 1913. This form of public pressure did indeed move the Colonial Office to overcome its timidity and override the opposition from SWA.47 The thirty-seven survivors
were ﬁnally returned. But the entire process had taken almost three years. Despite their
fury, the missionaries dared not act swiftly or publicly, for fear of losing their colonial
concession. And the security argument again and again trumped the humanitarian better
judgment of the Colonial Office. Finally, anything that could be construed as a “matter of
state” was, in principle, beyond the criticism of the public.
That the government responded to Reichstag pressure shows it was not deaf to public
opinion. But public opinion was not necessarily a panacea against military extremism in
any country. There were, for example, many voices in Britain favoring harsh and vengeful
43. J. Spiecker to Lindequist, excerpt, 26 June 1910, VEM-Wuppertal, C/i 17, p. 9. When Spiecker speciﬁcally
asked the government to conﬁrm that a court judgment lay behind the deportation, Berner replied that it had
been a “judgment of the government.” Berner’s evasive reply suggests that the deportation was strictly an administrative, not a legal, measure. Berner to Spiecker, 13 Oct. 1912, Berlin, ibid., p. 42. An internal government
document notes that only seven of the deportees were criminals: four were serving terms for cow theft, one for
attempted rape, one for incitement, and one for disobedience and lying to his master. All the rest of the deportees were simply members of various Nama clans: Witbooi, Stürmann, and Jefta-Ortmann, “Nachweisung der
nach Kamerun abtransportierten Eingeborenen,” undated, but from 1910, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090,
pp. 134–35.
44. Hintrager to Colonial Office, Nr. 211, 1 Feb. 1912, Windhuk, ibid., p. 141.
45. Berner to Spiecker, Berlin, 13 Oct. 1912, VEM-Wuppertal, C/i 17, p. 42.
46. Berner to Spiecker, 13 Nov. 1912, Berlin, ibid., pp. 43–44.
47. Secretary of Colonial Office to Gov. Seitz, 18 Mar. 1913, BA-Berlin, R 1001, Nr. 2090, pp. 178–79; MP
Mumm to Spiecker, Berlin, 20 Nov. 1913, VEM-Wuppertal, C/i 17, p. 56, and Spiecker to Vielhauer, 24 June 1913,
Barmen, ibid., p. 59.

Stopping the Process
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
military practices during the Boer War.48 In Germany, as elsewhere, historians are forced 191
to gauge public opinion before 1914 through newspapers, which method at least makes
plain that a uniﬁed public opinion did not exist. Regarding the uprising in SWA, the shock
of the revolt created a sense of national crisis that encouraged strong promilitary sentiment.49 In Conservative, but especially in procolonial and National Liberal papers, calls
for a politics of mass expropriation of Africans and punishment were common, but there
were no calls for the outright extermination of the people.50 Nonetheless, vituperative language and the loose use of “Vernichtung” (meaning destruction of military capacity, but
not explicitly excluding mass civilian death) are characteristic of the early months of the
uprising in these papers. Socialist, Left Liberal, and Roman Catholic publications represented a moderate or even critical point of view. Once Trotha’s policy was clearly revealed,
both in its extent and its expense to the colony and the taxpayer, public extremism virtually disappeared.51
Apart from the peculiar case of SWA, however, two general factors especially tended
to pull public opinion in Germany after 1900 toward, rather than away from, extremism.
The novelty of Germany’s colonies and the tepid support for them before 1907 meant that
the discourse of colonial security and warfare was monopolized by procolonial “experts”
and agitation groups. They were the only ones who cared or knew anything about the new
territories, and consequently their vocal activism ﬁlled the silence created by ignorance or
antipathy. The colonists themselves, radicalized by the colonial experience and by fantasies of revenge and seemingly legitimized by practical knowledge and by suffering,
pulled in the same direction. Therefore, colonial issues had an unusual potential to activate extremism.
More important, the government’s constant search for popular legitimacy in lieu of
more democratic processes condemned it to a kind of Caesarism in which it posed as the
guarantor of the national enthusiasms of the “loyal” classes (especially of the various middling strata). The narrowly military monarchical state then struggled to keep up with nationalism as it was reinterpreted outside government in imperial, economically expansionist, and social Darwinist ways. The result was Weltpolitik, whose aggressive dynamic
welded into a mutually reinforcing constellation the valorization of the nation, empire,
military strength, social Darwinist struggle, and war. The process by which nationalism
meant all these things simultaneously was a long one, stretching the length of the Wilhelminian period. The process was driven on the one hand by government and on the
other by mostly bourgeois, postliberal agitators organized into cultural, colonial, anti-Se-

48. Spies, Methods of Barbarism? 171, 240, 272–73.
49. Bley, Southwest Africa, 156–57; Theodor Leutwein, Elf Jahre, 522; Paul Leutwein, Afrikanerschicksal,
150–51.
50. Bebel, 17 Mar. and 19 Mar. 1904, Sten. Ber., vol. 199, cols. 1892, 1967; Stoecker, 17 Mar. 1904, ibid., col.
1904; Jahresbericht 1904 of Deutsche Kolonialgesellschaft Abteilung Berlin.
51. For example, “Die Hereros nach dem Kriege, Falsche Politik,” Berliner Tageblatt, Nr. 75, 11 Feb. 1908, BABerlin, R 1001, Nr. 2119, p. 86; M. J. Bonn, “Die wissenschaftliche Begründung der Trotha’schen Eingeborenenpolitik,” Frankfurter Zeitung, Nr. 45, 14 Feb. 1909, ibid., Nr. 2141, p. 6; Spraul, “ ‘Völkermord,’ ” 724.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
192 mitic, and promilitary groups. The government ultimately failed in its attempt to lead or
master the new nationalism, though it left its unmistakable imprint in the almost paranoid military-security preoccupation and the gloriﬁcation of war that became synonymous with prewar German nationalism. The foreign policy setbacks of 1905–1911 robbed
the government of its leadership claim, which passed to the most extreme, vociferous, and
therefore authentic-seeming proponents of the new nationalism, the Pan-Germans.52 The
failure of the government’s foreign policy sowed among its growing public critics the
same fear of weakness and concomitant worship of force that permeated military culture.53 In the years just before World War I, extreme nationalists and the military drew
palpably closer together, not just organizationally but, above all, ideologically.54 The historian of the symbiotic relation between government and public opinion, Klaus Wernecke, concludes that the government was not the prisoner of public opinion so much as
of the ideology of world prestige (Weltgeltung), which it had created in tandem with the
agitation groups.55 In any case, the new nationalism meant that public opinion was less
and less a reliable brake on military extremism and more and more the opposite, a force
pushing toward total, violent military solutions.56
The government’s encouragement of imperial expansion, chauvinistic nationalism,
and bellicose posturing was not a merely cynical tactic of mass manipulation. It reﬂected
basic assumptions of the Reich leadership, which furthered the drift toward ﬁnal solutions, even if that was not the conscious intention. Once again, the starting point was Germany’s three-fold weakness: its putative internal disunity (the Socialist and Roman Catholic threats to the monarchy and the military); its exposed position between France and
Russia; and above all, the gap between its power potential and that of Russia and Britain.
In a perceptive study of the assumptions behind Imperial German foreign policy, Jost
Dülffer has analyzed how the Kaiser, his chancellors, and high Foreign Office officials
managed their fear of Germany’s weakness. Their pervasive sense of national insecurity
caused them to imagine a bellicose, lawless world of state jackals bent on destroying one
another. Thus, the Kaiser interpreted the Russian invitation to the First Hague Conference on disarmament as being “directed more or less against our military development,
which Russia wants to stop in order to freeze us in the subordinate, inferior position relative to itself.”57 The suspicion that international agreements were always aimed at keeping
Germany weak determined Germany’s frequent obstructionism and, in Dülffer’s words,
“led to the tendency to seal itself against the outside world and to blindness about the realities of the international system.”58 Subjectively defensive, but in effect aggressive, isolation was justiﬁed in Hegelian terms as absolute state sovereignty. As the chief advisor in
52. Förster, Der doppelte Militarismus, 208–16; Chickering, We Men, 197.
53. Chickering, We Men, 96, 122–23.
54. Marilyn Shevin Coetzee, The German Army League (Oxford, 1990); Förster, Der doppelte Militarismus,
227; Rohkrämer, Der Militarismus der “kleinen Leute,” 201, 245, 254–60; Chickering, We Men, 268–90; Klaus Wernecke, Der Wille zur Weltgeltung (Düsseldorf, 1970), 302–8.
55. Wernecke, Der Wille zur Weltgeltung, 312–13.
56. Smith, “Talk of Genocide.”
57. Cited in Dülffer, Regeln gegen den Krieg, 109.
58. Ibid., 114.

Stopping the Process
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
the Foreign Office, Friedrich von Holstein, wrote in his draft instructions to German 193
delegates to the ﬁrst Hague Conference, “The state has no higher purpose than preserving
its own interests. Among great powers the latter will not necessarily be identical with upholding peace, but more likely with the rape [Vergewaltigung] of the enemy and competitors.”59 One of those delegates, Philipp Zorn, later (1915) protested this point of view:
Certainly every state, and especially every Great Power, must think in the ﬁrst
instance of its own interests. But if one ﬁrst gets used to the idea of not suspecting
in every suggestion made by another state a priori a trap or intrigue against oneself, if one with earnest and goodwill regards an understanding about differences
of opinion as the primary goal . . . then one . . . will recognize more and more
that the unity of [international state] interests is much greater than one usually
supposes.60
Zorn’s views were in the decided minority. Instead, the conviction of universal danger
and threat logically moved the Reich leadership to greater and greater reliance on military
force rather than on international or even bilateral agreement, or on normal diplomacy.
The fear–force dynamic encouraged the view that war was inevitable, and from there it
was a short step to risking war at a seemingly opportune moment. The Reich leadership’s
basic assumptions about power and politics favored military force and were therefore inappropriate instruments to limit or conﬁne the potential of military culture to develop
extreme solutions.

Learning from Mistakes
Both the Boer War and the war in SWA were recognized at the time to have been disastrously conducted. Perhaps the greatest difference between how Britain and Germany
handled their respective disasters lies in who was permitted to criticize. The British army
and government permitted outsiders, civilians, to gather evidence, judge, and recommend reform of military practices and institutions. The most remarkable example is the
Ladies’ Commission, which was created by the secretary of war and which inspected and
reported while the war was still going on. Such a commission was simply inconceivable in
Germany. Civilian oversight contravened the monarchical principle that regarded the
hermetically sealed military as its guarantor and bulwark. Every constitutional and institutional safeguard had been taken to thwart civilian prying into military affairs. Furthermore, the conduct of a war in progress was held to be the business of military experts
alone—chancellors had difficulty enough insinuating themselves into the process, much
less civilians outside government. If civilians were already impossible, then women inspectors were preposterous. Whatever expertise they might have brought to a situation
was closed to the German military from the start.
59. Holstein cited in Dülffer, ibid., 124, emphasis in original.
60. Zorn, Die beiden Haager Friedenskonferenzen, 78.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
194

Once the war was over, the British government continued to believe that military reform was too important to be left to the military. Following recommendations contained
in the report (1903) of Reginald Baliol, Viscount Esher, the government reorganized the
War Office, created the Defence Committee, and streamlined command at the highest
levels of administration. In addition, a commission headed by Victor Alexander, Earl of
Elgin and Kincardine, and Viscount Esher heard 144 witnesses over ﬁfty-ﬁve days detail
deﬁciencies in army administration. The resulting Elgin Report (1904) criticized conditions from top to bottom: it began with the niggardly military outlays by the cabinet,
moved on to note systematic deﬁciencies in actual ﬁghting and incompetence among senior and inexperienced staff officers, and moved in detail to consider ineffective armaments and inadequate clothing, medical care, handling of horses, and transport.61 Neither
report considered the conduct of war in the largest sense, that is, the blockhouses, laying
waste, or the internment camps. The last two issues, of course, had already been the objects of official investigation, internment camps by the Ladies’ Commission, and laying
waste and other controversial tactics by the Colonial Office during the war. Chamberlain
had ordered harsh tactics to be examined from two perspectives: “What can be done
without violating international law and usage?” and “Will any action proposed help to
end the war?” The results were designed to guide Britain in future wars.62 The Boer War
disaster thus produced officially sanctioned criticism, much of it from civilians, which reformed the military-governmental structure and vastly improved Britain’s capacity to
wage land warfare.63
The contrast with Germany is striking. In November 1908 the Kaiser called a commission to examine the SWA experience. It consisted of officers only, headed by Major General and Chief Quartermaster Erich von Gündell. The commission met thirty-ﬁve times;
it collected information by circulating a questionnaire and then an interim report for criticism. It produced two ﬁnal reports, one for internal consumption and a shorter one for
the Kaiser.64 Both reports were much narrower in scope than what Britain produced. Proceeding from the assumption that colonial warfare was fundamentally different from European warfare, the investigation was limited to problems arising from colonial revolts.
No lessons were applied to the regular army. The reports contained only one suggestion
for administrative reorganization: the creation of a permanent unit to respond to colonial
rebellions. Because the navy would not permit the marine infantry to do this, the Prussian
war minister agreed to train a brigade for this purpose. The reports also made two quasipolitical recommendations. One was to “strengthen the military element in the adminis61. Great Britain, Parliament, Report of His Majesty’s Commissioners.
62. Spies, Methods of Barbarism? 270–72.
63. Jay Stone and Erwin Schmidl, The Boer War and Military Reforms (Lanham, Md., 1988).
64. “Überblick über die bei der Entsendung von Verstärkungen für die Schutztruppe in Südwest-Afrika
gesammelten Erfahrungen und die in den Kommissionsberatungen zu erörternden Fragen,” 1 Nov. 1908, MAFreiburg, RW 51, vol. 18; “Ergebnis der Arbeiten der durch AKO vom 14.11.1908 berufenen Kommission zur Beratung aufgrund der bei der Entsendung von Verstärkungen für die Schutztruppen in SWA gesammelten Erfahrungen,” 1908, ibid., vol. 19; and Kommission zur Bewertung der bei der Entsendung von Verstärkungen für
die Schutztruppen in Südwest-Afrika gesammelten Erfahrungen, Bericht des Gen.-Majors und Quartiermeisters
v. Gündell an Seine Majestät Kaiser Wilhelm II, copy, 28 Mar. 1909, MA-Freiburg, Nl. Lequis, Nr. 59.

Stopping the Process
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
tration of the Schutztruppe” by removing disciplinary authority over soldiers from the 195
chancellor and/or governor and investing it in the military commander.65 The purpose
was to ease the integration of reinforcements from the regular army into the Schutztruppe
command structure by eliminating the unacceptable possibility that a civilian official
could punish soldiers. The second political recommendation was to allow commanders to
negotiate with rebels. This would have removed Trotha’s excuse for not doing so (namely,
having to wait for authorization from Berlin), but it would not have checked the pursuit
of extreme goals, nor was it designed to do so. The rest of the recommendations addressed speciﬁc problems. The reports advised expanding the administration of the rear
and improving medical care. To combat scurvy and malnutrition, they suggested raising
the amount of sugar and fruit preserves, including ﬂour in the vegetable ration, and eliminating tobacco and alcohol altogether.
The most interesting aspect of the official investigation into SWA is what disappeared
from the ﬁnal report. The interim report contained a thirteen-page section on “conduct
of the war” (Kriegführung). Signiﬁcantly, Vernichtungspolitik was absent; apparently that
subject was too sensitive to discuss. Indeed, the report disclaimed responsibility for the
“great success” of the pursuit, saying that occurred “because the foe voluntarily retreated
to the waterless territory, which destroyed both him and his cattle.”66 Colonel Estorff corrected this prevarication in the margin: “The intentional ﬂight of the Herero down the
riverbed from Waterberg,” he noted, “would have permitted a retreat without very great
losses. That retreat was redirected on orders from headquarters by a strenuous march of
the Estorff unit and by its battle on 15 August. Thereafter, they [the Herero] wandered into
the desert.”67 This colloquy is yet another indication that Trotha’s logical extremism was
not consciously accepted by the military institution whose practices led to it.
If Vernichtungspolitik remained off limits for investigative criticism, the failure of the
concentric battle of Waterberg did not. The interim report rejected concentric battles of
annihilation as almost impossible to achieve in the colonial theater, and it acknowledged
the almost equal difficulty of mounting a successful pursuit. Failing both, a “more defensive” tactic was required, such as holding all waterholes, removing all cattle from the land,
and/or sealing the borders so that the rebels could not import ammunition or food.68
These suggestions are noteworthy for two reasons. The admission that a defensive tactic
was preferable to the offensive was daring in an atmosphere where praise of the offensive
was so hegemonic. François’s assessment of the Boer War was about as far as even knowledgeable German colonial ﬁghters would usually go: “We must resort to the defensive
only as a makeshift, always bearing in mind that the defense is only half, if it renounces attack.”69 Challenging this doctrine exhausted the report writers’ boldness, however, for in
fact their suggestions to hold all waterholes, remove all cattle, or seal the entire border
were still versions of a total vision of control. Again, Estorff ’s marginalium jerked them
65. “Ergebnis der Arbeiten,” 5.
66. “Überblick,” 127.
67. Ibid.
68. Ibid.
69. François, Lehren aus dem Südafrikanischen Krieg, 57.

pa rt i i . m i l i ta ry c u lt u re
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
196 back to reality. “This will never lead to the goal,” he wrote. “If you cannot force the foe energetically and pursue him, then you must end the war politically like the English frequently have done.”70 In a way, the ﬁnal report indirectly acknowledged Estorff ’s point by
asking that commanders receive the right to negotiate with rebels. Still, the commission
was unable to enunciate directly the principle that political solutions might be preferable
to military ones. Instead, it was constantly tempted to dream up total, technical solutions
to the problems it faced.
The ﬁnal report omitted the section on conduct of war altogether. The only remaining residue was the recommendation concerning negotiation. Passing over actual conduct
of ﬁghting in silence, and thus tacitly leaving doctrine and practices intact, the report presented the key to victory as extensive prewar preparation. The interim report had already
reached the same conclusion: “Everything . . . can be organized in peacetime, from mobilization, provisioning, weapons, munitions, medical, etc. depots distributed according to
the peculiarities of the colony, down to the mobilization designation of the last oxcart.”
To this end, the commission called for “complete, understanding cooperation between
military and civil authorities.”71 More than this, the military wanted the infrastructure of
the colonies, especially the railroads, laid out for military purposes, and even offered to
build them itself.72 These suggestions subordinated the civil and economic development
of the colonies to military considerations. They turned on its head the principle that the
military serves and protects society. Mobilization mania was, of course, partly a reﬂection
of the technical-mechanical obsession worked out to such perfection in the Schlieffen
Plan. But these suggestions for the colonies went further, since they proposed to shape at
least partly the very development of civil institutions.
Apart from technical adjustments, the military assimilated the debacle in SWA with
no changes to its doctrines or customary practices. Without the necessity of explaining
shortcomings to outsiders, without a fresh critical perspective, the military’s basic assumptions remained insulated from empirical testing. Germany’s military culture remained unchallenged. The army therefore entered World War I with its patterns of doctrine and practice intact.
70. “Überblick,” 127.
71. “Überblick,” 134; “Ergebnis der Arbeiten,” 86.
72. “Überblick,” 135; “Ergebnis der Arbeiten,” 87, called for the building of railroads, but omitted the offer
to have the military do so.

PA RT I I I

   

11
World War I presented the German army and its military culture with their
greatest opportunity and greatest crisis. The civil-military split that had allowed
military culture to reinforce itself now also set the parameters of war conduct.
In the near absence of political oversight and coordination, and locked into
endless combat by reciprocal Allied intransigence that matched its own, the
German army waged a hopeless war in pursuit of a pure, military victory of
annihilation, unleashing instead the destructive micro-logics implicit in its
military culture. Gratuitous violence multiplied, consuming soldiers and
civilians alike, to the very brink of Germany’s own self-destruction.
In part 3 we shall analyze that process. I do not offer (yet another) narrative
of the war. Instead, I identify those events, decisions, or actions in which the
workings of military culture seem to have been especially determining. The
purpose is to demonstrate, as brieﬂy as possible, patterns that the reader will
already recognize, even as they are taken to extremes.
As in part 2, we begin with the political-strategic vacuum that militarycultural practices ﬁlled. In this section we ask whether the Kaiserreich was
coherent enough to have war aims that actually guided war conduct, or whether
its very incoherence opened the door for the spiraling habits of pure force. We
must also grapple with the widespread view that the war became radicalized
because of its length, a process that would happen in any war and to any
197

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
198

belligerent(s). There is some truth to this observation, especially on the home
front. The German variant of this view claims that radicalization occurred ﬁrst
under Hindenburg and Ludendorff, after August 1916. That is why chapter 9
examines the pattern of extremes in war operations before then: in the “Belgian
atrocities” of 1914 and in operations under the leadership of Chief of Staff Erich
von Falkenhayn from September 1914 to August 1916. We shall see that even
Falkenhayn, who tried to escape the compulsions of military culture,
nonetheless fell victim to them.
The occupied territories give us the opportunity to test whether European
warfare offered signiﬁcantly greater protections to enemy civilians than colonial
warfare did to Africans or Chinese. As we explore the kinds of
instrumentalization civilians suffered and the limits to them, we must also ask
whether eastern Europeans were treated worse than western Europeans. Did the
occupation in the east run along more ideological lines (which prepared the
ground for the policies of the Third Reich, as one recent work has suggested)?
The occupation of northern France will be of special interest for this reason.
Finally, in chapter 11 the German response to the Armenian genocide provides
the most stunning example of how unlimited the use of “military necessity”
regarding noncombatants had become as early as 1915.
The ﬁnal chapter returns to operations and to the period of generally
acknowledged radicalization under Ludendorff and Hindenburg. The virtual
collapse of civilian government in this period permitted them to override limits
(political, legal, and economic) to which Falkenhayn had reluctantly submitted.
The logic of limitless violence now proliferated in the Belgian deportations, the
Hindenburg program, unrestricted submarine warfare, and the destruction of
northern France in 1917. The apogee of pure, violent means was reached in the
decision to seek a military victory (Siegfrieden) by a last, all-or-nothing
offensive in March 1918. When this ﬁnal reprise of military-cultural precepts
failed, the Supreme Command, unable to learn from defeat or to relinquish the
chimera of military victory, repeated the tactic over and over until Germany
was so weakened that the Allies could begin the ﬁnal attacks of the war in the
summer and fall of 1918. Now, in the ultimate display of violent solipsism, the
military leaders, denying defeat, called for Germany to lay waste to occupied
western Europe and risk destroying itself in a hopeless Endkampf (ﬁnal battle)
inside Germany.

91
Waging War, 1914–1916
Risk, Extremes, and Limits

Strategic Vacuum

G

ermany’s conduct in the First World War is often explained as the result of policy. Its goal of continental hegemony and world (not just European) power
status unleashed a bitter war of unfettered imperialism, which took on the characteristics of wars of “paciﬁcation” in the occupied zones.1 This interpretation
has the merit of simplicity. It explains Germany’s expansionist war aims—the frankly imperialist peace treaties Germany forced on Russia (Brest-Litovsk) and Romania (Bucharest),
and its tenacious grip on Belgium and Longwy-Briey in Lorraine, which made a negotiated
settlement impossible. It explains the remarkable agreement among civilian government
leaders, important interest groups (owners of heavy industries, Prussian agrarians), bourgeois ideologues (Pan-Germans, patriotic professors, and pundits), the third Supreme Command (OHL) under Ludendorff and Hindenburg, and the navy on winning a pure victory of
force regardless of sacriﬁces. It is logical to assume that war conduct this repetitively destructive to self and others should have followed from policy, as it is logical to assume that
Lothar v. Trotha’s order for genocide should have preceded its realization in practice. But
Germany’s prosecution of World War I was much more like its bungled efforts in SWA than
conventional logic recognizes. For the same radical split between the military and the political spheres that produced Germany’s peculiar military culture made policy in the sense of
coordinated strategy impossible. The absence of policy created a vacuum that the standard

1. Fritz Fischer, Germany’s Aims in the First World War (New York, 1967); Fritz Fischer, World Power or Decline (New York, 1974); Fritz Klein, ed., Deutschland im Ersten Weltkrieg, 3 vols. (Berlin, 1968–69). On “paciﬁcation”: Trutz von Trotha, “ ‘The Fellows Can Just Starve’ ”; and Trutz von Trotha, Koloniale Herrschaft (Tübingen,
1994), 37–44.

199

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
200 operating procedures and assumptions of the military ﬁlled; they then developed further according to their own narrow logic inside the vortex of a long war that nobody had foreseen.
Chancellor Theobald v. Bethmann Hollweg had risked war in July 1914 hoping that either Russia would back down and lose credibility as a Great Power, or that Britain and/or
France would decline to support their partner during the latest Balkan crisis.2 Either way,
the Entente would dissolve, freeing Germany from its “encirclement” and greatly increasing its relative power, since it could henceforth weigh in against each of the former partners
separately, instead of facing their combined strength. This was world power on the cheap.
It opened pleasing vistas of continental economic expansion that would lead—who knew
exactly how?—to that Wilhelminian place in the sun. But neither Bethmann’s risk in 1914
nor Germany’s Weltpolitik of the preceding two decades had been framed in accord with
military planning or with Germany’s actual strength. Germany, a continental power lacking Britain’s enormous ﬁnancial resources, had prematurely challenged the world’s greatest
naval power while possessing neither a ﬁnished (nor experienced) navy of its own, nor the
economic basis to win a naval race without allies. Bethmann saw these limits to the naval
gamble and shifted German priorities to the Continent.3 Despite increased military spending just before the war, however, the armies of Germany and its ally, Austria-Hungary,
were smaller than those of France and Russia, and inadequate even for the demands of Germany’s only war plan, the Schlieffen Plan.4 Although Bethmann, like Bülow before him,
was aware of the Schlieffen Plan, he conducted foreign policy in 1914 without regard to it
and without consulting military or naval leaders, just as the General Staff and the navy had
developed their war plans without consulting the chancellors or even each other.
When the Entente powers refused to behave as Bethmann had hoped, genuine military danger developed and the chancellor in late July lost control of policy to the military
experts in the General Staff. Their calculations were not political but military, and their
decisions and requirements precipitated the world war.5 Thus it happened that Germany
entered war without war aims. The military’s goal was complete military victory. Until
1916, the General Staff had few or no territorial aims.6 Thereafter, the second OHL, under
Erich v. Falkenhayn (modestly), and the third OHL (grandiosely) championed annexations. Falkenhayn advocated keeping control over Belgium “for military reasons,” that is,
to prevent Belgium from becoming an enemy staging point in a future war. Ludendorff
and Hindenburg began their annexationism with similar military worries, arguing that a
border strip detached from Russian Poland would prevent Russian armies from penetrating East Prussia as they had in 1914. But they soon developed fantastically broad territorial
ambitions stretching from Antwerp and northern France to the Ukraine. These aims were
2. Among the huge literature on war origins, see especially Imanuel Geiss, ed., July 1914: The Outbreak of the
First World War (New York, 1968); John W. Langdon, July 1914: The Long Debate, 1918–1990 (New York, 1991);
Luigi Albertini, The Origins of the War of 1914, ed. and trans. Isabella Massey, 3 vols. (Oxford, 1952–57); R.J.W.
Evans and Hartmut Pogge von Strandmann, ed., The Coming of the First World War (Oxford, 1988); and H. W.
Koch, The Origins of the First World War (London, 1984).
3. Volker R. Berghahn, Germany and the Approach of War in 1914, 2nd ed. (New York, 1993).
4. Holger Afflerbach, “ ‘Bis zum letzten Mann und letzten Groschen?’ ” 90.
5. Geiss, July 1914.
6. Hans W. Gatzke, Germany’s Drive to the West (Baltimore, 1966), 10–11.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
largely derivative, however; Ludendorff and Hindenburg had taken them from Pan-Ger- 201
mans, leaders of heavy industry, and Prussian agrarians who had developed them after the
war had already begun, after Germany’s early, heady victories in the west in 1914 and in
the east the following year. In his memoirs Ludendorff insisted that the Supreme Command had not fought to achieve speciﬁc territorial goals.7 Ludendorff lied about many
things, but careful scrutiny of his and Hindenburg’s actions in 1917 and 1918 bears out his
disclaimer.8 Ludendorff used annexationism as a means to achieve military victory, not
the reverse. After years of war, heavy losses, and hunger and dissatisfaction at home, Ludendorff believed (wrongly) that only the prospect of huge gains would keep the troops
ﬁghting and the home front loyal. Ludendorff clung to annexation as the material and
military-strategic foundation for the inevitable next war. More than anything else, Ludendorff, together with most officers and many civilians, saw territorial expansion as a
sign of military victory. Renouncing annexations meant admitting defeat, admitting that
Germany could not force its enemies to its will. This is the reason Ludendorff and Hindenburg clung to absurd territorial gains even as they were negotiating the armistice. And
it is why the call for annexations expanded with Germany’s military successes—no speciﬁc content deﬁned the achievement of victory.
For his part, Bethmann never committed himself to speciﬁc war aims. He drew up the
(objectively immoderate) September 1914 program in order to limit the even more fantastic aims the Pan-Germans and some Reichstag members were publicizing.9 But he kept it
secret. Bethmann’s sibylline public statements on war aims continued his prewar “policy
of the diagonals,” an attempt to patch over domestic differences by shifting compromises
that robbed his government of coherence. Bethmann would have been pleased to preside
over annexations, but what they would be depended entirely on Germany’s military situation. “Never during the entire war did I present to the Supreme Command a general war
aims program whose achievement would have determined how long we had to ﬁght,”
Bethmann told his successor, Georg von Hertling, in 1917. Instead, he proposed waiting
for peace negotiations, during which Germany “would get what the military-political situation would permit and which Germany felt was useful.”10 The meaning of Bethmann’s
(in)action for the military becomes clearer in an off-the-cuff remark he made in 1917 to
7. Erich Ludendorff, Kriegführung und Politik (Berlin, 1922), 250, paraphrased in Gen. Hermann Kuhl’s report, in Germany, Parliament, Das Werk des Untersuchungsausschusses der Verfassungsgebenden Deutschen Nationalversammlung und des Deutschen Reichstages 1919–1928, Verhandlungen, Gutachten, Urkunden, Reihe 4: vol.
3, Die Ursachen des deutschen Zusammenbruchs im Jahre 1918, Erste Abteilung: Der militärische und aussenpolitische Zusammenbruch. ed. Eugen Fischer, Walther Block, and Albrecht Philipp (Berlin, 1928), 226 (hereafter UA
Reihe: volume, page).
8. Peter Graf Kielmansegg, Deutschland und der Erste Weltkrieg (Frankfurt am Main, 1968), 305–6; Schwertfeger Gutachten, in UA 4:2, 102–6; Germany, Reichsarchiv, Der Weltkrieg 1914 bis 1918, 14 vols. (Berlin, 1943),
14:3–4 (hereafter Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg).
9. Fischer, Germany’s Aims, 103–5.
10. Bethmann to Hertling, 26 Jan. 1918, Hohenﬁnow, cited in UA 4:2, 143; also Bethmann’s testimony before
the Reichstag, 31 Oct. 1919, in Germany, National Constituent Assembly, Official German Documents Relating to
the World War, trans. Division of International Law, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, vol. 1 (New
York, 1923), 339; and Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg, Betrachtungen zum Weltkriege, vol. 2: Während des
Krieges (Berlin, 1922), 153.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
202 Gen. Hans von Boehn, who asked the chancellor what his war aims were: “I’ll wait and see
how big the Supreme Command wins; when they’re out of ideas, then I must intervene
and make peace!”11 The chancellor thus explicitly left the military in charge of both conducting the war and determining when it was won or lost.
War aims ought to have been overall policy, uniting political, economic, and military considerations into strategy, but instead of guiding military practices, policy was
contingent on them. Germany had no strategic plan. The constitutional split between
politics and the military, Germany’s political “curse” as Bethmann called it, prevented
strategic planning.12 The constitution vested sole responsibility for coordinating policy
in the Kaiser; no institution, such as a cabinet, aided him. Unequal to this huge task, the
Kaiser withdrew into passivity, except on the rare occasions when the chief of staff or
chancellor speciﬁcally sought his intervention.13 Contemporaries commonly blamed
Wilhelm and the wartime chancellors for personal failure, but only the rare genius
could fairly have been expected to overcome the constitutional hurdles to effective policy making.14
Germany’s bifurcated institutions had had serious effects on the country’s political
culture. The split encouraged chancellors to stick to their own bailiwick; through the years
the military sphere, as part of the Kaiser’s power of command (Kommandogewalt), became taboo.15 The war further inﬂated the prestige of the soldier-experts. The Austrian
representative to supreme headquarters noted that civilian leaders “seemed to feel ill at
ease and constrained” in the military atmosphere.16 Civilian leaders took to disguising
themselves as soldiers: most wore their (reserve) uniforms when they visited supreme
headquarters, and Bethmann gave all of his wartime speeches to the Reichstag in uniform.17 But none felt competent to judge military matters. “It was simply impossible for a
military layman to presume to judge military possibilities, much less military necessities,”
Bethmann explained later. “But military necessities were precisely what seemed to me to
have guided military conduct. Even the most brilliant initiatives that the General Staff undertook were done from military necessity. How to respond to that necessity was some11. Recounted in Albrecht von Thaer, Generalstabsdienst an der Front und in der OHL, Abhandlungen der
Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, philologisch-historische Klasse, Dritte Folge, Nr. 40, ed. Siegfried
Kaehler (Göttingen, 1958), diary entry of 30 June 1918, 212, and in slightly different words, 241.
12. Bethmann: Germany, National Constituent Assembly, Official German Documents, 1:348. The best modern analysis of Germany’s strategic planlessness is Deist, “Strategy and Unlimited Warfare,” 265–79; and his superb analyses in Deist, Militär, Staat und Gesellschaft, in his article in Anticipating Total War, ed. Boemeke et al.,
and in his edited volume, Militär und Innenpolitik im Weltkrieg, 1914–1918 (Düsseldorf, 1970). See also Gerhard
Ritter’s classic account in Sword and the Scepter, vol. 3, and Karl-Dietrich Erdmann, Der Erste Weltkrieg, 5th ed.
(Munich, 1985), 65.
13. The Kaiser’s decisions tended toward the moderate alternative, especially from 1914 to 1917, which angered extremists. See Hull, “Military Culture,” 237.
14. Typical for the contemporary view: Schwertfeger’s report, 88, 169–76; Alfred Niemann, Kaiser und Heer
(Berlin, 1929), 60–62; and Eisenhart-Rothe, Im Banne der Persönlichkeit, 175–93.
15. Deist, “Voraussetzungen innenpolitischen Handelns des Militärs im Ersten Weltkrieg,” in Militär, Staat
und Gesellschaft, 115–17; Karl-Heinz Janssen believes that Bethmann was slightly more assertive: Der Kanzler und
der General (Göttingen, 1967), 207.
16. Josef Stürgkh, Im deutschen grossen Hauptquartier (Leipzig, 1921), 26.
17. Friedrich v. Payer, Von Bethmann Hollweg bis Ebert (Frankfurt, 1923), 67, 121.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
thing only the military could decide, including in areas where military and political de- 203
mands went hand in hand.”18
The self-abnegation of the civilians and the imperious self-assurance of the military
experts caused the information ﬂow between them to wither, despite the existence of regular brieﬁngs and competent mutual representatives in both camps.19 Falkenhayn kept
Bethmann as ignorant of operations as Bethmann kept Falkenhayn of diplomatic initiatives.20 They never worked together, which is why Falkenhayn’s at least incipient strategic
views were never transformed into actual policy. Bethmann never took advantage of the
only chief of staff who had a realistic view of Germany’s limited options.21 Ludendorff and
Hindenburg replaced Falkenhayn in August 1916, and together (with the help of the
Reichstag) they pushed out Bethmann in July 1917; with each step, the information ﬂow
between civilians and the military became worse. In September 1918 Chancellor Hertling
was unable to tell the Bundesrat (which a Reichstag vote in August 1914 had charged with
overseeing the prosecution of the war on the homefront) how long Germany could continue to ﬁght, because, in the interests of secrecy, he “conscientiously avoided becoming
informed about military details.”22 The nadir of civil-military relations came in 1918, as
military leaders hid the coming defeat from others and, above all, from themselves. But—
except for a brief moment in November 1914, which we will examine—at no time during
the war was the civilian leadership well informed about the military situation. The Reichstag, dependent mostly on official press reports, was even more in the dark.
Civilian leaders were thus in no position to force the military to engage in strategic
thinking, nor to engage in it themselves. Instead, one ﬁnds among civilian ministries
widespread mimicry of military attitudes and ways of deﬁning and handling problems.
Like Deputy Governor Tecklenburg in SWA, many officials were apparently convinced
that the exceptional situation of war required the suspension of civilian procedures and
the adoption of the professional habitus of the military experts. Once again they were encouraged in this supposition by German law. The state of siege law, in effect since 31 July
1914, subordinated the entire civilian administration to the oversight of the military—
speciﬁcally, to the commanding general of each military district. Only the Kaiser had the
authority to reverse their decisions.
Yet wartime Germany was not a military dictatorship in the conventional sense, even
under Ludendorff and Hindenburg.23 None of the chiefs of staff aspired to total power,
and dozens of mediate sources of power (or at least friction) continued to exist throughout the war. Military leaders remained narrowly focused on what they took to be their
duty: ﬁghting the war to military victory.
Furthermore, the military establishment was no better coordinated than the govern18. Bethmann, Betrachtungen, 9.
19. Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 330.
20. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 244–45, 253.
21. Ibid., 453.
22. Prince Max von Baden, Erinnerungen und Dokumente (Stuttgart, 1927), 303.
23. Kitchen disagrees, but see his deﬁnition and concluding discussion: Martin Kitchen, The Silent Dictatorship (London, 1976), 22, 274–77.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
204 ment as a whole. The Kaiser held sole responsibility here, too, and was if anything even
less active in exercising it. Inside Germany, at least sixty-two deputy army commanders
(of army districts or fortresses), each reporting directly to the Kaiser, exercised authority
in his own district. These Militärbefehlhaber operated independently, often beyond the
knowledge and always beyond the control of either the chief of the General Staff or the
chancellor.24 The deputy army commanders became lawmakers in their separate districts,
thus preventing Germany from developing a uniform and effective food policy, for example.25 “Instead of order, [they create] a whir of orders, resulting in disorder!” Crown
Prince Rupprecht complained.26 After May 1916 the Prussian war minister gained some
control over the deputy military commanders, but balkanization remained the guiding
principle.27
Partly to protect the Kaiser’s command power from civilian oversight, and partly
through sheer bureaucratic proliferation, Germany’s military disorganization had grown
worse between 1870 and 1914.28 The war encouraged even further ﬁssiparousness. It
brought new areas of control, the occupied zones, which were, variously, under a military
governor-general or, when they were close to the front lines, under the commander of the
local army, or, in the east, under “Ober-Ost,” the Supreme Command in the east under
Ludendorff and Hindenburg. Occupation policy remained typically uncoordinated. Warcaused scarcity made matters worse by encouraging competition for scarce resources,
rather than cooperation among the various military ﬁefdoms.
The war automatically elevated the chief of the General Staff from a mere planner to
de facto supreme commander who issued orders in the Kaiser’s name. His focus on operations was quite different from that of the war minister, whose purview was resources,
manpower, and, increasingly, the entire economic and ﬁnancial basis of the war effort.
Under Falkenhayn (September 1914 through August 1916) relations between the General
Staff and the war ministry were smooth, but the potential for conﬂict always existed. Beneath the chief of the General Staff were General Staff officers posted to all major units of
the ﬁeld army from army groups on down. They were junior in rank to the commanders,
yet they were charged with planning operations and making sure that General Staff thinking permeated practice. Not surprisingly, there was recurrent friction between them and
the titular commanders, who bore ﬁnal responsibility for orders.
If army subdivisions were not well coordinated, the army and navy were positively remote. The 1914 army and navy war plans had taken absolutely no notice of each other.
Britain and France entered the war with better coordination among themselves than Germany had achieved within its own services. “Ministerial particularism” (Ressortpartiku-

24. Wilhelm Deist, “Zur Institution des Militärbefehlshabers und Obermilitärbefehlshabers im Ersten
Weltkrieg,” Jahrbuch der Geschichte Mittel- und Osteuropas 13–14 (1965): 228.
25. Lothar Dessauer, Der Militärbefehlshaber und seine Verordnungsgewalt in der Praxis der Weltkrieges
(Berlin, 1918), 27–34; Deist, “Voraussetzungen,” 127–37; Roger Chickering, Imperial Germany and the Great War,
1914–1918 (Cambridge, 1998), 44–45.
26. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 5 May 1916, 1:457.
27. Deist, “Voraussetzungen,” 133; Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 353.
28. Deist, “Voraussetzungen,” 112–13.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
larismus), that hallmark of Wilhelminian government, did not weaken after 1914, and it 205
affected the military as well as the civilian administration. Each service remained profoundly ignorant of the other. The following exchange occurred between Chief of the
General Staff Falkenhayn and Navy Captain Widenmann in February 1916, during a proposed reorganization of the navy:
Falkenhayn: “Then it appears the chief of the Admiralty is actually superﬂuous?
Doesn’t he have the power of military decision?”
Widenmann: “No, he just reports to His Majesty about the division of resources
among the various theaters of war.”
Falkenhayn: “So, it’s not the same as my job?”
Widenmann: “Not as far as I can judge.”29
Mutual ignorance meant that naval and army officers deferred uncritically to each
other’s expertise. Even quite fantastic assertions (about how quickly a handful of submarines could defeat Britain, or how long the army in the west could hold out) tended to
be gullibly accepted by the other service, especially when they conﬁrmed what it wanted
to hear. There was no critical feedback here.
Lack of coordination between military and political leaders and within the military itself meant that Germany never achieved the “total war” that Ludendorff later claimed as
the ideal type of modern warfare and that many historians use to judge the Great War.
“Total war” in this usage means the complete mobilization of civilians, of civil society,
and especially of the economy for the war effort. A recent, three-volume comparative
study of total war and its antecedents concluded that World War I was a major stage in the
process of totalization but that it stopped short of its complete development. Roger
Chickering, one of the editors and main contributors to the project, identiﬁed the dynamics leading toward totality primarily in nonmilitary sectors: “demographic growth,
technological innovation, industrial integration, social conﬂict, the redeﬁnition of political society, the expansion of public power, and the heightening of diplomatic tension, to
say nothing of technological and organizational changes within the narrower realm suggested by the term ‘military history.’ ”30 In this widespread view, these dynamics were
loosed by the war itself. They “emerged suddenly, by improvisation, and without a shred
of foresight,”31 gathering momentum especially after 1916.32 Therefore, in the words of the

29. Alfred von Tirpitz, Politische Dokumente (Hamburg, 1926), 476.
30. Roger Chickering, “Total War: The Use and Abuse of a Concept,” in Anticipating Total War, ed. Boemeke et al., 13–28, here 27. The other two volumes in the series are Stig Förster and Jörg Nagler, ed., On the Road
to Total War (New York, 1997), and Roger Chickering and Stig Förster, ed., Great War, Total War (Cambridge,
2000).
31. Roger Chickering, “World War I and the Theory of Total War,” in Great War, Total War, ed. Chickering
and Förster, 37.
32. John Horne, “Introduction: Mobilizing for ‘Total War’ 1914–1918,” in State, Society, and Mobilization in
Europe during the First World War, ed. Horne (Cambridge, 1997), 1–18.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
206 historian Stig Förster, “No direct line led from the combat of the 1860s and 1870s to total
war.”33
Yet, in the German case, the continuities in military practices, doctrines, and micrologics, and their steadfast tendency to go to extremes, are astonishing. Perhaps the vantage
point of total war obscures our view of this phenomenon by its focus on the nonmilitary.
Wilhelm Deist has suggested “total combat” as more descriptive of the extremes that military conduct of the war produced.34 But this phrase does not do justice to the enormous
effects that military priorities had on civilians, especially in the occupied zones.
The continuities in German military practices resulted from the policy void and from
Germany’s strategic situation. The structural and institutional barriers to strategic planning meant that military viewpoints were not coordinated with or subordinated to political-economic-legal calculations but were free to develop according to their own unexamined internal logic. The new challenges posed by the war (the unprecedented expenditure
of munitions, huge loss of life, and then the war’s duration and extent) meant that no expert in any ﬁeld had an obvious policy remedy. In wartime, military expertise seemed
most apposite. But no degree of military expertise could have overcome Germany’s strategic deﬁcits. It and its weak ally Austria-Hungary faced a coalition vastly superior demographically and economically (even before the United States entered the war in April 1917)
and which could effectively cut off food and raw materials on which the landlocked Central Powers depended. The longer the war continued the more the power discrepancy
tipped to Germany’s disadvantage. Genuine strategic planning would have been forced to
acknowledge that Germany was too small to become a world power, or to win a world
war. For those who wanted to avoid this conclusion, purely military thinking was attractive. For the German military had developed its culture on the very premise of overachievement, of using quality, daring, and tactical proﬁciency to overcome strategic disadvantage. By acquiescing to German military culture, civilians could conveniently deny
the discouraging truth of Germany’s situation. This motive operated powerfully to silence
criticism of the military’s actions during the war.
In many ways World War I recapitulated for Germany the colonial situation. The
Schlieffen Plan in 1914 and its principles of rapid envelopment and pursuit in 1915 were
just successful enough to ensure that Germany fought the war on foreign soil. As in the
colonies, there were insufficient troops to control the hostile population according to military standards. The twin temptations of imperial exploitation and violent paciﬁcation
were ever present. At home, as in earlier colonial conﬂicts, the war raised enormous popular and governmental expectations of success (a quick military victory by the army
everyone assumed to be the best, an end to internal discord, the achievement of world
power, the acquisition of the fundamentals of future prosperity, and permanent military
security). The national stakes were inﬂated from the very beginning, not just after the war
had taken such a heavy toll of life. Yet there was a high likelihood that these expectations
33. Stig Förster, introduction, Great War, Total War, 3.
34. Wilhelm Deist, “The German Army, the Authoritarian Nation-State, and Total War,” in State, Society,
and Mobilization, ed. Horne, 160–72, here 160n2.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
would be disappointed. In the colonies, lack of resources hampered imperial wars because 207
of long transportation lines, stingy parliaments, and the absence of colonial infrastructure; in the world war Germany simply lacked manpower, food, and raw materials, both
comparatively, and even absolutely. The cleft between expectation and reality was too
large to permit a graceful or honest exit, however. Instead, the policies of bluff and saving
face recommended themselves. But unlike “small” colonial wars, which boosters only
claimed were matters of life and death, the world war truly did involve national security
interests—the security mania of the professional officer corps and its more ideologized
Pan-German version was suddenly justiﬁed. War really was existential, just as General v.
Hartmann had written in 1876.
To address this situation, the military experts ﬁlled the policy void with their default
plans, doctrinal frameworks, practical habits, and unconscious assumptions. It was these
that drove German military conduct (Kriegführung) into its spiral of extremity and that
ended in catastrophe. German military conduct distinguished itself by adamantine consistency; neither failure in battle, nor widespread foreign criticism (of “atrocities,” forbidden weapons, or treatment of occupied civilians), nor even the impending loss of the war
itself, shook the normal procedures by which military leaders understood, deﬁned, and
handled the problems of war. They learned little that they had not “known” when the
conﬂict started. Military learning was conﬁned almost solely to the tactical level. Impervious to experience on any other plane, uncorrected by other institutions, and facing an impossible self-imposed task, military leaders drifted into self-delusion and unreality. Military culture, whose operations they did not see or understand, worked together with
other factors to turn the very strengths of the German military into fatal weaknesses.
The rest of this chapter and the next three focus on the workings of Germany’s military
culture during the war, and especially on ﬁve aspects: patterns of repetition; uncoordinated
instances of the movement toward extremes, which nonetheless strongly resembled one
another; the replacement of larger strategic goals with mere means (tactics) or, put another
way, the adoption of short-term expedients over long-term thinking; the movement to irrational and dysfunctional action; and the inability to recognize or admit defeat.

Autumn 1914
During the war and afterward Germany’s military and civilian leaders commonly
claimed that objective circumstances had propelled Germany down the path to extremes.35 The sheer duration and extent of the war, they said, the stalemate in the west,
and above all the blockade created extreme necessities, which only extreme measures
could address. Historians often accept this logic, which would seem to explain the excesses of Ludendorff and Hindenburg in 1917 and 1918. But if this were true, then we
should expect to see the process unfold only after the war was well underway. In fact, the
spiral toward the extreme began immediately. The opening weeks of war showed how
35. UA 3:4; English version: Germany, National Constituent Assembly, Official German Documents; UA 3:1,
Volkmann’s report, 168; Meurer’s testimony, 88–89; Prussia, War Ministry and Supreme Command, Die
deutsche Kriegführung und das Völkerrecht (Berlin, 1919), iv, and passim.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
208 much German war conduct was determined by the patterns of military culture already familiar to us.
From the war’s outbreak at the beginning of August 1914, the General Staff took
charge of running it. The Schlieffen Plan’s “secret of victory”36 was now to unfold. Lt. Col.
Hans von Seeckt, who became chief of the army in the Weimar Republic, was hardly alone
in feeling that “it is like a dream that these operations, so long thought through, are running in reality exactly as they were planned on paper.”37 But not simply the advantages of
the plan now emerged—rapid mobilization and deployment, crushing strength on the
right wing, initial victories, and occupation of foreign territory—but also the potential
problems—the enormous goal of Siegfrieden (victory of pure military force), the exhausting timetable (four hundred miles of marching in forty days), the assumption of qualitative troop superiority (though relying on reserve officers and men years removed from
military training), the pressure on officers to blind themselves to adversity and to “will”
victory, the logistics left to chance.38
In fact, the Schlieffen Plan went wrong immediately. Belgium contradicted the expectation that such a small state would surely permit German troops free passage on their
way to France. On 3 August Belgium refused and took up arms. The Belgian government’s
statement was never published in Germany, which meant that soldiers had no reason to
revise their expectations of an easy march. To their surprise German troops encountered
real resistance from small units, sometimes from individual snipers who used houses and
trees for cover, a form of warfare unlike the sweeping mass movement of troops for which
they had been trained. On 4 August, the day Germany invaded Belgium, Gen. Otto von
Emmich ordered the Belgian population to give Germany “free passage”; destruction of
bridges or railroads (a normal military measure that the retreating Belgian army could be
expected to take) would result in reprisals.39 The next day Chief of Staff Moltke admitted
to his Austrian counterpart, “Our method in Belgium [referring to the siege at Liège] is
certainly brutal, but for us it is a matter of life or death, and anybody who gets in our way
has to take the consequences.”40 To Foreign Secretary Gottlieb von Jagow, Moltke explained on the same day that Britain’s entry into the war forced Germany “to exhaust
every means that could contribute to victory. . . . The grave situation in which the fatherland ﬁnds itself makes the use of every means that can harm the enemy a duty.”41 The
logic of Germany’s predicament was clear to those at the top: it demanded force limited
only by the achievement of victory.
36. Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 87, also 91, 420.
37. Hans von Seeckt, Aus meinem Leben 1866–1917, ed. Friedrich von Rabenau (Leipzig, 1938), diary entry of
29 Aug. 1914, 69.
38. Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria, commander of the German 6th Army, reported that “we were told
that, if necessary, we would have to rely on the abundant stores we would capture”; he discovered that such staples as wheat and ﬂour, for example, were far from abundant. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, 1:127. As for ammunition, it “somehow” arrived in time: Crefeld, Supplying War, 140.
39. Lothar Wieland, Belgien 1914 (Frankfurt, 1984), 4n16.
40. Ibid., 7.
41. Ibid., 7n35.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
At the bottom, the situation was messier. German troops began shooting Belgian and 209
French civilians for a variety of reasons: frustration at resistance, suspicion of the foreign
population, surprise at sniper ﬁre, shock at the ﬁrst sight of disﬁguring wounds and at the
heavy casualties caused by inexperienced officers hastening to achieve victory, incredulity
that friendly ﬁre could be so costly, the stress of meeting the goals of the Schlieffen Plan,
exhaustion from unaccustomed marching, drunkenness, lack of discipline, and poor
leadership.42 The pattern of troop behavior was remarkably similar to that in 1870 and in
the colonies. It had three signiﬁcant qualities. First, crimes of excess began immediately;
the use of human shields in combat, the punitive destruction of buildings, and the mass
execution of noncombatants began on 5 August 1914, the ﬁrst day of the real shooting
war.43 Second, they were widespread; half of all the German regiments in the western theater of operations committed such acts. In the ﬁrst two months of the war there were 129
major incidents of execution (involving ten or more civilians). The historians of these
events, John Horne and Alan Kramer, conclude that “violence against enemy civilians
was endemic throughout the German army.”44 Third, as in 1870, these acts were ﬁrst committed by common soldiers or low-ranking officers, but they were swiftly approved by
higher-ranking officers and systematized in orders at the army level and above. On 14 August, Moltke, for example, ordered that civilians engaging in combat would be summarily
executed, an order repeated on the 26th.45
The speed, extent, and systematic nature of the atrocities show that they had been
long prepared, not in the sense of ordered outright but in Barry Turner’s sense that largescale failures require “time and resources [to be] devoted to them.”46 Unintentional
preparation for excesses had occurred at the level of myth- and expectation-building,
training for combat, and the unrealistic Schlieffen Plan. The army and officer corps had
assiduously cultivated the myth of the francs-tireurs of 1870 until it had become part of
the folklore of German military culture. Officers and men expected French and Belgian
civilians to engage in illegal acts of resistance; it was easy to blame them for the discrepancy between the easy victory they expected and the difficult and sometimes horrible reality of war they encountered. Their credulity was then conﬁrmed and reinforced by superior orders and newspaper accounts.47 Even the apparently new practice of using
human shields must have seemed merely an extension of the already permissible. After
42. Ibid., 3–10; Alan Kramer, “ ‘Greueltaten,’ ” in “Keiner fühlt sich hier mehr als Mensch . . . ,” ed. Gerhard
Hirschfeld and Gerd Krumeich (Essen, 1993), 87–92.
43. Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 13, appendix 1:435. Human shields: John Horne and Alan
Kramer, “War between Soldiers and Enemy Civilians, 1914–1915,” in Great War, Total War, ed. Chickering and
Förster, 153–68, here 157–58; Carl Ernst, Der grosse Krieg in Belgien (Gembloux, Belgium, 1930), 30, 56; Georges
Gromaire, L’occupation allemande en France, 1914–1918 (Paris, 1925), 73; Dana C. Munro, George C. Sellery, and
August C. Krey, eds., German War Practices, Part 1: Treatment of Civilians (Washington, D.C., 1917), 40.
44. Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 76 (one half of all regiments), 74 (129 incidents).
45. John Horne and Alan Kramer, “German ‘Atrocities’ and Franco-German Opinion, 1914,” Journal of
Modern History 66:1 (March 1994): 17, 22; Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 162, 164.
46. Turner, “Organizational and Interorganizational Development of Disasters,” 395.
47. Wieland, Belgien 1914, 4, 20; Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 132.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
210 all, the Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung (12 March 1914) had recommended using civilian
hostages to protect trains from sabotage and to protect villages unexpectedly attacked by
enemy troops.48 It had therefore already breached the principle of civilian inviolability
from direct combat, as had the General Staff publication Kriegsbrauch. The massacres of
August and September must have seemed to the perpetrators to have been “sanctioned.”49
The pattern of acts is quite similar to what was done in SWA and elsewhere in the
colonies. One ﬁnds, for example, an order by the commander of the 33rd Reserve Division “to shoot all male inhabitants [of the village of Nomény] and expel the women in the
direction of France.”50 Burning of homes, and even whole villages, was common. The
transgression of the gender taboo appears in Falkenhayn’s order of 26 August 1914 making any civilian caught engaging in resistance, “regardless of age and sex,” liable to summary execution. As in SWA, the niceties of courts-martial swiftly gave way to common
summary executions.51 Harsh orders tended to lead to harsher behavior. One soldier
from the 108th Infantry Regiment described to a French investigator after his capture
how that happened: “We were given the order to kill all civilians shooting at us, but in reality the men of my regiment and I, myself, ﬁred at all civilians we found in the houses
from which we suspected there had been shots ﬁred; in that way we killed women and
even children. We did not do it light-heartedly.”52 Bad provisioning increased contact
with civilians and also the chances for lethal misunderstandings. Finally, as in the
colonies, the francs-tireurs myth placed the blame for extreme troop behavior on civilians, whose alleged armed resistance placed them outside the protection of international
law, indeed made them savages, as one of Germany’s newspapers of record claimed on 9
August, when it spread the already widespread tale that civilians (often women, in the
stories) had mutilated or tortured German troops in a fashion rivaled only by the
Herero.53
This wave of systematic violence in August and September 1914 killed six thousand
civilians, possibly more, and destroyed ﬁfteen to twenty thousand buildings, including
some entire villages.54 The allies dubbed these actions the “Belgian atrocities,” which became the ﬁrst staple of propaganda labeling the Germans brutal breakers of international
law. When the haze of appeasement settled over Europe in the 1920s, the “Belgian atrocities” were interred as propaganda lies until historians in the 1980s and 1990s unearthed
them and found they were true. Neither the wartime German government nor the Weimar
parliament denied them.55 Instead, they defended them as regrettably necessary reprisals
against illegal francs-tireurs (whom subsequent historical scholarship has shown did not
48. Prussia, War Ministry, Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung (KEO), p. 68 (para. 137), p. 69 (para. 141).
49. Sanford and Comstock, “Sanctions for Evil.”
50. Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 64; more examples: 33, 49.
51. Ibid., 164–65.
52. Ibid., 163–64.
53. Ibid., 135.
54. Horne and Kramer, “War between Soldiers,” 157–58; Kramer, “Greueltaten,” 86; Horne and Kramer,
German Atrocities, 74–75.
55. Germany, Foreign Office, Die völkerrechtswidrige Führung des belgischen Volkskriegs (Berlin, 1915); UA
3:2, 129–260; Prussia, War Ministry and Supreme Command, Die deutsche Kriegführung, 46–51.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
exist).56 The diaries of the time strongly suggest that Germans high and low believed the 211
francs-tireurs myth. But this belief did not cause the atrocities, any more than antiCatholicism or social Darwinism did, though all three made it easier for them to happen.57 The atrocities occurred because two forces converged: the unintended consequences to ordinary soldiers of a far too ambitious war plan, and the conscious and
customary acceptance among officers that making the risky plan work might require
using terror against civilians. These same officers did not understand how the Schlieffen
Plan and their own professional expectations had generated atrocity; they experienced the
situation as compulsive, beyond their control. Like Moltke, they felt forced to respond to
friction according to the logic of ever greater violence.
The object of the atrocities was to force civilian obedience and to re-create in the occupied zones the reliable order of home (the Kölnischer Zeitung asked, “Is there a person
in the world who would imagine that the Belgian capital, Brussels, would have permitted
us to live there doing as we please, as if in our own country, if the inhabitants did not
tremble at our [possible] revenge?”).58 The projection of military hierarchy and perfect
orderliness onto civilians is also clear in the frequency with which German officers assumed that mayors actually controlled their citizens’ actions.59
There was a more perfect way to do achieve order, however—deportation. Not three
weeks into the war, German authorities were already using this extreme measure. The ﬁrst
deportees were civilian hostages from Belgium and northern France, from places such as
Dinant or Louvain, where major atrocities had occurred. After being marched about aimlessly for hours, the civilians were crowded onto cattle cars and shipped off to internment
camps in Germany; most were repatriated after several months, but some remained prisoners for the entire war.60 The deportation of hostages was apparently a hastily improvised measure, because few of the necessary provisions for food, water, clothing, or shelter were provided.61 On 23 August General Moltke proposed that deportation should be a
permanent feature of occupation policy. He suggested to the chancellor that “part of the
numerous working class [of Belgium] . . . be pushed across the border to Antwerp,”
where, instead of Germany, the Belgian government-in-exile would have to feed them.
Bethmann did not reject this suggestion out of hand; instead, he blocked it temporarily.
The guidelines issued on 27 August to the military governor of Belgium read that deportation of the working class would depend on “special consideration.”62 Deportation was
obviously a widespread temptation. A month after Moltke’s suggestion, the chief of the
56. Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 123–29; Kramer, “Greueltaten,” 96–99; Wieland, Belgien 1914,
11–16.
57. Horne and Kramer stress ideological stereotyping: “War between Soldiers,” 162–65.
58. Walter Bloehm, “Greuelhetze,” Kölnische Zeitung 146 (10 Feb. 1915), morning edition, p. 1: paraphrased
in Ernst, Der grosse Krieg, 83.
59. Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 103.
60. Annette Becker, Oubliés de la Grande Guerre (Paris, 1998), 55.
61. Great Britain, Report of the Committee on Alleged German Outrages, Cd. 7894 (London, 1915), 19, 22, 28,
30–37; Ernst, Der grosse Krieg, 62–66; Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 77, 166, 436–38.
62. Frank Wende, Die belgische Frage in der deutschen Politik des Ersten Weltkrieges (Hamburg, 1969), 21–22;
Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 158.

PART

212

III .

THE

FIRST

WORLD

WAR

rear (Etappeninspekteur) of the 1st Army ordered all males of military age (eighteen to
forty-eight) in St. Quentin, France, to be transported to Germany, where they would be
less likely to escape to unoccupied France and where, above all, the 1st Army would not
have to feed them. His commander, Crown Prince Rupprecht, whittled down the number
of deportees to those capable of bearing arms, so that the rest could be used for labor be­
hind the German lines.63 Altogether, some twenty-three thousand French and Belgian
civilian deportees disappeared into German camps in the first weeks of the war.64
Despite extreme measures against civilians, the ruthless sacrifice of thousands of Ger­
man troops in hopeless attacks against strong positions,65 and tremendous daily exertions
in executing the Schlieffen Plan, the risk failed. It proved impossible to orchestrate the in­
dependently acting armies within Schlieffen's sweeping scheme.66 But more fundamen­
tally, Germany's strength in manpower, transportation, and materiel (especially muni­
tions) was simply not enough to beat Britain and France together, much less with the
addition of Russia. On 9 September 1914 the German armies were checked at the Marne
and had to retreat and dig in. The grand offensive was through, the enemy undefeated.
Chief of Staff Moltke had always appreciated more than most the tremendous risks in­
volved and, for example, had tried to improve the logistical basis of Schlieffen's plan and
to reduce Germany's vulnerability to enemy breakthrough while the bulk of German
troops were attempting their difficult one-sided sweep.67 Moltke therefore recognized
that failure at the Marne meant the failure of the Schlieffen Plan and with it Germany's
only hope to win the war. That had been the calculation: all or nothing. Moltke, who days
earlier had seemed to think that Germany had already won,68 now recognized the true ex­
tent of defeat. He lapsed into apathy, and his health collapsed.
Moltke's response was entirely appropriate for a man who took the Schlieffen Plan se­
riously as a strategic concept. Germany had not simply lost a battle, it had lost the war.
The widespread "resignation," "pessimism," or "irritability" among high-ranking officers
in the weeks after 9 September suggests that, at least subliminally, Moltke was not alone in
his insight.69 But it proved almost impossible to sustain this logical, but dour, view. The
broken Moltke was replaced in mid-September as chief of the General Staff by Erich v.
Falkenhayn, who briefed the chancellor on the new military situation on the 19th. Neither
Falkenhayn nor Bethmann concluded at that time that the war was 10stJo Bethmann suc­
cessfully pressed Falkenhayn to misrepresent the Marne to the German people as a volun63. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, 1:144-45.
64. Horne and Kramer, German Atrocities, 166.
65. Bernd F. Schulte, Europiiische Krise und Erster Weltkrieg (Frankfurt am Main, 1983), 245-46; Groener,

Lebenserinnerungen, 150.
66. German officers and too many historians have blamed the Marne on Moltke's poor leadership. For a re­

cent summary of the extensive literature see Strachan, First World War, 242-62, and Holmes's interesting inter­
pretation, "Reluctant March," 228-32.
67. Gunther Rothenberg, "Moltke, Schlieffen, and the Doctrine of Strategic Envelopment," in Makers of

Modern Strategy, ed. Paret, 296-325, here 321-22; Forster, "Dreams and Nightmares," 343-76; Burchardt,
Friedenswirtschaft, 26, 27, 48, 175, 193.
68. Fritz von Lossberg, Meine Tiitigkeit im Weltkriege 1914-1918 (Berlin, 1939), 128.
69. Seeckt, Aus meinem Leben, 72-74; Janssen, Der Kanzler und der General, 20; Sturgkh, Im deutschen

Grossen Hauptquartier, 41-42.
70. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 191.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
tary strategic correction. The thinking at general headquarters was so fuzzy that the Aus- 213
trian military representative there could not judge the situation clearly: “It was not easy to
understand the signiﬁcance of the battle of the Marne at the time.”71 Already by 18 September, Moltke seemed to have backtracked.72 Later he ascribed his behavior to having
been “nervous” and “pessimistic,” the recurring epithets military men used to discredit
advocates of unpleasant realism.73
It is therefore not surprising that Falkenhayn handled the problem by denying it. But
Falkenhayn was not alone; he was typical. No one among Germany’s higher military leaders accepted the defeat at the Marne, and therefore none was in a position to rethink
Schlieffen’s precepts.74 On the one hand, the press of circumstances surely hindered fundamental criticism. On the other, in the absence of rethinking, the automatisms of military culture determined action. Except for Gen. Karl von Einem, who advocated a strategic retreat in order to lure the French into a trap where they could be destroyed,
everybody favored a continuation of the offensive.75 Everyone without exception agreed
that military annihilation was still the goal and the way to achieve it was through concentration of forces and the relentless forcing of a single-battle victory.76
Falkenhayn therefore attempted the Schlieffen solution again, in the Moltke guise.
That is, he aimed to envelop the British by using as much strength as possible on the right
wing, while pinning the Allies down by attacks from the center, which the army commanders there believed might on their own succeed in achieving a total military victory.77
Repetition produced the same failure and ignited yet another technical debate among ofﬁcers about whether enough troops had been concentrated on the right wing.78
Denial of defeat and inability or unwillingness to rethink left the spiraling dynamic of
military culture in effect. The compulsion to escalate the use of violence was extremely
strong. When ﬁghting bogged down at Ypres, the last chance for encirclement, Falkenhayn committed wave after wave of German troops, leading to the death of eighty thousand of them and using up the precious new army of post–August 1914 volunteers. German losses were ﬁnally so staggering that many high-ranking officers criticized
Falkenhayn for not stopping the battle sooner—he did so on 13 November 1914 when Germany came within six days of having no artillery shells.79 But Falkenhayn’s repetitive actionism and loyalty to the Schlieffen Plan was the default position. Newly appointed Min71. Stürgkh, Im deutschen Grossen Hauptquartier, 81.
72. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, 1:126.
73. Moltke to Gen. Hans v. Plessen, 2 May 1915, cited in Herwig, First World War, 106.
74. Strachan, First World War, 262; Janssen, Der Kanzler, 26–27; Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 328; Kronprinz Wilhelm v. Preussen, Meine Erinnerungen aus Deutschlands Heldenkampf (Berlin, 1923), 91; Hermann von
Kuhl, Der Weltkrieg 1914–1918 (Berlin, 1929), 2:45.
75. Einem, Armeeführer, 61, 62; Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 180.
76. For example, Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, diary entry of 13 Sept. 1914, 176; Rupprecht Kronprinz v.
Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 15 Sept. 1914, 1:124; ex post facto criticism of this position by FreytagLoringhoven (8 June 1915), in Wild, Briefe, 68–69.
77. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 191–95; Strachan, First World War, 264–65.
78. Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 180–81; Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 99.
79. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 198. Plessen, 16 Nov. 1914: “Falkenhayn does not want to stop the violent attack
on Ypres until the last attack (again made by new troops) and the last heavy shell is ﬁred.” Reichsarchiv,
Weltkrieg, 6:93.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
214 ister of War Adolf Wild von Hohenborn summed it up, “What a soldier sets his mind to,
he must execute ruthlessly. If Ypres had been a victory, everybody would have been satisﬁed.”80 But at Ypres, the Schlieffen principles had failed again.
At the end of September, as Falkenhayn ordered the armies to attack, he was already
experimenting with the ﬁrst of a series of technical wonder weapons to extract victory
from defeat—gas.81 Fritz Haber, the scientist in charge of the program, remembered, “It
was thought up in great haste, created, and tried out at Neuve Chapelle in the same
month.”82 These early gas grenades contained an irritant to make enemy troops abandon
their positions; only in the next year did the Germans ﬁrst develop a lethal gas. The gas
war ultimately developed on both sides until, for example, ﬁve hundred thousand Russian
soldiers became gas casualties, while Germany devoted 25 percent of its shell-making capacity to gas shells.83 No one could have foreseen such effects from this small beginning,
especially given the widespread early opposition to the new weapon from officers who
found it morally repugnant.84 They all overcame their objections as the weapon became
more widely used. For our purposes, however, the decision to try gas grenades is a good
indicator of the grooves in which military problem-solving ran. First, the decision occurred very early, before the trench stalemate was complete. Desperation came quickly to
the Supreme Command, because its task was desperate by deﬁnition. Second, the method
tried was experimental and technical; it attempted to achieve a tactical advantage over the
enemy. Third, it tried to do so hastily, without much investment or forethought, and it
was based on short-term calculations. For example, the decision ignored the fact that the
prevailing winds in Europe are almost always westerly (which would blow gas back at the
German troops).85 If the weapon had worked, the war would have been over before anyone had to worry about this. Fourth, the decision rested on underestimating the capacity
of the enemy to retaliate in kind: Haber told Falkenhayn that Britain could not possibly
develop poison gas, because it lacked Germany’s scientiﬁc advantages.86 Gas warfare obviously violated international law, but no discussion of that fact or its potential effects preceded the adoption of the experiment. After the war, the legal expert who investigated gas
warfare for the Reichstag justiﬁed it legally as a “compulsory necessity of war.”87 Finally,
gas was designed for purely conventional purposes to achieve a tactical advantage; the escalation it represented was unintentional and was surely experienced as the “compulsory
necessity of war” by which it was later defended.88
80. Wild, Briefe, diary entry of 23 Dec. 1914, Mézières, 47.
81. The scientist in charge of the program, Fritz Haber, thought Falkenhayn had contacted him in early October, but the legal expert who examined the case for the postwar Reichstag investigation noted that the gas program began in late September: UA 3:4, 20–21; Rolf-Dieter Müller, “Total War as the Result of New Weapons?” in
Great War, Total War, ed. Chickering and Förster, 95–111, here 96.
82. UA 3:4, 19–20.
83. Müller, “Total War,” 103; UA 3:4, 14.
84. Müller, “Total War,” 107.
85. Crown Prince Rupprecht argued against the new weapon for this reason. Diary entry 1 Mar. 1915, Mein
Kriegstagebuch, 1:304–5.
86. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 261.
87. Dr. Kriege’s report, UA 3:4, 34.
88. Dennis E. Showalter, “Mass Warfare and the Impact of Technology,” in Great War, Total War, ed.
Chickering and Förster, 90–91, citing Rolf-Dieter Müller and Tim Travers.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
In the weeks before the stalemate on the western front had solidiﬁed, Germany’s war 215
conduct already showed the outlines it would pursue to the end. From the very beginning
it used ruthless methods and outright terror against civilians to fulﬁll the unrealistic
schedule of the Schlieffen Plan and to create a docile order that one could hardly expect of
civilians, much less of enemy civilians. Commanders rapidly arrived at the most ﬁnalseeming solution to civilian order—deportation—which they suggested and partly used
to solve logistical and governmental problems. When the Schlieffen Plan was frustrated,
one of the ﬁrst responses was to grasp at a cheap, experimental, technical weapon that operated at the tactical level. And, rather than admitting that the Schlieffen gamble had
failed, officers supported repeating its basic idea of sweeping attack over and over again,
at greater and greater human cost. With one exception, this template deﬁned how Germany fought the war right to the end. We turn now to that exception.

Falkenhayn and the Abandonment of Military Victory
With the defeat at Ypres, Falkenhayn became the second chief of staff to admit defeat,
or almost. He informed Bethmann on 18 November, “As long as Russia, France, and England hold together, it will be impossible for us to beat our enemies such that we will get
an acceptable peace. We would instead run the danger of slowly exhausting ourselves.”89
In short, Germany could not win a purely military victory—the Siegfrieden that constituted real victory for the Imperial German military. Like the elder Moltke in the 1880s,
Falkenhayn thought that only diplomacy could end the war. The military’s job now became twofold, to avoid an Allied breakthrough in the west, which would end in Germany’s outright military defeat, and to provide the conditions in the east whereby Russia
could be driven to a separate peace. “If Russia made peace, France would surely succumb,
too. Then if England did not completely bow to our will, we could beat it [niederzwingen]
by starving it with a naval blockade using our base in Belgium, even if this would take
months.”90 Unlike the younger Moltke, Falkenhayn did not, consequently, think they had
lost the war: “If we do not lose the war [via an Allied breakthrough], we will have won it,”
he used to tell his staff.91 In fact, Falkenhayn proposed a subtler version of the Schlieffen
Plan: victory against one foe (through a combination of military action and diplomacy),
followed by military victory against the others.
Historians generally do not credit Falkenhayn’s conclusion with being truly strategic,
that is, with having an overarching political and economic framework to contain and
guide military operations.92 And it is certainly true that Falkenhayn had no realistic idea
of how England could be “forced,” or even why France should sue for peace, as long as England remained stalwart. Still, Falkenhayn’s admission that Germany could not win a
purely military victory was extraordinary. It caused him to adopt unusually moderate war
aims and limited military goals. Throughout 1915 Falkenhayn directed the eastern cam89. Bethmann reported Falkenhayn’s letter in Bethmann to Arthur Zimmermann, 19 Nov. 1914, cited in Afﬂerbach, Falkenhayn, 204.
90. Ibid.
91. Ibid., 198.
92. Deist, “Strategy and Unlimited Warfare,” 274; Janssen, Der Kanzler, 85; Kielmansegg, Germany, 72–73.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
216 paign explicitly not to annihilate the Russian forces through a grand encirclement, as the
commanders in the east, Hindenburg and Ludendorff, strove to do but instead to achieve
a defeat just large enough to encourage Russia to negotiate a separate peace.93 And he gave
up the principle of risking all, which had been the heart of German military practice and
doctrine for decades. In preparing for the battle of Verdun, Falkenhayn told all the army
commanders and their chiefs of staff that Germany could not afford to risk everything in
a single attack for fear of so weakening the rest of the (western) front that Britain and
France could break through and defeat Germany. “For this reason,” he told them, “we
must consciously abandon the principle of concentrating everything for the great attack.”94
But Falkenhayn remained almost alone in his logical conclusions from the failure of
the Schlieffen Plan. His student, Crown Prince Wilhelm, who commanded the 5th Army
and afterward the Army Group Crown Prince Wilhelm opposite Verdun, supported
Falkenhayn’s strategic insight, though he arrived at it slightly later and shrank from publicizing his views.95 Gen. Max Hoffmann, chief of staff at Ober-Ost, was another.96 But Germany’s other senior commanders rejected Falkenhayn for his apostasy regarding a
Siegfrieden and a single victory of annihilation.97 Crown Prince Rupprecht, one of the
most moderate and politically well-informed generals, was nonetheless typical. He
learned on 12 November 1914 about Falkenhayn’s assessment of the Marne, yet that did
not move Rupprecht to draw any larger conclusions about Germany’s ability to win the
war. A year and a half later, Rupprecht summed up his dissatisfaction: “What bothers me
the most,” he conﬁded to his diary, “is that General Falkenhayn apparently thinks a decisive victory is no longer possible. How is the war supposed to end for us under these circumstances?”98 Col. Fritz von Lossberg, Germany’s genius for defensive battles, said essentially the same thing: “A two-front war requires daring, drastic decisions with the
broad goal of destroying the enemies one after another through strong offensives. But
General von Falkenhayn could never bring himself to adopt this will to destroy, either in
the east or in the west.”99
The memoirs and diaries suggest that the other military leaders shifted blame to the
bearer of bad tidings. They saw personal failure instead of a reasonable response to Germany’s objective position of inferiority. Falkenhayn did not ﬁt the ideal of Prusso-German command. “He is a man of small means, without large goals; he is inclined to make
his measures dependent on those of the enemy, instead of dictating the law.”100 But Ger93. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 295, 298, 305, 307–8.
94. Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 206. Emphasis in original.
95. Kronprinz Wilhelm v. Preussen, Meine Erinnerungen, 116, 152–57. Falkenhayn had been the crown
prince’s ﬁrst military governor.
96. Max Hoffmann was another: Max Hoffmann, Die Aufzeichnungen des Generalmajors Max Hoffmann, 2
vols., ed. Karl-Friedrich Nowak (Berlin, 1929), 1:232. Hugo v. Freytag-Loringhoven, whose deafness kept him
from command positions, praised Falkenhayn for having recognized “the natural limits of the Schlieffen doctrine”; Menschen und Dinge, wie ich sie in meinem Leben sah (Berlin, 1923), 285.
97. On the legions of Falkenhayn’s enemies: Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 211–17; Herwig, First World War, 131–34.
98. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entries of 12 Nov. 1914 and 20 Mar. 1916,
1:250–52 and 430.
99. Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 141–42.
100. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 2 Mar. 1915, 1:306.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
many had only (relatively) small means at its disposal. Germany was forced onto the de- 217
fensive, whose nature is responding to the enemy’s initiatives. Karl von Einem, commander of the 3rd Army, felt relieved when Falkenhayn was dismissed in August 1916: “He
was simply not a ﬁeld marshal, because he never anticipated events—he lacked intuitive
ability.”101
The Marne and, at the latest, Ypres were powerful reality checks to the professional
assumptions of the German military. Except for Moltke, Falkenhayn, and Hoffmann,
however, the upper military leadership ducked the unhappy strategic conclusions and
drew instead more comfortable operative or merely tactical conclusions. That is, they
stayed within the framework of the Schlieffen Plan, which itself was operative, not strategic. They concluded that the plan would have worked except for the personal leadership
failures of Moltke, who watered it down and lost control of his armies, and of the commanders in the ﬁeld, who did not follow the plan in their lust for victory. As Groener said
at the time, “The ‘plan’ of the late [or blessed: seligen] Schlieffen has been temporarily
lost; perhaps we’ll ﬁnd it again.”102 The remedy was therefore more of the Schlieffen Plan
and its premises, not less.103 More risk taking, grander goals, more daring intuitive leadership, more concentration of strength, more uncompromising execution of force—in
short, a higher round in the spiral of violence and destruction. Schlieffen’s principles,
which epitomized modern military thinking, were wonderfully effective operatively; even
Falkenhayn and Hoffmann clung to them for conduct in battle.104 It was difficult for most
other commanders to imagine that these same tenets might spell strategic doom. For the
vast majority of believers, the Marne and Ypres were occasions for positive, not negative,
feedback.

Falkenhayn and the Logic of Extremes
Historians usually use the third Supreme Command under Chief of Staff Hindenburg
and Quartermaster General Ludendorff (29 August 1916–26 October 1918) to illustrate the
“military dictatorship” and the extreme, counterproductive measures that now developed.105 But these were all preﬁgured by Falkenhayn in 1916. Falkenhayn’s odyssey proves
the patterned nature of the developments. Ludendorff ’s willfulness, vehemence, and,
101. Einem, Armeeführer, diary entry of 29 Aug. 1916, 253.
102. Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, diary entry of 13 Sept. 1914, 176.
103. Hindenburg, Aus meinem Leben, 118–19; Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 79 and passim. Even after the war
this was the common lesson military men drew from the Marne: Bernhard von Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2
(1928), 177; Freytag-Loringhoven, Heerführung im Weltkriege, 126–27; Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 6:444–45; Kuhl,
Weltkrieg, 1:510–11.
104. See Falkenhayn’s orders to keep the offensive spirit alive, despite going on the defensive: Reichsarchiv,
Weltkrieg, 6:480, or his conduct of the offensive at Gorlice in 1915, despite its limited goals: Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 297–308; Max Hoffmann, “Gedanken über 1914,” in Aufzeichnungen, 2:228–34, here 233–34.
105. “Dictatorship” is meant ﬁguratively, in that neither Hindenburg nor Ludendorff ever aspired to oneman rule; in fact, both explicitly rejected the suggestion when it was broached. Heinz Hagenlücke, Deutsche
Vaterlandspartei (Düsseldorf, 1997), 278–81; Werner Jochmann, “Die Ausbreitung des Antisemitismus,” in
Deutsches Judentum in Krieg und Revolution 1916–1923, ed. Werner E. Mosse (Tübingen, 1971), 430–31; Kuno von
Westarp, Konservative Politik im letzten Jahrzehnt des Kaiserreiches, 2 vols. (Berlin, 1935), 2:469.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
218 toward the end, frank irrationality can make it seem that his personality shaped events
more than was true. But Falkenhayn was nothing like Ludendorff. Falkenhayn served only
two short stints in the General Staff, thus missing the typical Schlieffen saturation.106 Instead, he combined a colonial career, as military inspector in Qing-Dao (including ﬁghting during the Boxer Uprising), with regular commands. He rose to brigade commander
and chief of the General Staff of the 4th Army before becoming Prussian war minister in
1913. He spoke several languages, thrived in the international atmosphere of Peking, and
was interested in foreign affairs. Falkenhayn’s relative cosmopolitanism may have helped
him recognize the signiﬁcance of Germany’s defeats in autumn 1914, but it did not free
him from military culture. No professional can forge such a successful career independent of organizational knowledge. Falkenhayn was clearly very good at playing the game;
he did not need Schlieffen—who only systematized certain aspects of Germany’s military
culture but did not create it—to tell him how to think like a professional.
Since November 1914, when he had recognized that Germany could not win a purely
military victory, Falkenhayn had pursued a strategy of dogged defense in the west and
limited offense in the east, designed to bring Russia to a separate peace. However, Germany’s civil-military split meant that the chief of staff and the chancellor did not coordinate their policies. Indeed, Bethmann arrived at Falkenhayn’s realistically dour conclusion only in late 1916. Until then Bethmann undermined peace feelers in hopes that
Germany would win greater battleﬁeld victories.107 In any case, Russia refused Germany’s
(weak) signals for negotiation in August 1915 and brought Falkenhayn up short. Throughout the war, the Allies’ uncompromising stance conﬁrmed the all-or-nothing assumptions of German military culture. For months Falkenhayn had fought the lonely ﬁght of
moderation against the outright opposition of every army commander, of the twin heroes
of Ober-Ost, and the foot-dragging of the chancellor. But it became too difficult to sustain a differentiated view. Falkenhayn now lost grip on his strategic insight and slipped
back into the all-or-nothing school of thought. On 29 November 1915 he informed the
chancellor that Germany did not have the choice between a compromise peace and a
purely military victory:
The view is false that Germany can choose between concluding peace soon by
documenting its acceptance of conditions acceptable to the enemy or, instead,
pursuing the war until the enemy’s will to win and therefore to stand fast is broken, at the risk that Germany must ﬁght to the last man and the last penny. In reality we only have the latter choice; we are forced to go down that path to a good
or bitter conclusion, whether we want to or not. . . . This is no longer a war of the
sort we knew earlier; this war has become for all participants literally a battle for
existence.108
106. My account follows Afflerbach, Falkenhayn.
107. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 265; Deist, “Strategy and Unlimited Warfare,” 273.
108. Falkenhayn to Bethmann Hollweg, 29 Nov. 1915, in Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 352.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Falkenhayn’s conversion was probably eased by the large battleﬁeld victories against the 219
Russians in the summer of 1915. These may have slightly buoyed him,109 but it was Russia’s
intransigence that forced him to confront again the situation of July 1914: envelopment,
material inferiority, and only the military way out. If we take his words seriously, then
Falkenhayn accepted the possibility of Germany’s self-destruction, the “bitter conclusion”
that meant ruin to “the last man and the last penny.” (In fact, the middle way, a status quo
ante peace, was never attempted—Bethmann had not offered it to the Russians in 1915,
nor did he or his successors do so later.) So Falkenhayn faced the classical Wilhelminian
all-or-nothing dilemma (“world power or defeat” [Weltmacht oder Niedergang], “the necessity of the impossible” [die Erforderlichkeit des Unmöglichen]), only this time without a
Schlieffen Plan.110
Beginning in mid-1915, and until his dismissal on 28 August 1916, Falkenhayn attempted to solve the dilemma in four ways. The ﬁrst addressed Germany’s most pressing
problem: the shortage of manpower in the army and in industry. He began (June 1915) in
Germany by trying to squeeze every able-bodied man into the army—by extending the
draft to ﬁfty year olds and reexamining the physically unﬁt—and by militarizing industry.
That is, workers would be drafted but would continue factory work under military discipline and with the state controlling wages, hours, and beneﬁts. The leader of heavy industry Gustav Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach had helped the economic neophyte draft this
proposal, which the chancellor, the Prussian war minister, and the interior secretary all
rejected as impossibly anti-union, anti-economic, and politically suicidal.111 Falkenhayn
dropped the idea for Germany, but shifted his attention to the occupied zones. In August
1915, he proposed drafting a Polish army to ﬁght in the west. Bethmann pointed out that
using force for this purpose contravened international law and that an appeal for volunteers was unlikely to be fruitful. So Falkenhayn let this idea drop, too.112 But there were
other ways to gain soldiers. In order to release German workers for the front, the war
minister in March 1916 proposed forcibly deporting four hundred thousand Belgian
workers to German factories. This time it was the governor-general of Belgium, Gen.
Moritz von Bissing, supported by the chancellor and interior secretary, who quashed the
idea, citing foreign opinion, international law, and the economic fact that forced labor
was never as efficient as volunteer labor.113
Falkenhayn’s second proposal to overcome comparative material weakness was to
radically revise the state sovereignty and economic borders of the Central Powers (Germany, Austria, Bulgaria, and Turkey), lumping them into an allegedly more efficient,
109. Ibid., 357.
110. These contemporary phrases (from Gen. v. Bernhardi and Kurt Riezler, Bethmann’s private secretary)
have become emblematic for the Kaiserreich’s self-imposed predicament. Riezler, Die Erforderlichkeit des Unmöglichen (Munich, 1913); Fritz Fischer, Weltmacht oder Niedergang (Frankfurt, 1965), 38.
111. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 317–320.
112. Ibid., 315.
113. Bissing to Bethmann Hollweg, Nr. CC. IV. A. 2804 Chef. Nr., Brussels, 12 Apr. 1916, UA 3:1, 333–34; Herbert Hoover, An American Epic, vol. 1: Introduction: The Relief of Belgium and Northern France, 1914–1930 (Chicago, 1959), 41.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
220 semipermanent middle European union. This fantasy, which quickly died, would not
merit mention except as further proof of the enthusiasm for provoking foreign revolution
evident in German military and political thinking. It was of a piece with the Ottoman call
for jihad against the West under German auspices, and with Germany’s attempts to underwrite revolution in the British and Russian empires.114
Falkenhayn’s third solution was, by contrast, quite real, if not realistic, for it was a
military plan that civilian opposition could not stop. It was the attack on Verdun.
Verdun brilliantly shows how pragmatic calculation undertaken in an impossible situation can spiral into unreality and, in this case, great loss of life. For Falkenhayn did not
believe that Germany was suddenly capable of a classic battle of annihilation, nor was he
entirely optimistic about victory—he promised the Kaiser only a “high probability” of
success, a quite subdued claim, given the hyperpositive language characteristic of senior
commanders.115 Verdun was supposed to achieve a favorable peace by the fall of 1916,
since Falkenhayn did not believe Germany, and especially its ally, Austria, could hold out
much longer. He factored in Germany’s relative weakness and focused the attack at the
demographically weaker foe, France, hoping that France’s resolve would falter if it lost
more soldiers than Germany. The stalemated war of attrition would thus be speeded up
and concentrated on the weakest Allied link. Falkenhayn was also careful not to commit
all troops to the attack but to save reserves in case Britain rushed to France’s aid. The Verdun plan combined activism with a grisly numerical calculation aiming at tremendous
numbers of dead. Although France was supposed to “bleed” more, Falkenhayn clearly accepted an immense German death rate. This cold, self-wasting calculation is all the more
remarkable for resting ultimately on a psychological gamble, that French morale would
crumble (before Germany’s).
But one could not calculate away Germany’s inferiority in even a shorter war of attrition. Prudently saving reserves forced Falkenhayn to limit the attack to the eastern hills
around Verdun, leaving the western positions to France, from which it rained down murderous artillery ﬁre on the attacking German troops below. France and Germany lost almost equal numbers of men, negating the original idea. This self-contradiction was visible in the planning; it caused Crown Prince Rupprecht to surmise “that General von
Falkenhayn is not clear about what he really wants, and that he is waiting for luck to bring
a positive result.”116
The conceptual fragility of the Verdun campaign is also clear in the confusion among
many high-ranking officers about whether Falkenhayn intended a “victory,” that is, to
take the fort (he did not), or simply to use the attack to lure as many French defenders to
their deaths as possible.117 Either Falkenhayn did not dare disappoint the conventional expectations of his officers, or he tightly restricted information. But even Falkenhayn wa114. Egmont Zechlin, “Friedensbestrebungen und Revolutionierungsversuche im Ersten Weltkrieg,” Aus
Politik und Zeitgeschichte, Beilage to Das Parlament, B20/1961, B24/1961, B25/1951, B20/1963, B22/1963.
115. Janssen, Der Kanzler, 184.
116. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 12 Feb. 1916, 1:427.
117. For different interpretations: Groener, Lebenserinnerungen, 320; Hoffmann, Aufzeichnungen, 136–37;
Thaer, Generalstabsdienst, 91, 96; Janssen, Der Kanzler, 182.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
vered when the fall of Fort Douaumont raised hopes that Germany might after all be able 221
to take the entire Verdun complex. He seemed then to press ahead. And even after it was
clear that the casualty calculation was entirely wrong, he refused to break off the battle.
There are three recurrent patterns here: a lack of clarity in the original goal (which resulted from the large cleft between reach and grasp); the tendency to follow “victory,”
even if it ran counter to the original plan or ran in an anti-strategic direction (in this case,
used up more precious manpower without the probability of ending the war); and the inability to acknowledge defeat.
Far from acknowledging defeat, Falkenhayn began swerving in the opposite direction.
He started by self-delusion. He convinced himself that the ratio of French to German
dead was far, far higher than it was—he estimated 9:1 and then trimmed it to 3:1 or 5:2
(when it was in fact close to 1:1).118 If this error originated in “wishful thinking and lack of
information,” it ended in lies.119 To keep up the ﬁction of success, Falkenhayn shaved
thirty to forty thousand off the number of German dead in a report to the chancellor in
May 1916.120 In May and June 1916, despite the fact that Verdun had not succeeded,
Falkenhayn suddenly began proclaiming a Siegfrieden by fall. He expanded what had
been rather moderate war aims to include demands for parts of the Verdun fort complex
and the important ore basin, Longwy-Briey, in the Côte Lorraine. His illusions went so far
that he (and Ober-Ost) interpreted the major Russian troop buildup of spring 1916 as a
positive sign of a last-gasp Russian offensive that would give Germany victory in the east,
too. In fact, the Brussilov offensive (4 June) almost knocked Austria out of the war, and it
was timed to coincide with the enormous British attack on the Somme (1 July), which
shook the German army like no other single event. Five days later, Falkenhayn admitted
to the Kaiser that his optimism was unfounded.121 On 19 July Falkenhayn summed up the
military situation as “bad, critical, mushy as a plum.”122
Falkenhayn was not an irrational man. After he left the post of General Staff chief, he
became a highly successful battleﬁeld commander. It is therefore all the more striking
how quickly and how far wishful thinking led him to self-delusion, to lying, and to the inability to recognize or respond to reality. The misinterpretation of the Brussilov offensive
is particularly striking because it is another instance where a stark occasion for critical
learning became transformed into the opposite, a tendentious conﬁrmation of wishful
thinking. But to Falkenhayn’s credit, when the cataclysm of the Somme broke, he recognized and admitted it. Ludendorff did not do the same two years later.
Falkenhayn responded to the pressures of summer 1916 in another characteristic
way—he immersed himself in detail. He ﬁddled with battalion-sized units in the east and
west, as if details could save the larger catastrophe.123 And when he ﬁnally did agree that
Verdun could not be pursued further, instead of breaking off the battle cleanly and shift118. The ratio was 1.1:1. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 371, 506.
119. Ibid., 371.
120. Ibid., 407–8.
121. Ibid., 408–20; Janssen, Der Kanzler, 201–4.
122. Janssen, Der Kanzler, 297.
123. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 437.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
222 ing as many troops as possible to the defense of the Somme, he wound down the attack
gradually and even renewed the attack in August to try to fool the Allies into thinking
Germany was strong enough to continue.124 Falkenhayn thus continued in the military
sphere the politics of bluff that had characterized prewar Wilhelminian foreign policy.
Finally, the fourth way in which Falkenhayn tackled the insoluble dilemma of providing military victory against a coalition of much stronger foes was through wonder
weapons. The battleship ﬂeet had been the wonder weapon of prewar Wilhelminian policy, insofar as it had promised using technical innovation and daring virtuosity to overcome Britain’s naval numbers and traditional expertise and gain for Germany world
power status. It is therefore not surprising that wonder-thinking during the war should
have largely focused on the navy, particularly on the submarine. Admiral v. Tirpitz had
from the beginning pressed for submarine warfare, unrestricted by the international-legal
requirements of dealing with merchant ships—prize-warfare. These rules dated from the
presubmarine era and demanded that warships check the freighters’ bills of lading and
then disembark all persons aboard before sinking the vessel. Prize rules were unrealistic
for submarines because they had to surface to fulﬁll them. The slower submarines risked
being rammed, or shot at and sunk by armed freighters. Therefore, naval officers argued
for unrestricted warfare, which could more safely and efficiently sink neutral freighters
bearing food to Britain, but which risked angering neutrals and especially causing the
United States to enter the war on the Allied side.
In 1915 Falkenhayn had joined Bethmann in rejecting the navy’s calls for unrestricted
submarine warfare (USW), because he feared driving neutral states in the Balkans into the
enemy camp. That fear subsided when Bulgaria declared war on Serbia in October 1915.
By September 1915 the navy argued frankly for USW as the last hope and projected that it
would take only six months to “force England to its knees.”125 The treasury secretary, on
the contrary, believed that the British blockade would eventually cause Germany to lose
the war, and Falkenhayn doubted that submarines were capable of beating England. Captain Michaelis’s response (30 September 1915) to their skepticism shows that USW was a
compulsive attempt to stave off recognition of Germany’s limits:
If this [skeptical] view were true, then it would mean we will never be able to
force England to a peace according to our wishes and that sooner or later we must
submit to its conditions. Can we even contemplate such an idea so long as there is
a single war weapon left with which we can harm the enemy? In my view: no.126
Once Falkenhayn felt trapped by the logic of total military victory, he now (December
1915) also grasped at the USW panacea, but he did so cautiously. In place of the military
defeat that he knew Germany could not achieve he again postulated a psychological vic124. Janssen, Der Kanzler, 242; Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 215, 247; Kronprinz Wilhelm v. Preussen, Deutschlands Heldenkampf (Berlin, 1923), 219–20, 223.
125. Tirpitz, Politische Dokumente, 525–26.
126. Captain Michaelis, “The Meaning of Submarine Warfare—A Memo from the Commander of the High
Seas Fleet,” Wilhelmshaven, 30 Sept. 1915, in Tirpitz, Politische Dokumente, 444.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
tory—Britain would behave like a shopkeeper and calculate that the harm Germany was 223
capable of inﬂicting by USW was more than Britain was willing to tolerate.127 This was
Verdun logic, and a reprise of Tirpitz’s original idea behind building the battle ﬂeet.
Falkenhayn now initiated a decision-making process that is unique in appearing to
provide the strategic coordination that Germany otherwise lacked. On 30 December 1915
the General Staff chief and the Prussian war minister met with the head of the Naval Ofﬁce (Tirpitz), the chief of the Admiralty (Grand Admiral Henning von Holtzendorff), and
the deputy chief of the Admiralty (Admiral Reinhard Koch). Falkenhayn posed three
questions: Would USW be so effective that it would outweigh a possible U.S. entry into
the war? Would England sue for peace by the end of 1916? and When could USW realistically and effectively be launched? Holtzendorff answered “yes” to the ﬁrst two questions
and April 1916 to the third. A week later the naval and military leadership agreed to go
ahead as much as possible without civilian involvement, but Falkenhayn, recognizing the
political implications, informed Bethmann. Falkenhayn’s argument was identical to Captain Michaelis’s and to the position he had sketched out earlier to Bethmann about the necessity of pursuing military victory: “We can no longer choose whether or not we want to
use it [USW]. We are simply compelled to do so.”128
Strategic coordination now widened beyond just the military to include Bethmann
and Treasury Secretary Karl Helfferich. The navy, with its ﬂood of statistics, set the terms
of the debate.129 The civilians argued that the navy’s data were in fact uncertain; that even
if Germany could damage England to the extent the navy claimed, it did not guarantee
England would sue for peace; and that U.S. entry was a far more serious problem and
would tip the scales against Germany, whatever happened with Great Britain.130 In the
spring of 1916, as the debate raged and the Kaiser was pulled ﬁrst in one direction and then
another, the decision was ultimately made on the basis of the data. Bethmann discovered
that Tirpitz had inﬂated the number of submarines at Germany’s disposal by counting
those under construction. Tirpitz resigned, and the Kaiser decided for the restricted version of submarine warfare demanded by the United States.
The decision against USW was not a rejection of the logic of military necessity but a
recognition that the risk was greater than the probability of success. Falkenhayn had originally been skeptical of the navy’s numbers; when he added them up in February, he arrived at less tonnage sunk than did the navy.131 But, driven by the logic of his situation, he
overcame his own doubts and let himself by convinced by the “experts.”132 When the decision went against him, he thought the Kaiser and chancellor had shown weakness in
backing down from a calculated risk.133 When one of the opponents of USW at the Foreign Office asked Falkenhayn how he could still support USW, Falkenhayn replied that
127. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 380, 384.
128. Bethmann memo of 7 Jan. 1916, in Janssen, Der Kanzler, 289, emphasis in original.
129. Deist, “Strategy and Unlimited Warfare,” 275–76.
130. Bethmann, memo of 29 Feb. 1916, in Bethmann, Betrachtungen, 2:261–69.
131. Tirpitz, Politische Dokumente, 475–77.
132. Janssen, Der Kanzler, 186, 203–4.
133. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 391.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
224 “in spite of all other deductions he always came up with the decided feeling that England
would give in and America would not intervene.” Falkenhayn’s interlocutor remarked,
“You can’t argue against this [sort of reasoning].”134
In a last attempt to bring Bethmann around, Falkenhayn pulled out all the stops. He
claimed that USW was an integral part of his Verdun strategy and that without USW the
campaign would fail and Germany would lose the resulting war of attrition. In fact,
Falkenhayn had calculated USW into his original Verdun plan, but had never made that
connection clear to other commanders or civilian leaders.135 Bethmann, who had effectively asserted himself against the navy, was now speechless—as a civilian he could not
counter the chief of staff ’s military appraisal of the land war, nor could he answer the argument from direct military necessity. The USW decision might yet have been reversed
but for Admiral Holtzendorff ’s timely admission that USW would only be effective if the
United States did not enter the war. Because Bethmann had previously shown that American entry meant losing the war, the Kaiser shrank from unlimited warfare—for the time
being.136
Falkenhayn’s actions in 1916 preﬁgure almost exactly the patterns of 1917 and 1918. The
difference was that Falkenhayn had been forced (back) into the position of pursuing a
purely military victory by Russia’s unwillingness to negotiate, while Ludendorff and Hindenburg voluntarily embraced this position and refused to consider negotiations until the
very end. Once a military commander found himself in this position, however, the default
mechanisms took him down the path of extremes. The military solution required taking
all-or-nothing risks, which, in the hopelessness of the strategic situation, were reckoned at
the level of operations or, often, of mere tactics. Victory, even merely tactical victory (taking Fort Douaumont), began to be pursued for its own sake, even if it led in antistrategic
directions; or, victory became redeﬁned technically or mechanically as the mere possession of territory or the loss of fewer men than the enemy. One tried to overcome material
and numerical inferiority by applying one’s organizational virtues, which led to the seemingly self-contradictory combination of recklessness with detailed planning. One interpreted negative signs as positive ones, one relied on technical virtuosity and wonder
weapons. One calculated, it is true, but according to wishful thinking; one doctored data
to support one’s wishes, one reckoned on psychology and morale and bluff. And, one
stretched one’s own troops to the limit, or beyond. The willingness to sacriﬁce one’s own
troops undercut whatever limits had existed for treating one’s own civilians, for, after all,
troops were more valuable and were making the greater sacriﬁces. Not surprisingly then,
the enemy’s civilians seemed even more appropriate for exploitation in the name of victory and of military necessity. Because no high officer was well versed in economics, corporate experts provided the details for exploitation. And when none of these steps
worked, one tried them again, with more risk and more force.
With the exception of Verdun, which certainly qualiﬁes as “total combat,” Falken134. Janssen, Der Kanzler, 198, and Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 392.
135. Herwig, First World War, 186, but cf. Kronprinz Wilhelm von Preussen, Erinnerungen des Kronprinzen
Wilhelm, ed. Karl Rosner (Stuttgart, 1922), 157–58.
136. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 398–403.

Waging War, 1914 –1916
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
hayn’s plans did not reach the extremes to which they tended. They were checked by 225
braking mechanisms that still operated among the civilian administrators and among
those military administrators, such as the governors-general of occupied areas, whose
jobs brought with them a civilian-like larger and longer-term viewpoint. These administrators factored in the larger world of international and domestic law, economics, domestic politics, neutral opinion, and even Allied opinion. But after August 1916, when Ludendorff and Hindenburg replaced Falkenhayn, these braking mechanisms worked less and
less well, and the spiral that had commenced at the very beginning of the war spun out of
control.

10 1
Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity

T

he military’s treatment of civilians, which contains many parallels to colonial conﬂict, shows how far the spiral of force, driven and justiﬁed by “military necessity,”
actually went in the “nontotal” First World War.

Foundations of Policy toward Enemy Civilians
Germany entered the war with a newly updated manual (1914) for the rear areas, the
Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung, or KEO.1 Because German military planners imagined that the
coming war would be brief, the manual did not prepare its readers for a long occupation
but for a short war of movement.2 Nowhere did it give general guidelines for treating civilians, nor did it discuss the international law of occupation. Nevertheless, the KEO laid
down four fundamental principles that one can discern in subsequent practice. First,
“The preparedness of the ﬁeld army comes unconditionally before the welfare of the rear
zone.”3 Second, civilians were liable to collective punishment for sabotage in their district
and to being held hostage to protect trains and villages from sabotage or enemy attack—
in short, civilians did not automatically enjoy the protections afforded them by the Hague
Convention on Land Warfare, which prohibited these practices.4 Third, the rear zones,
1. Prussia, War Ministry, Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung (KEO). The principles of the KEO applied to both the
occupied zones and the front areas under the Feldintendantur. For the latter, see Germany, General Staff,
Heeresverpﬂegung (Berlin, 1913), 279–311.
2. Freytag-Loringhoven, Menschen und Dinge, 136.
3. KEO, p. 52 (para. 103); Germany, General Staff, Heeresverpﬂegung, 290.
4. KEO, p. 68 (para. 137), p. 69 (para. 141). Cf. “The Hague Convention of 1907 Respecting the Laws and
Customs of War on Land,” para. 49, 50, and 52, in James Brown Scott, ed., The Hague Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York, 1915), 124–25, and commentaries by Meurer, Die Haager Friedenskonferenz

226

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
“especially in enemy territory,” were expected to furnish “stores of provisions, all kinds of 227
instruments, vehicles, [and] factory and construction materials.” Rear echelon officers
were to “use systematically the available factories, bakeries, butcher shops, mills, distilleries and breweries, refrigeration facilities, and threshing machines.” Above all, they were to
do so “beyond the current needs of the army,” “foreseeing coming requirements and considering every possibility.”5 Finally, underscoring the desire to go beyond mere duty, the
manual urged subordinates to behave independently. Corps, divisions, and the rear echelon inspectorate should communicate with each other directly; the army command was to
intervene only if problems surfaced.6 Like the ﬁeld army, the rear was supposed to run according to “mission tactics” (Auftragstaktik) and the staff system.7
The bulk of the KEO was simply military-bureaucratic: it set up the administrative hierarchy and outlined how to keep track of supplies in a uniform way. The local commandants were enjoined to feed the poor and to respond quickly and fairly to civilian complaints.8 The manual made clear that if the rear happened to be in Germany, the same
principles would generally apply.9 The problem lay in the dynamic assumptions incorporated in the KEO: the imperative predominance of the ﬁghting army, the lack of absolute
legal boundaries protecting the civilian population, the lack of limits to material exploitation, and the expectation that each local commander would go beyond what was necessary. In the absence of occupation policy coordinated from above, these assumptions
ﬁlled the void. And there was no overall occupation policy, any more than there were uniform occupation institutions. Policy and institutions emerged gradually out of practices,
supplemented by belated, sporadic interventions from the Reich Interior Office, the Foreign Office, the Chancellor’s Office, various Prussian ministries, and even the Reichstag.
Once again, the polycratic nature of Wilhelminian government created the vacuum
within which military-cultural practices became policy.
There were four institutional forms of German occupation: the military governorships of Belgium and Poland; the rest of the east (especially the Baltic region) united
under the eastern Supreme Command (Ober-Ost); the areas designated as the rear echelon in occupied France, Luxemburg, and westernmost Belgium (administered individually by the rear echelon administrators [Etappeninspektionen] of each of the seven armies
manning the front lines); and the ﬁeld administrations (Feldintendanturen) of the various
armies directly on the front. The Feldintendantur position was established as a result of
the lessons of 1866 and 1870. Headed by an Armeeintendant at the army level, it had special
officers down to the division level. Its job was to supervise the collection and distribution
of food and money for the ﬁghting troops at and just behind the front.10 The high com-

2:244–45, 289; Westlake, International Law, part 2: War, 102, 269; and the dissenting opinion of Lueder, “Das
Landkriegsrecht im Besonderen,” in Handbuch des Völkerrechts, ed. Holtzendorff, 4:475–76, 504–5.
5. KEO, pp. 57–58 (para. 114), 52–53 (para. 104); General Staff, Heeresverpﬂegung, 286–90.
6. KEO, p. 16 (para. 18, 19); Germany, General Staff, Heeresverpﬂegung, 285–86, 288.
7. KEO, p. 10 (para. 4), pp. 23–24 (para. 34).
8. Anlage 7: “Anweisung für den Etappen-Kommandanturen,” KEO, 93–98.
9. KEO, p. 65 (para. 130); Germany, General Staff, Heeresverpﬂegung, 290.
10. Germany, General Staff, Heeresverpﬂegung, 287–89, 324.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
228 mand (Armeeoberkommando) decided where the area of operations (front) ended and the
rear (Etappe) began.
No central office coordinated or guided these institutions. Yet the form and extent of
exploitation was remarkably similar in each, because the three main parameters determining occupation policy were the same everywhere: the military deﬁnition of the task
(establishing its understanding of order and authority, and the “military necessity” involved in serving the goal of military victory); the instruments at its disposal (bureaucratic administration and force); and the problem of overcoming Germany’s inferiority in
materials, food, and manpower. When the military set about solving these problems it
came up with broadly the same techniques wherever it was.
The military met surprisingly little resistance from German civilian government.
There was apparently widespread agreement among civilians about the assumptions contained in the KEO, or as Maj. Albrecht von Thaer, chief of staff of the 9th Reserve Corps
in northern France summed them up for his wife in early 1915, “Egoism for our troops is
simply a duty.”11 Ludwig Köhler, the chief administrator for commerce and trade in occupied Belgium, wrote after the war that “naturally, the economic life of the occupied
zone had to be made to serve German prosecution of the war to a much higher degree
than was true for the homeland.”12 At the very beginning of September 1914 the Prussian
ﬁnance minister was already stressing the bottom line: “It’s better that the Belgians starve
than that we do,” he wrote to the chancellor. Bethmann tried to rein him in, arguing that
Germany had “naturally assumed the duty of satisfying the most pressing needs of the
population,” but only, he added, “as far as this can be reconciled with our own needs.”13
Indeed, the ﬁrst instance of force used against enemy civilians for war purposes was
orchestrated by the Reich Office of the Interior to apply to draft-age, male Russian-Polish
agricultural workers in the German eastern provinces.14 In the two years before the war,
civilian planners had decided to follow recommendations from agrarian circles to ensure
the foreign labor on which German agriculture depended. On 3 August 1914 the Interior
Ministry of Mecklenburg-Schwerin ordered that foreign workers were to be disarmed,
guarded by armed (if necessary, civilian) personnel, and kept away from alcohol and
towns, and were to be arrested if they tried to leave their workplace. This typical order was
conﬁrmed and made uniform for other provinces by the Prussian war minister and the
chancellor in separate regulations in subsequent days.15 Although government leaders
11. Thaer to his wife, 6 Feb. 1915, in Thaer, Generalstabsdienst, 25.
12. Ludwig Köhler, Die Staatsverwaltung der besetzten Gebiete, vol.: Belgien (New Haven, 1927), 119.
13. Cited in Frank Wende, Die belgische Frage in der deutschen Politik des Ersten Weltkrieges (Hamburg,
1969), 24n42.
14. On forced laborers in Germany during the First World War: Ulrich Herbert, Geschichte der Ausländerbeschäftigung in Deutschland 1880 bis 1980 (Berlin, 1986), 82–113; Lothar Elsner, “Ausländerbeschäftigung und
Zwangsarbeitspolitik in Deutschland während des Ersten Weltkrieges,” in Auswanderer-Wanderarbeiter-Gastarbeiter, ed. Klaus J. Bade (Ostﬁldern, 1984), 527–57; Elsner, “Der Übergang zur Zwangsarbeit für ausländische Arbeiter in der deutschen Landwirtschaft zu Beginn des 1. Weltkriegs,” Wissenschaftliche Zeitschift der WilhelmPieck-Universität Rostock, Gesellschafts- und Sprachwissenschaftliche Reihe 26:3 (1977), 291–98; Friedrich Zunkel,
“Die ausländischen Arbeiter in der deutschen Kriegswirtschaftspolitik des 1. Weltkriegs,” in Entstehung und
Wandel der modernen Gesellschaft, ed. Gerhard A. Ritter (Berlin, 1970), 280–311.
15. Elsner, “Übergang,” 295.

Areas occupied by Germany during World War I (shaded).

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
230 were clearly embarrassed by the orders to detain foreign laborers illegally, they did so and
thus had clearly adopted the principle that military necessity trumped law even before the
war began.16

Belgium
During the war, Entente propaganda painted Belgium as the chief victim of German
occupation policies. Hugh Gibson, the American legation head in Brussels, said that Gen.
Moritz von Bissing (the governor-general of Belgium from November 1914 to April 1917)
“was the only German general who could strut sitting down.”17 But, for all Bissing’s soldierly rigor, his administration, like that of his counterpart, Gen. Hans von Beseler in
Poland, reﬂected a longer-term perspective and more economic realism than the other,
more strictly military, types of occupation. Although neither Bissing nor Beseler ever received any instructions about the future of the territories they were governing, both aimed
at either annexation or very close ties of dependency.18 For Bissing this meant reviving industry, sparing as much of the infrastructure as possible, and creating the conditions for
the acceptance of Belgium’s future status, both externally among the Allies and internally
among the population.19 This latter consideration sensitized him to international law,
which emerged as a major Allied concern.
Bissing’s job was made easier by the Committee for the Relief of Belgium (CRB).20
Both Belgium and Germany had been heavy importers of food before the war. General v.
Moltke’s scheme to deport Belgian workers and the harsh statement from the Prussian Finance Ministry cited previously reﬂected the view of military and civilian leaders that
Germany was unable to share its scarce resources with occupied areas, and in fact would
not do so. The CRB was founded by private persons from neutral states (chieﬂy Spain and
the United States), led by Herbert Hoover, and funded by Belgium, France, Britain, and
later mostly by the United States. As of mid-October 1914 the CRB covered two-thirds of
Belgium’s civilian food needs, with their own harvests covering the remainder. The food
was imported through neutral nations and distributed by a vast network of CRB employees—all on the condition that no food fall into German hands. The existence of this statewithin-a-state was a major infringement on German authority, but one that Germany
gladly accepted, rather than deplete its own resources.21 Without the CRB, Belgians probably would have faced mass starvation.22
Even with CRB aid, Belgium faced stringent military administration, far-reaching
economic exploitation, forced labor, and deportation. We will never know how Britain
16. Zunkel, “Ausländischen Arbeiter,” 287n27.
17. Herbert Hoover, American Epic (Chicago, 1959), 51.
18. Wild, Briefe, 121; Ernst von Wrisberg, Heer und Heimat, 1914–1918 (Leipzig, 1921), 131.
19. Köhler, Staatsverwaltung, 104.
20. CRB: see George H. Nash, The Life of Herbert Hoover, 4 vols. (New York, 1988), vols. 2 and 3.
21. On the CRB see Hoover, American Epic; Köhler, Staatsverwaltung, 70–80; and Helen McPhail, The Long
Silence (New York, 2000), 63–74.
22. As it was, the CRB barely covered subsistence needs and often fell below: Bissing to Hindenburg (no
date given, but must be 24 Sept. 1916), in UA 3:1, 347.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
and France might have conducted an occupation—they did not face the problem save for 231
a tiny sliver of Alsace. And they had access to greater resources, thus removing one main
temptation to full-scale exploitation. Presumably, they would have been equally interested in establishing clear authority and would have luxuriated in the bureaucracy and
economic waste typical of military government.23 But at least three factors seem to have
made the German occupation harsher than contemporaries had expected. The ﬁrst was
Germany’s chronic shortage of matériel and labor power. These were the civilian counterparts of the military disadvantages the Schlieffen Plan was designed to overcome, and military administrators applied equivalent techniques to solve them. The manpower shortage also meant that Germany’s occupation forces were spread too thin. As in the colonies,
where the same was true, terror and exemplary punishments replaced dense administration. The pattern began during the “Belgian atrocities,” as we have seen, but it continued.
Gen. August Keim (military governor of Limburg Province, a Pan-German, and former
head of the Army League) was accused of liberal use of the death penalty, which he defended by reference to widespread spying.24 Huge punitive ﬁnes were routinely levied
against communities, and the military courts punished all sorts of offenses, many of them
trivial. A German Social Democratic critic alleged that between October 1915 and September 1916, 103,902 people were judged guilty of war treason (Kriegsverrat) in Belgium.25 The
delict “war treason” held enemy civilians to the same standards of (relatively enthusiastic)
behavior expected of Germans in wartime. And this brings us to the second and third factors: the military held a much more elaborate and rigid conception of order than civilians
were used to, and Germans appeared to have been much more used to deferential behavior toward superiors than were the Belgians and French. The clash of cultures caused
widespread misunderstanding, and the chasm between higher standards and too few policemen produced great anxiety among the Germans about their authority—an anxiety
that encouraged more harshness.26
Economic exploitation reached proportions that no one would have predicted, although the dynamic was present from the beginning. In August 1914 the Foreign Office
fought the General Staff over how much money Belgium could legally (according to the
Hague Convention on Land Warfare) be expected to pay. Moltke said Belgium must “militarily, economically, and ﬁnancially be so exploited that it largely covers the needs of our
army concerning provisioning and certain items of war matériel and substitutes,” meaning the ﬁghting army, not the army of occupation.27 The Foreign Office read international
law—correctly—to mean that an occupier could demand payment only to cover occupation costs, not the costs of ﬁghting the war. On 29 August 1914 the Kaiser ordered that the
Supreme Command should determine the level of “contributions,” which it did largely
23. David Mitrany, The Effect of the War on Southeastern Europe, Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace (New Haven, 1936), 83–84, 138–39, 146–52, 163–65.
24. Coetzee, German Army League, 110.
25. Ernst, Der grosse Krieg, 118.
26. Wild to wife, 3 Dec. 1914, Mézières, Briefe, 45, and the citation from General Wandel’s diary of 23 Feb.
1915, ibid., 45n1.
27. Brigitte Hatke, Hugo Stinnes und die drei deutsch-belgischen Gesellschaften von 1916 (Stuttgart, 1990), 48.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
232

Belgians read an official notice in Brussels. Der Weltkrieg, illustrierte Kriegs-Chronik des Daheim
(Bielefeld: Velhagen & Klasing, 1915–), vol. 1, 235.

without regard either to law or the needs of the population.28 Both “contributions” and
requisitions gutted the economy, reducing Belgium’s population to extreme poverty.
Bissing countered the antieconomic pressure from the Supreme Command by trying
to jump-start Belgian industry, which had been made lame by extensive requisitions. But
he failed, because neither German heavy industry nor the raw materials “centrals” [Zentrale] in Berlin (which oversaw the collection and distribution of essential raw materials
for the war effort) wanted Belgium to recover. Heavy industry pursued its own interest,
which was to take over Belgian competitors, for instance, by forced expropriation of nonBelgian-owned or-managed ﬁrms, or to ruin those it could not take over.29 The third
Supreme Command ﬁnished the job in February 1917 by closing all “nonessential” factories, a step it had tried, but failed to achieve, in Germany. One way or another, by war’s
end, of 260,000 businesses in Belgium, only 3,013 had survived.30 By December 1917, 106
iron and steel factories had been dismantled and shipped to Germany, along with the entire interurban and streetcar systems.31 Requisition and expropriation reached deep into
the Belgian infrastructure. Mass Belgian unemployment then suggested one solution to
28. Wende, Die belgische Frage, 22–23.
29. Gerald Feldman, Hugo Stinnes (Munich, 1998), 374–511.
30. Hatke, Hugo Stinnes, 53–62; Gatzke, Germany’s Drive, 87–92, 155.
31. Köhler, Staatsverwaltung, 130–32.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
the German manpower problem. The resulting experiment created a scandal even larger 233
than the “Belgian atrocities”—the Belgian deportations.

The Deportations of Belgian Workers
The forcible mass movement of populations has two forms: getting rid of the unwanted (criminals, putatively disloyal elements, or “useless mouths”) and importing the
needed (laborers). Wartime Germany engaged in both sorts. Deportation was a new departure, for Germany had only a slender previous history of such actions—once in 1886,
when Bismarck forced thirty thousand Poles and Polish Jews from Posen into Congress
Poland, and again in the colonies, as in the Witboi deportation to Togo.32 And yet deportation was already an option for Moltke on 23 August 1914. Where did the idea come from?
Colonial rhetoric seems to have been the largest source for Germany, at least. Originally, liberals in the mid-nineteenth century debated deportation as a solution to social
problems by removing criminals, the poor, and socialist revolutionaries. Those schemes
never materialized. The broad stream of public and governmental opinion rejected deportation before 1914. But the idea lived on among social Darwinists, theorists of racial
degeneration, and above all, supporters of the Pan-Germans and the right wing of the
German Colonial Society.33 Writing pseudonymously in 1912, Heinrich Class, the PanGerman leader, recommended evacuating French and Russian territory for German colonization in the event of a successful war. He coyly nodded to the moral disapproval he
knew would greet his suggestion, saying forced evacuation was “only a tool to be used in
the extreme case,” but he immediately hastened to outline that case: a “defensive” war in
which Germany was forced to attack its enemies, followed, in the interests of “ultimate security” against France and “a better border and also land for colonization” in Russia, by
“evacuation” of the native inhabitants.34 It is unclear whether Class’s book inspired the
naval officers whom the publicist Ernst Jäckh overheard in 1913 discussing “evacuation,”
“expropriation,” and German colonization.35 Class repeated his ideas openly after 28 August 1914 as war aims.36 The ethnic cleansing variety of deportation is more clearly linked
to civilian, rather than to military, circles, however. Already by early December 1914
Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg favored ethnic cleansing and German colonization of a
strip of Poland bordering Prussia, and he appears to have arrived at this idea himself. He
appointed Pan-German and procolonial members of the Prussian government to hone
the details. Prussian high officialdom was divided about evacuation, and even most of the
32. Hans-Ulrich Wehler, “Polenpolitik im Deutschen Kaiserreich,” in Wehler, Krisenherde des Kaiserreichs
1871–1918, 2nd ed. (Göttingen, 1979), 184–202.
33. Johannes H. Voigt, “Die Deportation,” in Ausweisung und Deportation, ed. Andreas Gestrich (Stuttgart,
1995), 83–101.
34. Class, ‘Wenn ich der Kaiser wär’ (Leipzig, 1912), 140–42, 152 (France); 170 (Russia).
35. Ernst Jäckh to Friedrich Naumann, Norway, Aug. 1913, in Jäckh’s Der goldene Pﬂug (Stuttgart, 1954), 291,
cited by Imanuel Geiss, Der polnische Grenzstreifen, 1914–1918 (Hamburg, 1960), 42. See also Wernecke, Der Wille
zur Weltgeltung, 302–4.
36. Gatzke, Germany’s Drive, 26–27.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
234 supporters, including the chancellor, rejected force and haste in favor of inducements to
lure the unwanted over the border.37 Ludendorff adopted the idea with his typical vehemence, but the Polish border scheme was the creation of civilians, not the military.38
There were other precedents for deportation. Every newspaper reader knew of the violent ethnic evacuations that had occurred during the Balkan Wars of 1912 and 1913, but
references to these among German officers seem uncommon.39 It is perhaps more surprising that the Russian precedent was so rarely cited in Germany. Unlike Germany, Russia had a long history of internal deportation, for punitive and demographic-colonization purposes. At the outbreak of war in 1914 its army received sweeping wartime powers
very similar to those of the German army, including the explicit power to deport. Obsessed with spies whom they imagined were rife among Russia’s unusually large foreign
population, Russia’s high command began the internal deportation of male enemy aliens
living near the front even before ﬁghting started. Driven by the army, together with conservative and right-wing newspapers, deportation swiftly expanded geographically to
“exclusion zones” such as railways, major roads, defense factories, and the coastline, and
demographically to include women and children aliens, and then Russian subjects of
non–Great Russian nationality. Deportation became popular as an occasion for expropriation of property, especially of land. One million aliens and eight hundred thousand
ethnic Russian subjects may have been deported, the highest number for any country
during the war. Like all deportations under military control in this period, Russia’s were
poorly prepared for the journey and the resettlement.40 Everyone suffered, many died.
The deportation of ethnic Germans (Russian subjects) began on 7 September 1914, on the
initiative of a corps commander, whose action was quickly backed by the local governor
(of Suvalki province) and then by the chief of staff. As with other ethnic groups, the deportation swiftly widened its scope until whole provinces were “empty” of German
speakers.41
Despite the enormous scale of the Russian operations, they seem to have been rarely
discussed in German circles, and even after the war they were not commonly mentioned
as exculpatory (along the tu quoque model). An exception was, again, a civilian, the president of East Prussia, Adolf Batocki, who in December 1914 cited the Russian precedents
“in the last few years” as proof that “with the right preparation” governments could move
37. Geiss, Der polnische Grenzstreifen: Bethmann (71–72); other civilian supporters (49–60); Prussian division (129–32); lack of force (104).
38. Ibid., 128. Col. Thaer (a Silesian) thought he had authored the idea, but, because the plans were top secret, he could not know that the chancellor was already way ahead of him. Like Bethmann, Thaer wanted to
compensate the inhabitants and have them leave voluntarily. Thaer, Generalstabsdienst, 43, 165, 205.
39. Geiss believes 1912–13 was an important precedent in Germany: Imanuel Geiss, “The Civilian Dimension of the War,” in Facing Armageddon, ed. Hugh Cecil and Peter Liddle (London, 1996), 17.
40. Despite some prewar planning for this eventuality: Peter Holquist, “To Count, to Extract, to Exterminate,” in A State of Nations, ed. Terry Martin and Ronald Suny (Oxford, 2001), 111–44, here 121–22; Dittmar
Dahlmann, “Die Deportationen der deutschen Bevölkerungsgruppe in Russland und in der Sowjetunion 1915
und 1941,” in Ausweisung und Deportation, ed. Andreas Gestrich (Stuttgart, 1995), 103–14, here 105.
41. This account is based on the excellent study by Eric Lohr, “Enemy Alien Politics within the Russian Empire during World War I,” Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1999, revised ms. See his article, “The Russian Army
and the Jews,” Russian Review 60:3 (July 2001), 404–19.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
masses of people “without harming them.”42 The phrase “in the last few years” suggests 235
Batocki may not have been thinking of the current wartime deportations.
The modern history of deportation in Germany and Europe is still understudied, but
the current state of research suggests that ideologically motivated deportation ideas had
penetrated further into civilian than into German military circles, and that the Balkan or
Russian precedents were not objects of imitation. Instead, Moltke’s idea and the military
pressure for Belgian deportations were immediate, short-term solutions to speciﬁc problems: fear of resistance and inability to feed Belgian workers before the CRB, and the
manpower shortage in ammunition factories. The knowledge of deportations elsewhere
made it easier to conceive of this tactic, but it appears to have been more a logical extension of the application of force to problems than part of an ideological worldview.
The process by which Germany came to deport tens of thousands of Belgian workers
illustrates well the incremental, short-term nature of decision making, the lack of overt
guiding principles, and the strength of covert assumptions.43 The slide appears to have
begun in early 1915 when some Rhenish industrialists called for Belgian workers to help alleviate the labor shortage.44 In March 1915 the Prussian war minister asked GovernorGeneral Bissing to arrange for volunteer laborers, which he did, but with little success. In
the next year, thanks to German occupation policies, Belgian unemployment grew parallel with the labor shortage in Germany. By March 1916 a different motive moved the military: to free up reserves for the front, the war minister demanded four hundred thousand
forced deportees to replace German factory workers. Bissing refused, citing the unfavorable effect that this clear breach of international law would have on foreign, especially
neutral, public opinion, and the low quality of forced labor.45 Bissing turned to the chancellor, who avoided the principled rejection Bissing sought and temporized, suggesting
that other measures be tried ﬁrst.46 Lacking ﬁrm support from the chancellor, it became
harder, even for a military man responsible only to the Kaiser, to hold out against military
logic. Bissing now began a series of compromises that inadvertently undermined his principled opposition. In May he cut off public works assistance to localities to increase the
number of unemployed. Then, building on his earlier orders (starting in November 1914)
against those refusing to accept work, he shifted jurisdiction over such people from civil
to military courts (15 May 1916) and legalized their deportation to Germany as individual
miscreants. Bissing had thus expanded and militarized the penal model to force individuals to “volunteer,” creating in the process both the mechanism and the excuse for later
forcible mass deportation. For the moment, the 15 May ordinance remained merely a
threat, however.
42. Adolf Tortilowicz v. Batocki-Friebe to Arnold Wahnschaffe, 20 Dec. 1914, cited in Geiss, Der polnische
Grenzstreifen, 76.
43. Still the best account: Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 3:361–72; also, Köhler, Staatsverwaltung, 144–68; and
Belgium, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Report Laid before the Belgian Parliament by the Minister of Foreign Affairs
in Answer to the Reichstag Report on Belgian Deportations, 1916–1917 (Brussels, 1928).
44. Zunkel, “Ausländischen Arbeiter,” 289.
45. Köhler, Verwaltung, 146–51.
46. Bethmann to Bissing, draft, 17 Apr. 1916, and Wahnschaffe’s marginalium on Bissing to Bethmann,
Brussels, 28 Apr. 1916, in UA 3:1, 336, 338; Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 3:361–62.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
236

Meanwhile, the number of volunteers remained low and the pressure increased. In
August 1916 Ludendorff and Hindenburg replaced Falkenhayn and immediately announced plans for the Hindenburg program to triple munitions production by spring
and to increase Germany’s troop levels. Forced labor would do both. Leaders of heavy industries, eager for cheap labor, became active lobbyists for it in September 1916. Carl
Duisburg, head of Bayer Corporation, argued that industry could fulﬁll OHL’s demand
for the “impossible” (Menschenunmögliche) only if all limits, which he labeled “bureaucratism,” were removed. For instance, he suggested that Bissing should lower food rations
to create more “volunteers.”47 Walter Rathenau went further: “The solution to the Belgian
worker problem can only be achieved by ignoring international prestige questions [i.e.,
international law], so that the seven hundred thousand workers in Belgium are made
available to the home market, even if it means American aid [the CRB] will end.”48 The
civilian “experts” thus agreed with OHL that force was the solution and that, as Hindenburg had told Bissing days earlier, “the necessity to use all labor power forces us to these
sorts of measures and all social and international-legal considerations must be absolutely
subordinate.”49
On 4 August, before Ludendorff and Hindenburg had assumed supreme command,
and responding to increasing pressure from the war ministry, Bissing had already taken
the next step, telling the provincial and county administrators to begin deporting individuals under the order of 15 May.50 Nonetheless, in September he held ﬁrm against the third
OHL’s insistent pressure. Bissing cited international law ﬁrst, but apparently sensing that
this argument was no longer strong enough, he listed practical objections: forced deportation would cause mass unrest and labor stoppages in Belgium, American aid would
cease, neutrals would protest, and “since a means to force intransigent workers to work
has not to date been used in a civilized state,” the workers would become useless eaters.51
The day after the 16 September meeting at which industrialists so enthusiastically supported the OHL, Bissing clashed personally with Ludendorff and thereupon offered the
Kaiser his resignation, which Wilhelm rejected. Forced to stay in office, Bissing tried to be
accommodating. When OHL suggested deporting only draft-age men, Bissing considered
it, but demurred after one of his aides informed him that this, too, contravened international law.
The issue was supposed to be concluded at a 28 September conference in Berlin
among the two military governors-general and representatives of the Foreign Office, the
Reich Office of the Interior, the Supreme Command, and the War Ministry. This meeting
formally met the conditions for a “strategic” decision-making session, insofar as military
and civilian offices were present, but it did not function that way. The economic feasibility of deportation was never discussed, only the narrower issue of what circumstances
47. Protocol of the meeting (between leading industrialists and the war minister), 16 Sept. 1916, in UA 3:1,
385, 387.
48. Rathenau to Ludendorff, 16 Sept. 1916, UA 3:1, 383; Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 3:364–65.
49. OHL to the governors-general of Belgium and Warsaw, draft, II Nr. 34 648 op., 13 Sept. 1916, UA 3:1, 339.
50. Köhler, Verwaltung, 150–51; UA 3:1, 422; Zunkel, “Ausländischen Arbeiter,” 298.
51. Bissing to Hindenburg, Ia Nr. 7793, Brussels, 15 Sept. 1916, UA 3:1, 341–44.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
might make deportations legal.52 Bissing’s representatives rejected OHL’s demand to use 237
two hundred thousand forced laborers to build defensive positions (the “Siegfried line”)
behind the front in France. OHL’s spokesman, Quartermaster General von Sauberzweig,
made two arguments for mass deportation and forced labor: military necessity (“It is possible that the entire outcome of the war depends on this”),53 and the duty of the occupying power to uphold “law and order” against idlers. The general government responded
that all was quiet in Belgium. The representative of the War Ministry and the military
men present agreed with Sauberzweig, and surprisingly, the Foreign Office raised no
strong objection. The meeting ended inconclusively, but it led to a legal opinion by the
Foreign Office that the military danger posed by masses of unemployed Belgians permitted deportation under international law.54
With the ground being cut out from under him, Bissing still maintained (4 October)
that forced labor was “against my conscience.”55 Bissing had written to the chancellor, rehearsing the many practical (but not legal) reasons against deportation and forced labor.
While he was awaiting the reply, the general government and representatives of OHL
began outlining the logistics of deportation, just in case. On 7 October 1916 Bethmann followed the Foreign Office’s legalistic reasoning.56 He declared that international law did
not forbid using civilian labor to build fortiﬁcations.57 Deportations to Germany could be
made to seem legal by declaring the (willfully) unemployed a threat to security and using
Bissing’s 15 May order to cover their mass deportation. Their forced labor was then legal
because they were criminals, not simply civilian deportees.58 Bethmann did underscore
that deportees should perform no munitions work.
What seems to have happened is that civilians (in the Reich Office of the Interior, the
Foreign Office, the general government, and the Chancellor’s Office) had followed the
long trend of German judicial thinking that held that military necessity—in this case, potential danger to occupation troops—or even the duty to uphold order in occupied territory superseded international law. International law had been Bissing’s chief argument
against the deportations. He used this argument less and less as September wore on.
Without the shield of international law, both he and the civilian leaders who opposed deportation—and this included the chancellor and the foreign secretary—were exposed to
the unanswerable claim of military necessity to win the war. Years later, Bethmann characterized the Belgian deportations as “a forced measure of military necessity” to the investigating parliamentary committee. “The military branch claimed that they were matters of necessity,” Bethmann explained, “regulations resulting from a forced situation,
52. Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 3:366.
53. Köhler, Verwaltung, 151. Köhler was present at the meeting, but the protocols do not contain this citation: UA 3:1, 349–54.
54. Dr. Kriege’s testimony, UA 3:1, 332, 409.
55. Bissing to Hindenburg, Brussels, 4 Oct. 1916, ibid., 356.
56. Bethmann to Bissing, 7 Oct. 1916, ibid., 366.
57. Bethmann may have been following a decision made earlier in discussions between the Reich Office of
the Interior and General Moltke. Lewald’s testimony, protocol of 28 Sept. 1916 meeting, in ibid., 352.
58. Bissing’s civilian administration chief, v. Sandt, had already argued along these lines: Sandt to Bissing, 5
Sept. 1916, draft, and protocol of conference of 6 Oct. 1916, Brussels, in ibid., 395, 359.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
238 essential for the purpose of carrying out the Hindenburg program, required in order to
carry it out at all. So far as I know, it was not possible to carry out this program even then;
but the argument of inexorable military necessity always confronted me.”59 The chancellor therefore tried only to mitigate the deportations, not to stop them. Deprived of support from the highest political office, Bissing ﬁnally gave in on 11 October.60
A week later (19 October) the decision-making process lurched to its next phase:
preparation. Bissing apparently received the ﬁgure of twenty thousand deportees a week
from industrialists and forwarded that to OHL. Rather than planning for this large number, representatives from the general government of Belgium and the relevant Berlin ofﬁces, meeting in Berlin, agreed on a typically fuzzy and self-contradictory policy. Although the aim was to increase “volunteers,” the method was threatened or actual
punishment. On the one hand, the deportations were justiﬁed as necessary for security
under a penal order (15 May 1916); on the other, “the planned measures were to be
stripped of the appearance of punishment” by calling the camps that housed the deportees “collection areas” rather than “concentration or prison camps.”61 In part, self-contradiction arose from the compromise necessary to paper over disagreements among policy makers. But it indicates, too, an incomplete decision-making process in which the
government apparatus was willing to act according to “military necessity” but was reluctant to accept the consequences of this extremism, and thus was unwilling to think the
process and its ramiﬁcations through to the end. Years later, Bissing’s administrative assistant, Köhler, who was heavily involved in overseeing the deportations, concluded that the
deportations “showed lack of psychological understanding, the absence of a steady leading hand, the incompleteness of decisions, and also the retreat before resistance that one
should have taken into account from the outset.”62
Deportations began a week after this last meeting, on 26 October—two days before the
written guidelines for deportation were issued by the general government and three weeks
before the War Office (Kriegsamt) issued its own instructions.63 These guidelines clearly
show that work, not punishment, was the intended object. But force had its own logic,64
and, together with the military manner of doing things, the punitive or repressive character of deportation eclipsed everything else. The delicate balance the military was supposed
59. Germany, National Constituent Assembly, Official German Documents Relating to the World War, 412.
“It was even for the Imperial Chancellor a matter of immense difficulty, if not of impossibility, to do away with
a measure concerning which the military authorities said: ‘If this measure is not carried out, we shall simply be
unable to win the war’ ” (419).
60. Köhler, Staatsverwaltung, 151.
61. Ibid., 153; Erich Ludendorff, Urkunden der Obersten Heeresleitung über ihre Tätigkeit 1916–18, 2nd ed.
(Berlin, 1921), 127–28.
62. Köhler, Staatsverwaltung, 166.
63. “Anweisung des General-Gouvernements in Belgien an die ihm untergeordneten deutschen Militärund Zivilstellen über die Ausführung der Abschiebung arbeitsscheuer Belgier nach Deutschland,” Sektion I c
Nr. 7900, Brussels, 28 Oct. 1916; and “Die vom Kriegsministerium (Kriegsamt) aufgestellten Grundsätze über
Heranziehung arbeitsscheuer Belgier zu Arbeiten nach Deutschland,” Berlin, 15 Nov. 1916, UA 3:1, 239–45.
64. This is the theme of Ulrich Herbert’s work on forced labor in the First World War: Ausländerbeschäftigung, 82–113, and Herbert, “Zwangsarbeit als Lernprozess,” Archiv für Sozialgeschichte 24 (1984): 285–304.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
to observe, and could not, was summed up in the governor-general’s order that the trans- 239
ports were to be commanded by “an especially appropriate, energetic, but calm officer”
who was to “to avoid all unnecessary harshness” and “to overlook small instances of disobedience but to intervene strenuously against large ones.”65 The transports were to be
handled like troop transports. The War Office guidelines revealed the logic of force even
more clearly. Camp commanders were told not to use outright force to get the Belgians to
work; instead, “through stringent discipline and strict enlistment for necessary work in the
camps, the prerequisites will be laid down such that the Belgians will greet every opportunity for well-paid work outside the camp as a desirable improvement of their condition.”
Once the Belgians were working, the guidelines foresaw pay equal to that of German workers (minus upkeep costs), and the deputy military commanders were ordered to make sure
just complaints were swiftly and fairly settled. Nonetheless, the “volunteers” were to be
kept in groups, so that they could easily be overseen and if necessary guarded by armed
German workers. And their clothing was to carry a permanent label marking them as Belgian deportees.66 Forced labor therefore automatically militarized the workplace and required uniform-like insignia to ensure different treatment for suspect laborers.
The actual treatment of the deportees fell below these standards. Belgian resistance
was partly to blame because withholding unemployment lists meant that the Germans,
who initially did not examine the deportees medically, ﬁlled their quotas with many sickly
nonworkers. But the sheer organizational inability of the German military bore a greater
share of the blame. Rear echelon troop strength had fallen by one-third in the autumn of
1916;67 Germany lacked the personnel to carry out a successful, humane deportation of
large numbers of unwilling people.68 Knowing that they would have great trouble rounding up non-“volunteers” who knew they would be deported, the general government instructed district commanders to hold these people at the collection centers, “without [giving them] the opportunity of going home again.”69 They were thus unable to collect food,
winter clothing, or blankets—nor, despite the governor-general’s orders, did they receive
them. Some deportees went sixty-three hours without food, and most were without blankets in the cold and drizzly fall and winter.70 Typical of the organizational chaos was the
ﬂuctuating number of deportees demanded from week to week: OHL requested ﬁrst eight
thousand, then twenty thousand, then the next day revised that ﬁgure to twelve to thirteen
65. “Anweisung des General-Gouvernements,” 239.
66. “Die vom Kriegsministerium (Kriegsamt) aufgestellten Grundsätze,” 243–45. In response to military
security concerns about enemy alien workers, Krupp managers in 1915 had suggested labeling Polish workers’
clothing, but nothing came of it: Herbert, “Zwangsarbeit,” 296, and Herbert, Ausländerbeschäftigung, 105.
67. Testimony of Lt. Col. Koch (Reichswehr), 16 Sept. 1925, in UA 3:1, 414, 416.
68. The same was true in the east, where the governor-general acceded to the same pressure as Bissing and
in October 1916 deported ﬁve thousand Jewish forced laborers to Germany. Half of them were too frail to work
and the deportation was called off before the planned thirty thousand had been rounded up. Ludendorff ’s successor at Ober-Ost commented on the failure of Germany’s forced labor policy: “Our organs are simply inadequate to round up all the people forcibly.” Herbert, Ausländerbeschaftigung, 92; Zunkel, “Ausländischen Arbeiter,” 301–2.
69. Draft telegraphic instructions to the district chiefs, 6 Oct. 1916, UA 3:1, 373.
70. Munro, Sellery, and Krey, ed., German War Practices, part 1, 76.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
240 thousand, and ﬁnally to two thousand after it became clear that Germany could not handle anything larger.71
Deportees arrived at ill-equipped former POW camps, where many waited weeks to be
placed in factories. The camps displayed the typical range of humane to punitive treatment
and competent to incompetent management that characterized military camps housing
civilians, for example, in the Boer War. Some commandants recognized that the poor condition of many deportees required extra rations beyond the official 1,745 calories; others held
scrupulously to the official order; and still others reduced rations to induce “volunteers.”
Some commandants were able to scrape up sufficient coal to heat barracks, others were not.72
The food and coal shortages in Germany made the commandants’ job much more difficult.
The combination of poor health, resistance, and poor coordination with industry
meant that ﬁve weeks into the deportation, only 20 percent of the deportees were working.73 Even Ludendorff quickly recognized that the experiment had been a disaster. Deportations halted in February 1917 even before the order came to do so.74 In the interim almost sixty thousand men had been deported to Germany. All who refused the massive
pressure to sign “voluntary” labor contracts were repatriated by mid-July 1917, despite
General Ludendorff ’s attempt to have them diverted as forced laborers into occupied
France.75 There they would have joined over sixty thousand more men, women, and children, who had already been deported from Belgium to do military work behind the lines
in the rear echelons (beyond Bissing’s control). These persons were never released during
the war.76 The official Belgian report says that among deportees to Germany 3–4 percent
died, 5.2 percent were maimed or permanently invalided, 6.5 percent had “scars from illtreatment,” 4.4 percent suffered frostbite, and 35.8 percent were ill when they returned
from Germany.77 German investigators reported a death rate of 1.8 percent by the end of
March 1917 (annualized, that would be 4.46 percent), a ﬁgure they said was “high.”78
These statistics were the results of malnutrition, poor original health, overwork, ill-treatment, poor hygiene, no extra clothing, and bad housing. Malnutrition was partly the result of Germany’s meager food ration in 1916–1917, which required supplements to reach
the subsistence level.79 Unlike French civilian prisoners, the Belgian deportees did not re71. Köhler, Verwaltung, 164.
72. Protocol of the Kriegsministerium Unterkunftsabteilung, Nr. 12 833/3. 17 MA, Berlin, 31 Mar. 1917, in UA
3:1, 374–80.
73. Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 3:370.
74. Ibid., 3:371.
75. Zunkel, “Ausländischen Arbeiter,” 299n76.
76. Belgium, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Report Laid before, 29–41.
77. “Observations Made on the State of Health of the Deportees on Their Return from Germany and from
the German Front in Belgium and France,” in Belgium, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Report Laid before, 42–51,
here 47. There is disagreement on the death toll: cf. Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 3:369, 567n45, and Gatzke, Germany’s Drive, 157.
78. Protocol of the Kriegsministerium Unterkunftsabteilung, 375.
79. Bumm calculated that the average daily civilian ration in Germany was falling from 1,500 to 1,000 calories per day in the late fall and winter of 1916–17: Franz Bumm, Deutschlands Gesundheitsverhältnisse unter dem
Einﬂuss des Weltkrieges, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (Stuttgart, 1928), 72, cited in Chickering,
Imperial Germany, 143.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
ceive Red Cross or other extra food packages until the end of March.80 Inmates (in any 241
sort of institution) generally suffered a much higher malnutrition and death rate than did
noninmates during the war. Nevertheless, the other conditions listed were caused by the
same combination of logistical inattention, “lovelessness,” and hostile disdain that
reigned in the colonies. As the historian Gerhard Ritter observed, “The whole scheme had
the appearance of regular slave transports and slave markets, which mitigation by some
well-intentioned local commandants could not alter.”81
Internationally, the Belgian deportations were equally disastrous. They produced an
enormous international uproar that went beyond the Entente powers to include all the
neutral states, the pope, and legions of private citizens.82 No issue did more to turn American public opinion against Germany.83 And the deportations coincided with Bethmann’s
peace initiative of December 1916, discrediting it as a cruel hoax.
Yet even after the war was over, neither former Foreign Secretary Arthur Zimmermann, who referred to the deportations as “a domestic measure,” nor Bethmann
seemed to understand their signiﬁcance.84 It may be understandable that Bethmann
dismissed international opposition as mere Allied propaganda, for he could point to
the (illegal) British blockade as a major factor forcing Germany to exploit all the resources at its disposal. But for our purposes, Bethmann’s obtuseness is signiﬁcant because it coexisted with his otherwise trenchant criticism of military “necessities” and
how these blocked wiser political viewpoints.85 Despite this insight, Bethmann seems
to have regarded the Belgian deportations as an unimportant sideshow where the details of execution somehow went wrong and had to be mitigated, rather than as emblematic of a systematic pattern of extreme war conduct. Bethmann ended his postwar
Reichstag testimony on the deportations by implicitly justifying them in the same titfor-tat, tu quoque terms typical of everyone who accepted the argument from military
necessity:
“The violation of international law was unquestionably to be found in the execution [of the deportations]; but this plea, I believe, will not be denied me: Are we
forever to talk of nothing but our own sins, even those consisting in the violations
of international law, we who stand face to face with an anomaly of international
law like England’s blockade through which (raising his voice) our people have
been relegated to an existence of misery for generations?”
(Loud applause from the spectators.)
The Chairman: “That closes the matter.”86

80. Protocol of the Kriegsministerium Unterkunftsabteilung, 376.
81. Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 3:369.
82. UA 3:1, 212–13, 246–78.
83. Germany, National Constituent Assembly, Official German Documents, 2:253–54; Prince Max v. Baden,
Erinnerungen und Dokumente (Stuttgart, 1927), 78.
84. Germany, National Constituent Assembly, Official German Documents, 1:412.
85. Ibid., 1:419–20.
86. Ibid., 1:420.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
242

Ludwig Köhler, Bissing’s assistant, recognized that the problems in execution came
from the nature of the policy itself as it arose out of “military necessity.” “This compulsory reason for the entire action could not fail to have its effects on the manner of execution,” he wrote in his contribution to the Carnegie Commission reports after the war.
“The organs responsible for carrying out the forcible deportation thought they were only
doing their duty when they placed the relentless fulﬁllment of the demands of the
Supreme Command ahead of all other, including political, viewpoints.” Having seen how
extremism replicated itself throughout the system, Köhler nonetheless seems, like Bethmann, to have been unable to extricate himself from the chains of military-necessity
thinking. He, too, relapsed into the tu quoque argument, citing the blockade and the Allied aerial bombardment of Karlsruhe: “Why should Germans be more punctilious [than
the Entente] when it was a matter of life or death for the fatherland?”
And then Köhler recounted a ﬁnal reason for the brutality involved in deportations:
Belgian resistance and German fear of weakness. The Belgians had refused to produce lists
of the unemployed; German officers responded by forced roundups of all available men,
regardless of their skills or physical appropriateness. Köhler echoed the officer in charge
of deportations at Mons, who claimed that resistance threatened “to stop the measure almost entirely and to prove the German administration powerless.”87 The necessity to
demonstrate authority became greater as Germany’s relative power declined, that is, as it
came to rely more on foreign labor. This was a typical colonial situation of resistance and
dependence, and it elicited a similar administrative response.
The Belgian deportations showed how military occupation policy developed as a
seemingly logical response to the wartime situation, braked for a time by longer-term,
postwar considerations and by sensitivity to the opinions of foreigners, on whom Germany was dependent for imports and (indirectly, via the CRB) food. That dependence increased Germany’s otherwise comparatively weak attention to international law. But none
of these brakes could stop indeﬁnitely the inexorable argument from military necessity,
which civilians such as the leaders of heavy industry could easily also claim when it coincided with their material interests. Military necessity was so indisputable that civilian
leaders could not free themselves from it even after the war had been lost; they continued
to argue according to its precepts (tit-for-tat, tu quoque, and the requirement to uphold
authority based on force by applying more force).88
But the Entente propagandists were wrong if they thought Belgium was the paradigm
case of military rule. The general government in fact shielded Belgium from the full force
of a military-practical regime. General v. Einem’s opinion of Bissing was widespread:
“For the army he was not a good governor, because he was always too much concerned
with sparing the Belgians; the army could only get things out of Belgium with difficulty.”89
It had a much easier time where it ruled directly: in the Baltic areas under Ober-Ost and
in northern France.
87. Köhler, Staatsverwaltung, 163.
88. The Reichstag’s majority opinion also absolved the government of wrongdoing: UA 3:1, 193–97.
89. Einem, Armeeführer, diary entry of 19 Apr. 1917, 304.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu

The Occupation under Ober-Ost
Although most Polish-speaking areas under German control were united under one
governor-generalship, the rest of a vast occupied zone, reaching from the easternmost
Polish counties to Courland on the Baltic Sea, Lithuania, and parts of White Russia
(forty-two thousand square kilometers and three million people), was ruled directly by
the eastern Supreme Command, Ober-Ost (see map 3).90 A centralized military occupation hierarchy presided over four, later two, military districts that were subdivided
along the Prussian model, down to individual villages and estates.91 Next to this were an
independent military railroad administration (formally similar to the independence of
the railroad section of the General Staff) and the military police. The bureaucrats proliferated to between ten and eighteen thousand in number.92 But they were never sufficient to permeate the large areas they were charged with administering, and so the
colonial pattern of great expectations and inadequate means was repeated once more.
The great expectations of the military recall the colonial, too: establishing order and security, living off the occupied zone (which made them independent of civilian oversight
from Berlin), providing a surplus to the Reich, and demonstrating the superiority of the
occupied administration to its Russian predecessor, which might “justify keeping the
area forever.”93
Although Ludendorff called a number of civilians from the Reich to help with administration, all officials were enjoined to stress the military nature of occupation at every
turn.94 The principles of occupation government, as Ludendorff set them down, were exactly those guiding the officer in combat: “to act quickly and energetically in unknown
circumstances”; “to work not bureaucratically, but according to the requirements of the
situation. Thank God there was no ‘precedent,’ that grave-digger of free power of decision.”95 Of course no “precedent” did not mean “free” decisions but rather ones determined by the habits of military culture. Friedrich von Payer, the leader of the Left Liberal
Party, who became vice-chancellor in November 1917 and who had investigated the failures of German occupation administration in the east, summed up the main principle
there as “nothing but the demand for a rigid, suffocating order.”96
As is usual in systems aspiring to extreme “order,” the result was disorder. The luxuriant bureaucracy produced a thicket of ordinances no orderly mind could penetrate. As
one denizen of the lower bureaucracy claimed, “I have not spoken to a single one of our
men in serious conversation who does not admit the convoluted counterproductiveness
of our administrative measures . . . but each participates in the madness, because he feels
90. Aba Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik im Ersten Weltkrieg (Wiesbaden, 1993), 13n5; Vejas Liulevicius, War
Land on the Eastern Front (Cambridge, 2000), 21.
91. Liulevicius, War Land, 62–63.
92. Ibid., 56–57.
93. Ibid., 54–55.
94. Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 33.
95. Ludendorff ’s memoirs as cited in Liulevicius, War Land, 59. Also, Eisenhart-Rothe, Im Banne der Persönlichkeit, 145–50.
96. Payer, Von Bethmann Hollweg, 201.

243

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
244 himself helplessly clamped into the paperwork machine.”97 The thin occupation put a
premium on the Auftragssystem, the autonomy of each administrator to fulﬁll the principles of occupation in his own manner.98 There was wide latitude for bizarre, brutal, or
idiosyncratic behavior.99 The overlapping jurisdictions of administration, railroad, and
military police produced chaos of their own that Ober-Ost never resolved. And the statistics that were supposed to be an objective record of resources were often the amalgam of
subjective impressions by local officials and absurd formalism, according to which, for example, all cows gave the same amount of milk and did so in winter as well as in summer.100
Military “order” was a solid tripod resting on identiﬁcation and deﬁnition (of people
and resources); hierarchy (the proper relationship of authority and subordination); and
control (the exercise of authority or, failing that, of mere power).
Identiﬁcation began with people. Every inhabitant over the age of ten was to receive a
pass photo, which he or she was required to show on command. Photos were taken of ﬁve
people at a time, each with numbers pinned to their chests. In 1917 1.8 million people were
processed. This sort of objectiﬁcation merely extended to civilians what soldiers had already undergone. It is typical of the military bureaucracy that it applied the same level of
scrutiny to itself, reporting that the 1.8 million passes had cost 12,000 pens and 177 liters of
ink.101 Next, the occupiers attempted surveys of the entire resources of the area: factories,
houses, buildings, livestock, down to household utensils.
Hierarchy rested on two simple principles: “No native could command or be set
above any German,”102 and, as the Order of Rule stated, “The interests of the army and the
German Reich always supersede the interests of the occupied territory.”103 Military authorities demanded constant demonstrations of deference from the occupied, who, for
example, were required to step off the sidewalk and deferentially tip their hats when they
met a German officer.104
As control, “order” expressed itself in the prohibition of all unauthorized travel, even
to the next village. All movement required passes, and thus the normal intercourse of life
was either minutely regulated or stopped altogether.105 Other behavior was equally subject to a ﬂood of minute, self-contradictory prohibitions: “not working on Sundays and
holidays, eating or selling meat or meat products, baking or eating cakes, brewing homemade beer, entering railroad cars reserved for Germans, hunting, feeding horses with
oats, going to the market more than once per week, sending letters or packages other than
by the official post, etc. etc.”106 Many prohibitions naturally produced many contraven97. Richard Dehmel, cited in Liulevicius, War Land, 177.
98. Liulevicius, War Land, 63.
99. Payer, Von Bethmann Hollweg, 234.
100. Alfred Vagts, “A Memoir of Military Occupation,” Military Affairs 7:1 (spring 1943), 16–24, here 23; Liulevicius, War Land, 66–67.
101. Liulevicius, War Land, 101–3.
102. Ibid., 58.
103. Ibid., 66.
104. Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 28–29.
105. Liulevicius, War Land, 89–100, 108.
106. Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 28.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
tions, and these were met with drastic punishment, from heavy collective ﬁnes to execu- 245
tions and, everywhere, beatings. A “memorandum on the most important abuses in
Lithuania” that the presidium of the Lithuanian Landrat sent to the German chancellor
on 20 October 1917 closed by saying, “There are many proven facts that show there are
beatings at work, beatings at the police station, beatings during investigations, beatings
when one has caught escaped prisoners, beatings during requisitions, beatings in prisons,
beatings of children at schools, beatings because people fail to doff their hats, beatings because they come too late, etc.”107
The manner of occupation combined the capricious control, brutality, and petty humiliation of the barracks, while the content of occupation was deﬁned by the military necessity of victory. In the east, as in Belgium, exorbitant requisitions, expropriation, and
forced labor were how the military tried to overcome Germany’s material and manpower
deﬁciencies.
Requisitions and expropriations of property were pushed way beyond the subsistence
limit. A modern study estimates that in 1916 the Lithuanian population was left with 0.7
percent of the wheat and 1 percent of the rye harvest, no oats, 0.5 percent of the potatoes,
13 percent of the butter, 67 percent of the eggs (which were hard to transport), and virtually no meat.108 In some areas, even seeds and seed potatoes were requisitioned.109 Livestock disappeared into the military maw: 38 percent of the horses, 48 percent of cows, 30
percent of the sheep, and 44 percent of the pigs.110 A postwar evaluation estimated that
the German military occupation had removed 261 million marks worth of resources.111
The occupiers “paid” for requisitions in worthless chits and met resistance with beatings,
collective ﬁnes, exemplary punishments (such as being marched from village to village in
chains), or worse.112 There were few factories to shut down and conﬁscate (it was Poland
that suffered more from the systematic stripping of metals and factory machines),113 but
forests were plentiful; by war’s end 20 percent of these had disappeared into the German
war effort.114 In the absence of outside aid such as Belgium enjoyed from the CRB, the
areas of eastern occupation, including the governor-generalship of Poland, suffered
deaths from starvation and increases in mortality from diseases caused by malnutrition.115 By 1916 the piecemeal efforts at expropriation had been systematized, so that when
German troops took over most of Romania in the fall, an economic section of the General
Staff moved in right behind the troops, setting up offices in the Ministry of Agriculture,
107. “Denkschrift, die wichtigsten Missstände in Litauen betreffend,” 20 Oct. 1917, cited in Werner Basler,
Deutschlands Annexionspolitik in Polen und im Baltikum, 1914–1918 (East Berlin, 1962), 282.
108. Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 47n203.
109. Ibid., 30.
110. Basler, Deutschlands Annexionspolitik, 280.
111. Liulevicius, War Land, 73.
112. Basler, Deutschlands Annexionspolitik, 279; Liulevicius, War Land, 67–68, 75; Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 48.
113. Antony Polonsky, “The German Occupation of Poland during the First and Second World Wars,” in
Armies of Occupation, ed. Roy A. Prete and A. Hamish Ion (Waterloo, Ont., 1982), 127; Basler, Deutschlands Annexionspolitik, 108–11.
114. Basler, Deutschlands Annexionspolitik, 280.
115. Ibid., 380; Liulevicius, War Land, 68, 75.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
246

NCO requisitioning a cow (probably in Poland), First World War. Der Weltkrieg, illustrierte KriegsChronik des Daheim (Bielefeld: Velhagen & Klasing, 1915–), vol. 2, 127.

from where it presided over the plunder of that country with “rational ruthlessness,” as a
reporter for the Carnegie Commission noted.116
Of all the great economic hardships, the population hated forced labor the most. Impressing people for forced labor emerged as an ad hoc practice in the ﬁrst months of the
occupation (autumn 1915), and it was regularized and extended throughout 1916. An order
of 6 May 1916 made all persons with ragged clothing liable to forced labor; on 26 June all
adults, male and female, were declared subject to forced labor, and on 6 November 1916
all men between seventeen and sixty were ordered to report to work camps.117 The military authorities therefore succeeded in “militarizing labor” in the occupied zones, where
they had failed in Germany because the trade unions and the Reichstag refused to accept
the original form of the Hindenburg program. The Reichstag protested forced labor and
deportations in the east, too, but despite promises by Ober-Ost, the practices continued
to the end of the war.118 Richer people could commute their forced labor by payment. The
poor were rounded up like cattle: “At night people in the countryside are taken prisoner
and collected together. Even in the suburbs there are regular hunts.”119
As in the other examples of forced labor we have seen, the ostensible economic goals
were contradicted by bad treatment. Rations in the east were a half pound of bread and a
116. Mitrany, Effect of War, 141–50, here 141.
117. Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 38, 39; Liulevicius, War Land, 73.
118. Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 39–40; Basler, Deutschlands Annexionspolitik, 281.
119. “Memorandum on abuses,” in Basler, Deutschlands Annexionspolitik, 281.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
liter of soup a day.120 This appears to have been at least 20 percent less than what German 247
civilians were receiving in spring 1917, 35 percent less than the daily rations of the Belgian
deportees, and a little less than Entente prisoners of war received at the worst periods of
detention, in 1914 and again in 1918.121 Unlike prisoners of war from the west, who received Red Cross packages, there were no such supplements for eastern forced laborers.
More work needs to be done on comparative rationing, but it appears that these forced laborers were receiving perhaps half of what contemporaries believed necessary to sustain a
heavy laborer.122 Many died. Their suffering occurred as tons of food were being shipped
from the occupied zone to Germany, or consumed by German troops. Pay, when it came,
was a pittance, and housing and working conditions mirrored the wretchedness of the
food allotments.
Most forced laborers in the east faced deportation to worksites inside the occupation
zone. But at least thirty-four thousand were forcibly transported to Germany to work in
agriculture.123 An unknown number “volunteered,” together with the ﬁve hundred to six
hundred thousand or more Russian-Polish workers.124 Even after their “voluntary” contracts expired, however, these civilians were compelled to continue working in Germany,
making the label “volunteer” meaningless.125 Prisoners of war and forced laborers were
the single largest category of worker in agriculture during the war.126
There were other deportees from Ober-Ost whose plight developed directly from occupation practices, not from the need for labor. As the front moved eastward in the autumn of 1915, behind it German police and gendarmes imported from Prussia swept the
land hunting for spies. Their suspicions were as latitudinarian as those of the troops in
Belgium in 1914. They arrested so many “spies” that in January 1916 the military administration of Courland ordered the deportation of the entire population of a ten-kilometer
strip along the coast and behind the lines.127 These deportations mixed punitive and security motives.
The result of all this order and security was revolt. Thousands of suffering civilians,
Russian prisoners of war, and forced laborers escaped into the woods and began partisan
warfare. Even after Russian aid to the partisans stopped at the end of 1916, resistance con120. Ibid.
121. Civilians: Prussia, War Ministry and Supreme Command, Die deutsche Kriegführung und das Völkerrecht (Berlin, 1919), 41–42 (hereafter Die deutsche Kriegführung); deportees: Belgium, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Report Laid before, 44; prisoners of war: Conrad Hoffman, In the Prison Camps of Germany (New York, 1920), 111;
Robert Jackson, The Prisoners, 1914–1918 (New York, 1989), 2.
122. Belgium, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Report Laid before, 45.
123. Elsner, “Ausländerbeschäftigung,” 539–40.
124. Herbert, Ausländerbeschäftigung, 91; 750,000: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Division
of International Law, Violations of the Laws and Customs of War, pamphlet no. 32 (Oxford, 1919), 33. The Polish
report on which this charge was based said the Poles were “induced by German agents to work under conditions
depriving them of all their rights. They endured very harsh treatment in regard to work and food, and were frequently beaten.”
125. Zunkel, “Ausländischen Arbeiter,” 295; Basler, Deutschlands Annexionspolitik, 281.
126. Elsner, “Übergang,” 291.
127. Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 15.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
248 tinued, and the partisans successfully wrested control of whole areas from German
troops, especially at night. The occupiers appear not to have understood that they had
created this state of affairs; they referred to the resisters as “robber bands,” suggesting
mere criminality rather than a political response to systematic ill-treatment.128
The extent of the brutality and exploitation in the east has invited comparison to the
far worse occupation under National Socialism. World War I certainly provided a foundation for later developments.129 The experience of administering an area as though it
were a tabula rasa, the disdain in which the inhabitants were held, the aspiration to showcase superior culture as order and organization—these “pathologies of power” were
swiftly combined after the war into the militarized, völkisch ideology that became National Socialism.130 But one should be cautious in concluding that utopian ideology,
which Ludendorff expressed and probably only consolidated after the war was already
over, caused the immense extremity of the eastern occupation of World War I.131 It developed instead out of the frames that the military applied to the problems it faced of establishing security and winning the war. The extent to which the military was unhampered
by political interference (from civilian government, the Reichstag, foreign opinion, local
resistance) is the extent to which it would travel up the spiral of force to the end of destructiveness and dysfunctionality. The best proof of this contention is that the same pattern had already occurred, not in the east, where traditional disdain for the non-German
speakers was being recast into modern racism and where vast tracts of land excited the
imagination with boundless possibilities, but in northern France, whose occupation
shared with the east the one really important factor in determining the spiral of extremity:
untrammeled military power.

Northern France
The occupation of northern France reached such a degree of completion in instrumentalizing the civilian population, expropriating wealth, and destroying the infrastructure that it merits without hyperbole the word “total.” And yet no single hand or handbook guided the policies. With the exception of the destruction during the retreats of 1917
and 1918, which the third OHL ordered, all other actions occurred in the familiar sliding
fashion at the initiative of the six separate armies whose purview stretched from the frontlines to the border.132 Each army had its ﬁeld administration directly at the front, and behind it an occupation zone run by the rear echelon inspector (a general) and his (reserve)
troops. Civilians were gradually seconded from Germany to aid the soldiers, but the oc128. Ibid., 14, 50.
129. Herbert, Ausländerbeschäftigung, 83, 113.
130. This is Liulevicius’s argument in War Land; citation, 176.
131. Ludendorff ’s later ideology: Eisenhart-Rothe, Im Banne der Persönlichkeit, 167–74; Siegfried Kaehler,
“Vier quellenkritische Untersuchungen zum Kriegsende 1918,” Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in
Göttingen, Philologisch-Historische Klasse 8 (1960), 423–81, here 451. Ideology as cause: Liulevicius, War Land,
7–9, 69.
132. Except for Longwy-Briey, which was slated for annexation from the beginning and which fell under a
separate administration; see Gatzke, Germany’s Drive, 85.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
cupation remained ﬁrmly military and unremittingly short term, that is, the occupation 249
aimed exclusively at contributing to the success of the ﬁghting troops. No grander goal (of
annexation, or demonstration of organizational superiority) clouded this practical aim.
Beneath the military pyramid were usually a French mayor and his staff, though not all of
these survived the war.133 When the occupation began, about 2.25 million people lived in
this heartland of French industry. There were 1.6 million surviving in a moonscape when
it ended.134
The occupation authorities in northern France subjected their areas to the same identiﬁcation and control techniques that suffocated the east, but in France there were few
woods or swamps to escape to and from which to take up armed resistance.135 Every person received an identity card specifying name, date of birth, profession, marital status,
and state of health.136 Each house had to post a list of occupants in the window.137 But instrumentalizing civilians as forced laborers brought forth new inventions: external labels
indicating work status. People who had been deported to Germany and returned or those
who were liable to deportation to Germany wore a red label that subjected them to greater
scrutiny. Gray and red meant you had signed a “voluntary” labor contract. A red label
with the letters “Z.A.B.” signiﬁed you were part of the civilian work brigades (Zivilarbeiter-Bataillonen), the lowest rung of the forced labor ladder.138 This system unknowingly fulﬁlled a similar scheme of Trotha’s, to affix to Herero prisoners tin IDs stamped
“G.F.” (gefangener Herero).
Because the French zone was smaller and had been much more routinized and
charted by its own government than the east, it was possible to impose a much more
complete degree of control there. A similar ﬂood of minute prohibitions and exhortations
inundated each zone. There was a permanent curfew, doors and windows were forbidden
to be locked during the day, correspondence was forbidden except to prisoners of war interned in Germany. No travel was permitted without a pass (for which one had to pay),
and by 1917 there was virtually no movement, as the economy ceased to function and the
land disintegrated into isolated units.139
As it did everywhere, the quest for perfect security quickened the pervasive interest in
demonstrating authority.140 The Grusserlass (the requirement to step off the sidewalk and
tip one’s hat in deference to officers) had appeared in some districts in 1914. Interestingly,
133. For instance, the mayor of Lille was sacked in Feb. 1916: Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein
Kriegstagebuch, 1:432.
134. Georges Gromaire, L’occupation allemande en France (1914–1918) (Paris, 1925), 193, 199. No recent history has equaled or surpassed Gromaire’s excellent account, which is based on official investigations and supplemented by many interviews he conducted in January 1919 and throughout 1921. Recent works: McPhail, Long
Silence; Annette Becker, Oubliés de la Grande Guerre (Paris, 1998), 27–88; and Leonard V. Smith, Stéphane Audoin-Rouzeau, and Annette Becker, France and the Great War, 1914–1918 (Cambridge, 2002), 45–53. On population: Hoover, American Epic, 388; McPhail, Long Silence, 36n3.
135. (Weak) resistance: Becker, Oubliés, 77–88.
136. Wilhelm Appens, Charleville (Dortmund, 1919), 34.
137. Gromaire, L’occupation, 76.
138. Ibid., 74, 220, 242.
139. Ibid., 75–79.
140. Many examples: ibid., 15, 16, 220, 342, 347.

General-Gouvernement (German civil administration) in occupied Belgium, 1914–1917, and occupied
zone in northern France, 1914–1918. Sources: Georges Gromaire, L’occupation allemande en France
(1914–1918), 44; Rupprecht Kronprinz von Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, vol. 2, map 8; UA Reihe 3, vol. 1,
“Karte der Zerstörungen beim Rückzug 1917”; Germany, Reichsarchiv, Der Weltkrieg 1914 bis 1918, vol. 6.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
it was introduced at Charleville not because the Kaiser’s headquarters were temporarily 251
located there but at the initiative of the rear commander after the Kaiser had already
moved on.141 Even women and children seemed threatening. In February 1915 Crown
Prince Rupprecht tried to stop women and children from wearing the tricolor by demonstrating France’s defeat and humiliation. He ordered prisoners of war to be paraded
through the streets of Lille. The resulting enthusiastic patriotic demonstration, mainly by
women and children, was not what he had had in mind. “This nonsense must absolutely
be ended,” he wrote, “and the people shown that they cannot fool with us, in order to stop
serious risings.” As “atonement” for the demonstration, he ﬁned Lille half a million
francs.142
Requisitions were heavy from the beginning because the Schlieffen Plan had largely
left logistics to chance, which meant living off the occupied land. A list from Avesnes in
November 1914 shows how far requisitions reached into the household even at the start:
“inkwells, a broom, 2 lavatory buckets, bells, 2 coffee pots, 8 coffee spoons, 8 sets of table
silver and crockery, 3 forks, a coffee mill, 2 lamps.”143 France enjoyed one big advantage
over the east, however. Beginning in March 1915, the CRB began feeding France too,
though initially, because of transport problems, at a lower ration than for Belgium.144
But there is little reason to believe that requisitions would have diminished much if the
CRB had not existed. Crown Prince Rupprecht, commander of the 6th Army, was a politically astute and humane commander, who in 1916 ended up sharing precious rations
with seventeen thousand French miners—who were necessary to the war effort—and
their dependents. But in February 1915 he noted the principle of requisitioning in France:
“The task of the economic section of our occupation administration lay mainly in the
systematic removal of all raw materials needed by our industry and the seizure of food
for the army. . . . It was regrettable that the population for a time suffered real shortages.”145 Rupprecht tried to ameliorate these shortages; he sent the French mayor of Lille
to unoccupied France to try to overcome French opposition to paying Switzerland for
extra food shipments. But these actions did not change the basic situation, which was
that the German war effort and the good of the troops superseded elementary civilian
needs.146
Requisitioning drifted into outright expropriation. By February 1916 (that is, before
the radicalization normally attributed to the third OHL after August 1916) a team of two
hundred economic experts visited over four thousand ﬁrms, compiling a detailed report
that was the basis for the dismantling of whole factories and their shipment to Ger141. Appens, Charleville, 12.
142. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entries of 4 Feb. and 5 Mar. 1915, 1:307, 309.
143. McPhail, Long Silence, 48.
144. Nash, Life of Hoover, 2:109.
145. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry, 9 Feb. 1915, 1:298, 321, 437; also, Wild,
Briefe, letter to wife of 1 Jan. 1915, 50. Chronic malnutrition: Becker, Oubliés, 44.
146. When Bethmann, in arguing against unrestricted submarine warfare, said that the entry of the United
States into the war would mean the end of food aid to Belgium, he still did not appear to think Germany would
take up the slack: “The insecurity behind our front will increase if the Belgians must go hungry.” Betrachtungen
2:267. In July 1916 the military occupation authorities almost cancelled CRB aid: Nash, Life of Hoover, 2:179–82.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
252 many.147 Agriculture was similarly surveyed, transformed into a command economy, and
conﬁscated. Four-ﬁfths of the grain harvest went to Germany, and the remaining oneﬁfth was used to pay the CRB.148 Livestock disappeared eastward. The command economy led to wastage typical of military management. One member of the occupation remembered later how the military tried to reform agriculture in the Ardennes. Because
Germany needed grain, the officers consolidated the small dairy farms, herding the cows
into huge holding areas and planting pasturage with wheat. The cows, unused to such
treatment, sickened and died. The wheat did not do much better because the climate was
too wet, which is why the natives had turned to dairy farming in the ﬁrst place. The Germans produced two hundredweights of grain per morgen (2.1 acres) of land, when the
French had offered to deliver eight, if they could manage their own property. That offer
was refused because, as a German observer ironically noted, “everything had to be militarized and run by officers. Fields were planted on command, harvested on command, and
grain was threshed on command; but growth and sunshine can’t be commanded—they
haven’t yet been drilled in the royal Prussian manner.”149 Despite the wastage, from July
1917 to the end of the war Belgium and France accounted for 20 percent of Germany’s raw
material needs.150
Like their fellow sufferers in the east, the French found forced labor the worst aspect
of occupation. The work requirement was like requisitioning, expropriation, and deportation: present as a presumptive right of necessity from the beginning, it grew like Topsy,
expanding in all directions, encompassing more categories of people, more kinds of work,
and more geographical areas. It was driven by the independent initiatives of rear echelon
administrators of lesser or greater rank and by the needs of troop commanders.151 So,
labor conscription began with healthy men, as in the order of the 1st Army’s commander
of the rear (29 October 1914) making any able-bodied man liable for work in the ﬁelds,
and it spread from there. On 18 November 1914 the rear administration at Sissone ordered
that unemployed men could be put in worker columns; on 25 March 1915, the rear commander at St. Quentin laid out times for obligatory work for men, but added that women
and children could also be held to smaller tasks. By 20 July 1915 all men, women, and children were held to fourteen-hour days in the ﬁelds at Holnon (Aisne).152 By 24 April 1916
one ﬁnds an order in Avesnes announcing that all persons, male or female, from twelve to
sixty-four, were liable to forced labor.153 In this piecemeal manner the entire French population was subject to forced labor long before the radicalization associated with the third
OHL and before Ober-Ost had established its full regime in the east. By 1918 not only was
147. Gromaire, L’occupation, 110.
148. Ibid., 137.
149. Appens, Charleville, 35–36.
150. Die deutsche Kriegführung, 34.
151. Gromaire believes that orders came from above, but his documents suggest the reverse. Gromaire describes women’s forced work as proceeding “with [the Germans’] slow and progressive movement” from local
work, to work afar, deportation, and ﬁnally the general mobilization of women. Gromaire, L’occupation, ordered from above: 209; women: 247–70.
152. Violation of the Laws, 39.
153. For the orders: Gromaire, L’occupation, 208–212, 214, 215.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
everyone theoretically liable for work, they were in fact working.154 Their work ran from 253
office cleaning to snow shoveling, agricultural labor, repairing guns, building the huge
fortiﬁcations for the Siegfried line in 1917, and digging the labyrinth of trenches in 1918
(where in late September over half a million civilians labored).155 That is, some of the
work was directly war-related (especially that performed by the Z.A.B.), and therefore
forbidden under international law. Payment was generally by chit, which was in the long
run worthless and in the short run paid for by the municipalities as “contributions,” not
by the occupation authority. This was the same system in use in the east.156
Because of the CRB, French rations were better than those of forced laborers in the
east, but the other conditions were identically bad.157 Work columns rose at 4 a.m.; they
might be sheltered in private homes, but they could land in barracks, tents, or abandoned
buildings, often without straw or blankets; hygiene was miserable, medicine nonexistent;
clothing and shoes simply wore out and were not replaced.158 The Z.A.B. laborers were
treated worse than people in the work columns. There were at least ﬁfty thousand, maybe
as many as one hundred thousand, in at least twenty-ﬁve brigades.159 The Z.A.B. workers
were interned in camps, guarded by police dogs, and subjected to rigorous discipline enforced by severe punishments. Another category of worker was men of conscription age
who were treated like prisoners of war and subject to martial law. And ﬁnally the many
evacuees (from the front or from destroyed or conﬁscated houses) were simply used for
labor as the occasion seemed to require. All these various groups of workers seem to have
been managed in the rotation system: they were worked until they became ill or exhausted, were rotated elsewhere to recover, and then brought back.160 An unknown but
probably signiﬁcant number died.161 As the war continued, France became crisscrossed
with a network of labor camps, sixty-eight around Verdun (containing deported Belgians) and seventy-eight between Lille and St. Quentin.162 When Herbert Hoover returned from an inspection tour of northern France, he said, “In every respect the land is
like a vast concentration camp.”163
One of the most remarkable proofs of the total disposability of the French population
was the ubiquity and variety of deportation. Chronologically, the ﬁrst deportations involved men of draft age, civilian hostages, and large numbers of “spies,” who were transported by train to Germany with the same lack of preparation that Belgian deportees experienced.164 Many of these people were returned to France after several months.
154. Ibid., 221; Becker, Oubliés, 57–61.
155. Germany, Reichsarchiv, Der Weltkrieg 1914 bis 1918, 12:63, 123–24; 14: Beilage 41.
156. Gromaire, L’occupation, 208. In one area in April 1916 wages were set at 2.25 francs a day, “of which 1.75
franc was deducted, leaving 50 centimes pay, of which only 25 centimes was paid in cash.” Violation of the Laws,
37. See also Reinhold Zilch, Okkupation und Währung im Ersten Weltkrieg (Goldbach, 1994).
157. Smith et al., France, 48. undervalue the contribution of the CRB.
158. Gromaire, L’occupation, 232–34.
159. Ibid., 245.
160. Ibid., 214, 230; McPhail, Long Silence, 164, 177.
161. Gromaire, L’occupation, 435; McPhail, Long Silence, 172; Becker, Oubliés, 64.
162. McPhail, Long Silence, 178.
163. Ibid., 55.
164. Gromaire, L’occupation, 34–36, 73–74.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
254 Deportation was also a common punishment for certain crimes or occupation infractions.165 A third type of deportation struck people who lived just behind the front; when
the war became stalemated, many of them were evacuated.166 As evacuees, they became a
disposable labor force whose work might return them to the areas from which they had
originally been deported.
A fourth kind of deportation began in spring 1915 when the Swiss government offered
to be a conduit for the “repatriation” of elderly, very young, or frail civilians to unoccupied France. Trains of ﬁve hundred persons each began leaving for Schaffhausen, while
others went through Belgium. Most persons departed voluntarily in the sense that conditions and treatment were so poor that leaving their home, friends, and surroundings
seemed better than staying.167 But these “repatriated” largely coincided with the population that was unable to work, and it seems that some of them (especially at the beginning)
were simply forced to leave and others belonged to groups (such as prostitutes) that some
officers wanted deported.168 Very large numbers of mostly women, children, old, and sick
people were thus removed from the occupied zone by war’s end, probably as many as half
a million (almost 25 percent), which was the German ﬁgure.169 The quartermaster general
of the Field Army in 1915, Gen. Hugo von Freytag-Loringhoven, later recalled that he had
wanted to deport even more people, but Switzerland limited the number of trains.170
The ubiquitous shuttling of forced laborers to and fro inside the occupied zone was
another sort of deportation that characterized the occupation to its last days. But the limits of forced labor deportation had been tested in April 1916 in an experiment conducted
by the quartermaster general of the 6th Army. He applied military logic to solving in his
district Germany’s two major problems simultaneously: lack of food and lack of labor,
and in so doing, he also tested the proposition that all civilians had to work for their keep
and that any civilian could be made to work successfully anywhere.
By spring 1916, feeding the urban population of Lille, Roubaix, and Tourcoing had become more and more difficult for the 6th Army’s rear echelon. Most men were already detained or working, leaving a dependent population of women, children, the inﬁrm, and
the elderly. The quartermaster general aimed to solve the problem in a single stroke. He
ordered each company of occupation troops to round up two hundred people, beginning
with the unmarried or the childless, if possible from the working class, and forcibly deporting them to the countryside, where agricultural labor was needed and food was more
plentiful. This military solution contained the usual contradiction. It had a humanitarian
165. Ibid., 228, 357.
166. Testimony of 1st Lt. Otto v. Stülpnagel, UA 3:4, 25.
167. Some people reportedly paid ﬁve hundred francs each to be “repatriated” to France: Smith et al.,
France, 50; Becker, Oubliés, 66–67.
168. Gromaire, L’occupation, 426–31; “forced”: 427; Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch,
1:307; “prostitutes”: Wild, Briefe, 56n1.
169. Die deutsche Kriegführung, 42. Hoover, in charge of postwar feeding of refugees, also speaks of ﬁve
hundred thousand returnees from southern France; American Epic, vol. 1: Relief of Belgium, letter of 28 Dec. 1918,
399. Gromaire, L’occupation, 474, writes of a minimum of two hundred thousand, which is consistent with his
usual underestimation of numbers.
170. Freytag-Loringhoven, Menschen und Dinge, 295.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
side—better provisioning—and it targeted the most mobile or versatile sections of the re- 255
maining population. The deportees were supposed to receive advance notice and could
take thirty kilograms of belongings with them. But its other face was involuntary labor,
and its method was force. And above all, it was animated by the same wishful and antieconomical thinking characteristic of military problem solving.171 In the end, therefore, force
and unrealism carried the day.
Inevitably, the execution of the plan went awry. Some people were not notiﬁed and had
ﬁfteen minutes to pack. Some deportations occurred at 3:30 a.m.; people were snatched randomly to fulﬁll the quota.172 These results were systematic, if unintentional, because compulsion was the bottom line. The covering order made this principle clear: “The execution of
these orders shall be done energetically. A certain coarseness is inevitable, but one should
avoid all useless hardship and brutality. Resulting trouble should be handled without
pity.”173 This mixed message therefore ultimately decided for force. Furthermore, preparations for transport and billeting were as insufficient as they would be for the Belgian deportees. Between twenty-four and thirty thousand people, mostly women, arrived in the countryside to ﬁnd few accommodations; they lived in ruins or abandoned buildings with little
or no sanitation.174 There was no medicine, but the women were vaccinated against typhus
and checked for venereal disease, suggesting that the occupation authorities were diligent
only in those matters that they thought might affect their own health.175 The women were
regimented like soldiers, given numbers, and formed into work groups; they were permitted
to write only once a month, less than was true for prisoners of war.176
Not surprisingly, the city women of Lille, Roubaix, and Tourcoing were barely able to
perform agricultural labor. On 9 August 1916 (after protests from Switzerland and the
Vatican) the quartermaster general admitted defeat and ordered all women under thirty
returned.177 The one lasting success of the episode was that more women “volunteered”
for local work, hoping to escape another deportation.
The deportations of Lille, Roubaix, and Tourcoing illustrate once again the path that
military problem solving typically took when left to its own devices. The quartermaster
general did not intend to create suffering; indeed, he probably intended to alleviate it. But
a whole chain of assumptions and habits doomed the project to disaster: the insistence
that food be obtained only in exchange for work (the same foundational assumption of
the Hindenburg program to be applied to German civilians);178 regarding people as in171. Becker imagines the Germans aimed speciﬁcally to humiliate French women, but there is no evidence
of this: Becker, Oubliés, 73–74, and Smith et al., France, 49–50.
172. Gromaire, L’occupation, 280; Munro, Sellery, and Krey, eds., German War Practices, 1:82–83.
173. Gromaire, L’occupation, 280. Apparently, some officers and men refused to roust women from their
beds and were imprisoned for it: Becker, Oubliés, 76.
174. Numbers: ibid., 277n1; Munro, Sellery, and Krey, eds., German War Practices, 1:86.
175. Conditions: Gromaire, L’occupation, 287–91.
176. Munro, Sellery, and Krey, eds., German War Practices, 1:86–87.
177. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry, 9 Aug. 1916, 1:515. Protests: UA 3:1,
360, 362, 363.
178. Hindenburg to Bethmann, II Nr. 34 647, 13 Sept. 1916: “The principle ‘who does not work, will not eat’
is in our current situation more than ever justiﬁed, also vis-à-vis women.” Cited in Ludendorff, Urkunden Obersten Heeresleitung, 67, emphasis in original.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
256 terchangeable material (Menschenmaterial); instrumentalizing civilians for the war effort;
attempting to solve knotty problems in a single blow, which led to mixed motives and
wishful thinking; force and violence as methods of execution; holding subordinates to
the fulﬁllment of their duty “energetically” and “without pity”; haste, which precluded
adequate logistical preparation; malignant neglect, the result of disdain for the nonsoldier (in this case the threefold condition of being the enemy, civilian, and female); and
lack of realistic economic knowledge or judgment. These small cogs could produce major
catastrophes.
Not all military men were so blinkered by military culture, however. The commander
of the 6th Army, Crown Prince Rupprecht, was skeptical of the experiment from the moment the quartermaster general informed him of it: “The execution of this very harsh
measure will not be without friction, and it will cause many abuses,” he wrote in his diary.
“Its success will be extremely small, since clerks and factory workers aren’t appropriate
for agricultural work.”179 But Rupprecht did not stop the project. His own responsibility
lay with the ﬁghting troops; mission tactics and regulations discouraged micromanaging
one’s subordinates. Rupprecht therefore allowed the quartermaster general to exercise authority, however misguided, in his own bailiwick. Apparently the chancellor learned of
the results of the experiment only through American protests.180
The ﬁnal kind of deportation was not a result of occupation but of combat. In preparation for the German offensives of 1918, masses of civilians were removed from their
homes.181 More, however, were removed during the two major retreats in the west. One
was the intentional retreat in spring 1917 to the Siegfried line, which forced laborers had
helped to build; the other was the unplanned, grudging withdrawal in summer and fall of
1918 prior to Germany’s defeat. During both, German troops were ordered to destroy
everything they could and forcibly to remove the remaining civilians farther into the stilloccupied zones.182 In both cases, civilians were deported almost without notice and could
take little or nothing with them. Ostensibly, these harsh actions were done to save civilian
lives, but the real goals seem mixed. Otherwise, it is hard to explain why only those capable of working were deported in 1917, leaving fourteen thousand dependants behind for
the Entente to take care of.183 As it was, 125,000 people became instantly homeless and
propertyless and, falling into the category of the evacuated, became fodder for the involuntary work columns. The 1918 deportations were naturally even hastier and much less
complete, as German soldiers abandoned their positions spontaneously and civilians
strove to stay put. Opposition by the German political leadership also hampered the complete deportation that OHL evidently wanted.184 Because the military goal during both
retreats was complete destruction of the area, civilians were simply accounted as assets,
whose disappearance (as potential laborers) was just part of the scorched earth policy. As
179. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry, 4 Apr. 1916, 1:443.
180. Munro, Sellery, and Krey, eds., German War Practices, 1:88.
181. Herwig, First World War, 397; Max von Gallwitz, Erleben im Western (Berlin, 1934), 309.
182. Kuhl’s testimony, UA 3:1, 93.
183. Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:64; Die deutsche Kriegführung, 43.
184. Stülpnagel’s testimony, UA 3:4, 25.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
late as 29 September 1918, the day Ludendorff admitted the war was lost, he ordered the 257
ﬂooding of the mines of Carvin and Dourges and the removal of the French miners to
other areas farther behind the lines.185
Even this very short account should have made clear that deportation was a normal
event in occupied northern France. However, none of the six types of deportation aimed
at “ethnic cleansing”; none was the expression of a grand ideological scheme to empty the
area of its original population. But there were also very few hindrances to conceiving of
deportation or putting it into practice. Indeed, in 1914 the French government brieﬂy considered evacuating the entire population (rather than permit food shipments to the
enemy zone), until Herbert Hoover convinced them of its impracticality.186 Although
Germany did not have a monopoly on deportation as a possible solution to various problems, the German military was quick to resort to actual deportation, which its officers invoked for all sorts of local reasons. The patchwork of local deportations in France became
ever denser until it covered the entire zone, just as if it had been a centralized, coordinated
policy. Repetitive practice demonstrated and justiﬁed the principle that civilians were entirely disposable; they could be shifted around at will, or simply made to disappear, in the
sense used by Trotha in SWA. The ubiquity of deportation lowered the barriers even further to ideologically motivated deportation for “security” or colonization reasons, ideas
that were already present in the far right wing in 1914 and that were now freer to enter the
mainstream.187
If not everyone was a forced laborer (the occupation forces intentionally made it difﬁcult to distinguish forced from “voluntary” labor), if not everyone was deported, still,
everyone was working for the occupiers, and everyone without exception was liable to becoming a forced laborer or a deportee. Requisitions and expropriations had also reached
the point of near totality. And perhaps more important, no principle or institution existed
in Germany that was powerful enough to hinder the development toward totality in any
of these areas. The same was true for the ﬁnal demonstration of extremity: the willful destruction of northern France during the retreats of 1917 and 1918.

The Destruction of Northern France
Northern France was, of course, a battleﬁeld for the entire war, and artillery ﬁre
churned a swath of ruin on either side of the trenches. But purposeful destruction is a
different phenomenon. It was little discussed or prepared for in prewar official handbooks. The KEO said that during retreat the rear inspectorate was to order speciﬁcally
185. UA 3:1, 105. The next day Ludendorff amended his order to say that only the aboveground machinery
should be destroyed, but it does not appear that he called off the deportation: UA 3:1, 105; Reichsarchiv,
Weltkrieg, 14:656.
186. Nash, Life of Hoover, 2:107; McPhail, Long Silence, 68–69.
187. The right-wing Deutsche Tageszeitung had already asked on 15 Aug. 1914 if “evacuation of all inhabitants
in the occupied zones” were not the best guarantee of security. Wieland, Belgien 1914, 22n139. Duke Johann Albrecht of Mecklenburg, president of the German Colonial Society, favored deporting all Walloons from Belgium: Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 3:26. And in excitable moments, the Kaiser would call for removing all the inhabitants from those areas in France and Belgium that Germany might annex: Ritter, Sword and Scepter, 3:34.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
258 “which railroads, telegraph lines and other communications, depots, and storage facilities” were to be destroyed.188 Wholesale destruction was evidently not foreseen.189 There
were several possible precedents in the First World War. Both the Belgians and the French
had effectively hampered Germany’s advance in 1914 by blowing up transport and communication networks, and France had ﬂooded two of its coal mines.190 Russia had been
more thorough in East Prussia in 1914, and especially in 1915 by pursuing a scorched earth
policy during its retreat from Warsaw.191 But Gen. Hermann von Kuhl, the chief of staff of
the army group that carried out the bulk of the devastation in 1917, did not recall these
precedents when Reichstag investigators questioned him after the war. He explained that
“war-historical studies concerning similar destruction were never done by the General
Staff, so far as I can recall. It’s a question that simply happens from case to case in
wartime. It happened during the [German] retreat in Poland in 1914, when one destroyed
as much as one could.”192 It was thus Germany’s own experience that served as the model,
an experience that, like the “Belgian atrocities,” the early deportations, the grasp for the
wonder weapon, gas, and other examples of extremity, occurred at the very beginning of
the war out of what the actors understood as the logic of warfare.193 Gen. Max Hoffmann
wrote during the October 1914 retreat that the army had destroyed the (militarily important) railroads and bridges so thoroughly “that it will take the Russians weeks before they
can advance. In addition, I’ve ordered all Russian coal mines to be ﬂooded. One comes up
with the ﬁnest ideas.”194 By no means were German assets exempt from this sort of thinking: the eastern commanders in 1914 also wanted to destroy the Upper Silesian mines, but
the chief of staff of the 6th Army district (in which the mines were located), the deputy
war minister, and civilian leaders got the order rescinded.195 The category of militarily
signiﬁcant objects had therefore immediately expanded to include economic targets.
One week after taking over the Supreme Command (28 August 1916), Ludendorff and
Hindenburg surveyed the western front for the ﬁrst time and concluded that Germany
had to fortify its defensive lines and go on the defensive to save manpower. They ordered
the preparation of the Siegfried line, located ﬁfteen to forty-ﬁve kilometers to the rear of
the front trenches. Although the decision to undertake a strategic retreat to the Siegfried
line (code-named Alberich) was not taken until February 1917, on 2 October 1916 OHL
ordered the army commanders to prepare plans for the complete destruction of areas that
would be abandoned:
188. The General Staff recommended the total destruction of food stores during retreats: Germany, General
Staff, Heeresverpﬂegung, 310.
189. KEO, p. 16 (para. 20).
190. Peter Graf Kielmansegg, Deutschland und der Erste Weltkrieg (Frankfurt, 1968), 62; Herwig, First World
War, 97; UA 3:1, 63.
191. Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 12:121; UA 3:1, 153.
192. UA 3:1, 81, 82.
193. Kuhl explained this logic in ibid., 82.
194. Hoffmann to his wife, 21 Oct. 1914, Max Hoffmann, Aufzeichnungen des Generalmajors Max Hofmann
(Berlin, 1929), 1:59, cited in Geiss, Der polnische Grenzstreifen, 33n97.
195. Wrisberg, Heer und Heimat, 23.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
It is necessary to make extensive preparations for the complete destruction of all
rail lines, and further, all streets, bridges, canals, locks, localities, and all equipment and buildings that we cannot take with us but that could be of any use at all
[von irgendwelchem Nutzen] to the enemy. The enemy must ﬁnd a countryside
completely sucked dry in which his own mobility is made as difficult as possible.196
The phrase “any use at all” was inﬁnitely elastic and meant in practice total destruction of
one-fourth of Germany’s entire occupation zone in France.197 Apparently the idea was to
prevent an Allied attack for long enough to give the German troops, exhausted and decimated by the battle of the Somme, a chance to rest.198
Destruction, like combat and occupation, followed mission tactics, so the details were
left to the army and army group commanders. They mounted signiﬁcant opposition to
this order. Army group commander Crown Prince Rupprecht protested that it was both
militarily unnecessary, since Entente troops could shelter in ruins as well as in intact
buildings, and impossible to carry out.199 But he could not stop it. At most, he was able to
limit the destruction to a strip ﬁfteen kilometers in front of the Siegfried line and to save
Noyon, Vesle, and Ham, three of the larger localities. “I would have liked to resign,” he
wrote, “but I was told it would do no good and would not have been approved anyway for
political reasons, since it would have given the impression abroad of a rift between Bavaria
and the Reich. So I had to limit myself to refusing to sign the order of execution.”200
Unfortunately, the destruction turned out to be quite feasible. The operation was
minutely planned. Nothing was spared, not the wells, which were made “unusable,”201
not even the orchards, which were felled to prevent soldiers from taking shelter under
them.202 After the war, one German officer said that the area had been rendered “literally
unrecognizable”; it had been turned into “a desolate, dead desert.”203 In all, 2.5 million
kilograms of dynamite were used and the destruction was even ﬁlmed.204 The commander
of the 3rd Army found the ﬁlm shocking: “We saw factories ﬂy into the air, rows of houses
fall over, bridges break in two—it was awful, an orgy of dynamite. That this is all militarily justiﬁed is unquestionable. But putting this on ﬁlm—incomprehensible!”205
Efforts were made to ease the conditions of the 125,000 deportees, many of whom
were removed overnight with no notice (because the operation was to be kept secret from
the Allies). The extensive preparation, and probably the fundamental opposition of Rup196. Order of 2 Oct. 1916, in Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:62–63.
197. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, 3:128.
198. Kuhl’s testimony, UA 3:1, 73.
199. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 17 Oct. 1916, 2:47.
200. Ibid., diary entry of 15 Mar. 1917, 2:116.
201. Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:63; or “poisoned”—there was a major argument about this after the war.
202. Ibid., 2:63.
203. Captain W. Meyer, in the Münchner Post 216 (1919), cited in Ernst, Der grosse Krieg, 100.
204. Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:63.
205. Einem, Armeeführer, 318, emphasis in original.

259

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
260 precht’s army group, meant that this was the only deportation of the war that went
smoothly and with a minimum of immediate hardship for the deportees.206 But the fundamental hardship could not be ameliorated. When the Entente troops gingerly went forward into the moonscape, they were deeply shocked. Bethmann believed that peace with
France was made immeasurably more difficult because of the hatred the military’s action
had engendered.207 The destruction was counterproductive militarily, too; it was so total
and so irrevocable that it hampered German troops during their advance through the
same area in the March 1918 offensive.208
In the summer and fall of 1918 the pattern repeated itself: wholesale destruction of all
property and forced removal of the population. OHL’s general outlines for a planned retreat in 1918 had called for eleven days of thorough destruction.209 But, as we shall see,
army commanders found it impossible to get Ludendorff to agree to a planned retreat, so
the German army fell back as the situation dictated. It had no time to destroy as thoroughly as it had in 1917. Nevertheless, General von Lüttwitz remarked that the destruction
“went beyond the bounds of the necessary.”210 Only when Ludendorff had admitted that
the war was lost did the order go out to cease burning down houses and villages.211 But
widespread devastation, including of houses, continued in many areas.212
The Allies used their increased leverage against these actions. In his note of 14 October 1918, President Woodrow Wilson required the “acts of inhumanity, spoliation, and
desolation” to stop, or the Allies would refuse to sign the armistice.213 At a cabinet meeting three days later, Ludendorff defended the army’s actions as limited to what was militarily necessary, but the cabinet assured the U.S. president that the army would be ordered to avoid destruction of private property.214 This intervention may have saved
Belgium’s coal mines, but those of northern France were destroyed; the Supreme Command admitted that 40 of the 111 mines were entirely destroyed, while the rest lost all
aboveground facilities.215
Internal opposition also hindered even more extreme planned destruction. Crown
Prince Rupprecht, who favored targeting only transportation and communication lines,
energetically repeated the order to restrict destruction to these traditional military objects. German mine managers in one area refused to carry out orders to blow up the
206. UA 3:1, 75.
207. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 1 June 1917, 2:181.
208. General Kuhl’s report, UA 4:3, 105, 142; Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entries of 17 Jan. and 20 Jan. 1918, 3:251–52, 263–64.
209. Gallwitz, Erleben im Westen, 353–54.
210. Cited in Klein, Deutschland, 3:445.
211. UA 3:1, 92; Erich Matthias and Rudolf Morsey, ed., Die Regierung des Prinzen Max von Baden (Düsseldorf, 1962), 121.
212. See War Minister Scheüch’s explanation to the cabinet on 28 Oct. 1918, Matthias and Morsey, Regierung,
416.
213. President Wilson Note to German Government, 14 Oct. 1918, in U.S. Department of State, Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1918, Supplement 1: The World War, 2 vols. (Washington, D.C.,
1933), 1:358–59, here 359.
214. Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 443, 457.
215. Die deutsche Kriegführung, 37–38.

Civilians as Objects of Military Necessity
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
aboveground facilities in late October, instead removing critical machine parts. Their ac- 261
tion was blessed by their chief quartermaster.216
Despite lack of time, Allied intervention, and some resistance, the 1918 destruction of
northern France was clearly excessive. Thorough devastation was the counterpart in situations of retreat to the absolute, no-holds-barred precepts governing attack and sweeping
advance. In the same way that they had decisively inﬂuenced the Schlieffen Plan, Germany’s weakness and numerical inferiority in 1918 encouraged scorched earth. As General
v. Kuhl later explained, Germany had not even begun to prepare the Antwerp-Maas defensive line that would have permitted it to fend off Allied attacks, at least for a time. It
lacked the manpower to do so. “Considering this deﬁciency, it was all the more urgent to
hold up the opponent by other means.”217
There were other reasons as well. The military regarded anything built or improved
during the occupation as German property, even though it had been “paid” for by French
municipal “contributions” and largely built by forced civilian labor. The Supreme Command and the War Ministry defended the destruction of these facilities, which otherwise
would have helped the enemy: “Can one really demand this of us? Can anyone deny that
the law of war permits this destruction for this reason?”218
Desire to wreck postwar economic competition was another reason that had been operating strongly during the previous phases of requisitions and expropriations.219 Revenge and frustration over losing the war were also widespread motives. The bloodthirsty
“plans” to ﬁght the Allied advance every step of the way reveal this undercurrent of emotion. Colonel Schwertfeger wrote in November 1918:
It will be necessary for our enemies to pay for every step ahead with streams of
blood. Large areas that so far have been unaffected by war will be wrecked completely. If the enemy wants to push us out of the occupied parts of northern
France, and if they want to force a retreat from Belgium, they will have to count
on an extended period of bloody battles and the completely useless destruction of
their own territory.220
The same motive seems to be behind the useless continuation of destruction that was
originally part of expropriation. One critical German observer in Charlesville noted that
“two days before the retreat even the lampposts were struck down and sawed apart. There
was not enough time to cart them off, so they at least had to be destroyed.”221 And, ﬁnally,
the breakdown of discipline, the result of the officers’ loss of authority and of the troops’
216. UA 3:1, 115.
217. Ibid., 90.
218. Die deutsche Kriegführung, 29.
219. Gatzke, Germany’s Drive, 91–92, 154, 160; Hatke, Hugo Stinnes, 53–54; Wende, Die belgische Frage,
193–95; McPhail, Long Silence, 34; Munro, Sellery, and Krey, eds., German War Practices 2:8.
220. Schwertfeger in the Nationale Zeitung, Nov. 1918, cited in Michael Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,”
Journal of Modern History 73 (Sept. 2001), 459–527, here 495. Trotha had referred in July 1904 to the “streams of
blood” necessary to force colonization: Trotha, diary, 1 July 1904, Trotha Papers, Nr. 315, p. 15.
221. Appens, Charleville, 27.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
262 material deprivation for the past two years, meant widespread plunder. The same observer wrote that “the civilian population is not even left with the smallest appliance or
even a chicken.”222
The results of the devastation were staggering. There was nothing left but mud. In November 1918 half a million “repatriates” from southern France and three hundred thousand French deportees in Belgium trekked home. They found nothing. Herbert Hoover,
in charge of their relief, wrote, “The destruction of twenty principal towns and literally
hundreds of villages renders the return of these refugees a stupendous problem.”223 By
one estimate, 850,000 buildings in France had been destroyed or seriously damaged;224
combat accounted for much of this number, but the greater part resulted from gratuitous
destruction understood by the Supreme Command as “military necessity.”
222. Ibid., 36.
223. Hoover, letter of 28 Dec. 1918, American Epic, vol. 1: Relief of Belgium, 399.
224. For purposes of comparison, in the Lithuanian areas of occupation the number of buildings destroyed
was about ﬁfty-seven thousand: Basler, Deutschlands Annexionspolitik, 280. The German government said that
the Russian army in East Prussia had destroyed twenty thousand buildings and eighty thousand dwellings: UA
3:1, 153.

111
The Armenian Genocide

I

n the spring of 1915 Germany’s new Turkish ally began systematically murdering its
Armenian population. The most radical reformers in the ruling Committee of
Union and Progress (CUP) used the cover of war to “deport” the Armenians from
their homes in Anatolia. Special armed units, Kurdish and other ethnic bands, and
sometimes the regular army then slaughtered the defenseless refugees on their way to
equally lethal concentration camps in the Syrian desert. The genocidal campaign continued through 1917 and picked up again in 1918, when Turkish troops entered the Caucasus.
In the end, Anatolia’s three thousand-year-old, 1.5–2 million-strong Armenian community was gone. That was the CUP’s goal—to build a nation-state around a homogenous
Turkic-Islamic population, stripped of its Christians (Armenians, Greeks, Nestorians,
and some Syrians) and Jews. This genocidal project killed at least eight hundred thousand
Armenians, most likely a million or more.1

1. Death estimates: Arnold J. Toynbee, Armenian Atrocities (London, 1915), 6, see also 92–105; Consul
Rössler to Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg, Aleppo, 20 Dec. 1915, Nr. 116, Politisches Archiv, Auswärtiges Amt,
Bonn, Türkei 183, vol. 40 (hereafter PA-AA). War’s end, German estimates: Johannes Lepsius, Der Todesgang des
armenischen Volkes (Potsdam, 1930), 297; Vahakn N. Dadrian, “The Naim-Andonian Documents on the World
War I Destruction of the Ottoman Armenians,” International Journal of Middle East Studies 18:3 (1986), 342.
Turkish estimates: Norman Naimark, Fires of Hatred (Cambridge, Mass., 2001), 41; Gerard J. Libaridian, “The
Ultimate Repression,” in Genocide and the Modern Age, ed. Isidor Wallimann and Michael N. Dobrowski (New
York, 1987), 206. German Admiral Souchon, who spent the war in Constantinople, conﬁded to his diary on 15
Aug. 1915 that “three-quarters of the Armenians living in Turkey have been liquidated.” BA-MA Freiburg, Nl.
Souchon, no. 15, cited in Christoph Dinkel, “German Officers and the Armenian Genocide,” Armenian Review
44, no. 1/173 (spring 1991): 77–133, here 115. See also Robert Melson, “Provocation or Nationalism,” in The History
and Sociology of Genocide, ed. Chalk and Jonassohn, 266–89, here 269–70; Robert Melson, Revolution and Genocide (Chicago, 1992), 145–47, 312–13nn18, 23; Marjorie Housepian, The Smyrna Affair (New York, 1966).

263

Routes of deportations of Armenians in Turkey, 1914–1918. Sources: Gerayer Koutcharian, Der Siedlungsraum der Armenier unter dem Einﬂuss der historischpolitischen Ereignisse seit dem Berliner Kongress 1878 (Berlin, 1989), map 5; Jürgen Herrnkind, Helmut Kistler, and Herbert Raisch, eds., Atlas zur Universalgeschichte (Munich, 1979), map 83; Hermann Kinder and Werner Hilgemann, The Anchor Atlas of World History, vol. 2, (New York, 1968), 126.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
United States and Allied commentators quickly suspected German involvement.2 265
Powerful Germany seemed likely to be the dominant partner in the alliance, especially in
wartime because of the German military mission. German officers and consuls were scattered across Anatolia where the killing occurred. And most of all, German official statements and (censored) newspaper accounts were at best pusillanimous; at worst they denied the killings or even blamed the Armenians.3 The CUP assiduously spread rumors
that German officials had ordered the killings, and these rumors ﬁltered out to foreign
observers, as they were intended to do.4
Like contemporaries, scholars today remain divided on Germany’s role. Ulrich
Trumpener, in a careful, archivally based study, concludes that Germany “neither instigated nor welcomed” the genocide. But he ﬁnds that both Austrian and German officials
“were guilty of extremely poor judgment, a considerable degree of moral callousness, and
an altogether excessive concern with what was or seemed to be politically expedient.”
They shrank from “drastic” measures to stop the Turks, though Trumpener doubts even
those would have been successful.5
On the other side, Vahakn N. Dadrian argues most forcefully for Germany’s complicity. His case could be summarized like this: two Germans (Colmar von der Goltz and Paul
Rohrbach) contributed the ideology of ethnic consolidation through deportation; German officers suggested or ordered the deportations, and some participated in them; the
Kaiser’s pro-Turkish enthusiasm dictated that Germany’s diplomats weakly and insincerely “protest” the killings after they came to light; and Germany continued to support
the genocide, as evidenced by medals bestowed on some of the main perpetrators, their
rescue from Allied hands after the war, and the Foreign Office’s refusal to extradite them
for war crimes.6
Germany’s role in the Armenian genocide was, in fact, complicated and riddled with
contradiction. Germany’s foreign policy goals were incompatible with those of its ally,

2. Toynbee, Armenian Atrocities, 6.
3. Examples of this reasoning: Docs. 55, 110, 124, 139, 236, 531 in Arthur Beylerian, Les grandes puissances
(Paris, 1983); James Bryce and Arnold Toynbee, ed., The Treatment of the Armenians in the Ottoman Empire,
1914–16, ed. Ara Saraﬁan (London, 2000), xxxii; Armen Hairapetian, “ ‘Race Problems’ and the Armenian Genocide,” Armenian Review 37 (spring 1984): 41–59; and Armen K. Hovannisian, “The United States Inquiry and the
Armenian Question, 1917–1919,” Armenian Review 37 (spring 1984): 146–63.
4. Austrian Consul Nadamlenzki to Ambassador Pallavicini, Adrianople, Nr. Z.100/P, 10 Nov. 1915,
reprinted in Institut für Armenische Fragen, The Armenian Genocide, 3 vols. (Munich, 1987), 2:274; Pallavicini,
Konﬁdenten-Bericht, Nr. 444, Constantinople, 2 Dec. 1915, cited in ibid., 294–96; Scheubner-Richter to Hohenlohe-Langenburg, Erzerum, Nr. 580, 5 Aug. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 39; Rössler to Bethmann, Aleppo, Nr.
110, 30 Nov. 1915, ibid., vol. 40; Gunz to Embassy, Constantinople, 10 Aug. 1915, ibid., vol. 55; Ambassador WolffMetternich to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 725, 18 Dec. 1915, ibid., vol. 40; Wolff-Metternich to Bethmann, Pera, 7 Dec.
1915 (citing a report of Gen. Friedrich Kress v. Kressenstein), in Johannes Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien,
1914–1918 (Potsdam, 1919), 201–2; Lepsius, Todesgang, x.
Lepsius’s collection Deutschland und Armenien omits portions of some documents and occasionally sanitizes others. Nevertheless, it gives a generally accurate and detailed view of how the genocide unfolded. I have
checked Lepsius’s edition with the ﬁlmed version of the originals, available in U.S. National Archives Microﬁlm
Rolls 139/463–64, 136/77, 136/81–82, and with the originals in the PA-AA, Türkei 183, vols. 36–40, 43–45, and 51.
5. Ulrich Trumpener, Germany and the Ottoman Empire (Princeton, 1968), 204–5, 269.
6. Vahakn N. Dadrian, The History of the Armenian Genocide (Providence, R.I., 1995), and Vahakn N.
Dadrian, German Responsibility in the Armenian Genocide (Watertown, Mass., 1996).

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
266 and its institutions in Turkey, as at home, were internally fractious and uncoordinated.
On the one hand, German policy regarding the genocide was largely the product of the
same military-cultural assumptions that animated German wartime policies in Europe.
These assumptions were most strongly articulated by some German officers in Turkey,
but they also had penetrated the thinking of certain inﬂuential diplomats. On the other
hand, other German foreign-political interests were clearly harmed by military “requirements.” More than anything else, however, the stark result of unalloyed “military necessity” horriﬁed most German observers who were on the spot, driving some to intervene
against the killing. The resulting German policy was typically at cross purposes, ineffective, and (self-) destructive. But it is a brilliant illustration, if another is needed, of the
logic and cost of “military necessity.”

The German-Turkish Alliance and the Military Mission
The German-Turkish alliance was a shotgun marriage of two partners whose immediate aims coincided but whose long-term goals (insofar as Germany had any) were contradictory. Three men, War Minister Enver Pasha, Interior Minister Mehmet Talât Pasha,
and the later commander of the 4th Army in Syria and Palestine, Cemal Pasha, were the
most powerful core of a government of perhaps ﬁfty shifting members. It was Enver who
proposed the alliance to a reluctant Ambassador Hans von Wangenheim on 22 July 1914.
The CUP hoped to use German support to create a modern, homogeneous state free of
foreign tutelage and interference. Speciﬁcally, the CUP wanted to remove or renounce the
reserve rights that foreign powers had gained over ﬁnancial, judicial, and other internal
matters (the “capitulations”) and to revoke the Reform Agreement of February 1914 that
Russia, seconded by Britain and France, had forced on Turkey. The agreement had established Armenian autonomy in areas of Anatolia, guaranteed by Russian intervention if
necessary. Once freed of these limits to Turkish sovereignty, the CUP dreamed of expansion into Russia and into the Balkans, from which the Ottoman Empire had recently been
expelled.7
The war doubtless came sooner than Enver expected; he and Talât had to maneuver
hard to push their fellow governors to begin hostilities (November 1914). But Enver and
his fellow radicals wanted war. Only war permitted them to abrogate the capitulations
and the Reform Agreement. Cemal remembered, “Our only hope was through the world
war to free ourselves from all conventions that were so many attacks on our independence
and in future to be able to live as an independent and free people. . . . Similarly, it was our
main goal . . . to dissolve the Armenian reforms that had been forced on us by Russia.”8
The “complete independence” from foreign intervention that Talât once summed up as
Turkey’s war aim meant freedom to “solve” the Armenian question; it is quite likely that

7. Trumpener, Germany, 19, 28. The correspondence surrounding the alliance, its terms, and renegotiation:
Carl Mühlmann, Deutschland und die Türkei, 1913–1914, Politische Wissenschaft, vol. 7 (Berlin, 1929), 92–101.
8. Ahmed Djemal, Erinnerungen eines Türkischen Staatsmannes (Munich, 1922), 353–54. Cf. Wangenheim to
Bethmann, Pera, 2 Feb. 1915, Doc. 15 of Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, 29.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Enver and Talât envisioned some radical solution as they pushed for war.9 In a long, care- 267
ful memo written in April 1916 Austrian Ambassador Janós Pallavicini summarized how
CUP leaders had instrumentalized the war:
The current leaders saw in the outbreak of the world war the favorable moment to
reshape things undisturbed by other states and to be able to establish a national
Turkish state by repressing all other nationalities. . . . The Young Turks hoped to
ﬁnd in us and Germany in this war support against external and therefore also
against internal enemies. This is the main reason that Turkey let us pull it into war
so easily in autumn 1914.
Unfortunately, the Young Turk leaders, who felt themselves strong enough in
this alliance to execute their program, took advantage of the situation to go
against the non-Turkish nationalities in the sharpest way. Only during the war
could Talât and Enver and their followers proceed against the Armenians as they
have done and also so frighten the other nations [ethnic groups] that today they
appear to have virtually achieved their Turkish national state.10
The Armenian genocide was therefore a central goal of Ottoman policy.
For the CUP, the alliance with Germany was a means toward long-term and above all
bigger goals. The same was not true for Germany. It had hastily concluded the alliance
for purely short-term military reasons as the outbreak of war neared. There was considerable difference of opinion about Turkey’s military value. Many officers in the military
mission and Ambassador Wangenheim judged Turkey weak and unreliable.11 Kaiser
Wilhelm, at ﬁrst, and then Chief of Staff Moltke, Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg, and the
Foreign Office overrode Wangenheim’s misgivings. When war actually did break out, almost as the alliance was being signed, they pressed for Turkey’s immediate entry into the
war.12
Turkey was militarily useful. It closed the Straits, thus cutting off Russia from direct
Allied support; it tied down Russian troops (and during the Gallipoli campaign, those of
Britain and France, along with Australia, New Zealand, and other members of the British
Empire); it threatened the Suez Canal; and it lent troops to the European theater.13 The alliance also strengthened Germany’s hand in the Balkans, bringing Bulgaria closer to the
Central Powers and encouraging Romania to remain neutral (for a time).14 But Turkey’s
disastrous campaign against Russia in December and January 1914–15 and its never-ending ﬁnancial and munitions crises made it “a heavy moral, ﬁnancial, and military bur9. Matthias Erzberger memo of his conversation with Enver and Talât of 10 Feb. 1916, Doc. 238, in Lepsius,
Deutschland und Armenien, 237.
10. Pallavicini to Foreign Minister Burián, Constantinople, Nr. 28/P.A., 8 Apr. 1916, HHStA PA XII 210,
reprinted in Institut, Armenian Genocide, 2:342–43.
11. Friedrich Kress von Kressenstein, Mit den Türken zum Suezkanal (Berlin, 1938), 15–16.
12. Trumpener, Germany, 15, 22; Jehuda L. Wallach, Anatomie einer Militärhilfe (Düsseldorf, 1976), 158–61,
166–67; Djemal, Erinnerungen, 136–42.
13. Mühlmann, Deutschland, 81–85.
14. Bethmann, Betrachtungen, 2:12.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
268 den,” as Ambassador Count Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff later recalled.15 More than
anything else, OHL knew that the war would be won or lost in Europe, not in Turkey.
Neither Falkenhayn nor Ludendorff harbored illusions about the Turks’ military capacities.16 OHL was therefore not the driving force behind Germany’s Turkish policy in the
war, despite worries about how the Allied invasion of the Dardanelles in spring and summer 1915 might harm Germany’s war effort.17 The most pro-Turkish voices in the government belonged to diplomats, especially to Arthur Zimmermann, undersecretary of the
Foreign Office.
Turkey loomed large for those who thought in global, world-policy terms. Turkey was
the only land route whereby Germany could strike directly at the British, either by cutting
Britain off from India at Suez, or by threatening India via Persia. Hitting Britain was the
object of the jihad, or holy war, for which Kaiser Wilhelm pressed and which the caliphate
officially declared on 14 November 1914.18 (The jihad helped fuel the atmosphere of intolerance that aided the genocide.)19 But even if such grandiose plans failed, Turkey was still
key to Germany’s world power status. If Britain could not be beaten, Germany could
compensate for stalemate in Europe and restriction of overseas colonies by predominating in the Near East through a Turkish client state beholden to it ﬁnancially, technically
(the Berlin-Baghdad railway), and militarily. Foreign Secretary Jagow wrote in July 1915
that “supporting Turkey is now and in the future for us a question of the foremost importance.”20 For this reason the chancellor and the Foreign Office pressed hard during the
summer and early fall of 1915 for Falkenhayn to open a third front against Serbia to link
up with the Turks. Zimmermann was so desperate to do so that on 1 August 1915 he
turned directly to Turkish Foreign Minister Halil Bey to have Enver lobby the reluctant
German chief of staff.21 The Foreign Office’s efforts on Turkey’s behalf could rely on vocal
support from the growing group of anti-English expansionists such as Admiral v. Tirpitz,
important sectors of the National Liberals, and the Pan-Germans.22
The more important that Turkey seemed to Germany’s future, the weaker Germany’s
own position in the alliance seemed to be.23 The alliance was not popular outside the rad-

15. Johann Heinrich Graf Bernstorff, Erinnerungen und Briefe (Zürich, 1936), 129. Bernstorff became ambassador in September 1917.
16. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 336–37; Janssen, Der Kanzler, 67; Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein
Kriegstagebuch, 2:104, 250; Wild, Briefe, 64.
17. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 44, 58–59, 262–63.
18. Humann to embassy, Therapia, 17 Aug. 1914, BA-MA Freiburg, RM 40, vol. 456, Archiv der Marine,
Kriegsakten, Politisches, Bd. 1, Akten der Mittelmeerdivision.
19. Libaridian, “Ultimate Repression,” 205; Pallavicini to Burián, Constantinople, Nr. 95/P.A., “streng vertraulich,” 12 Nov. 1915, HHStA PA I 944, cited in Institut, Armenian Genocide, 2:278.
20. “Zusatz zum Schreiben des Herrn Reichskanzler,” by Jagow, 24 July 1915, cited in Janssen, Der Kanzler,
283. Also Bethmann’s similar view of 4 July 1915, cited 138; and Zimmermann’s, 42–43.
21. Janssen, Der Kanzler, 278–79; Germany, Reichsarchiv, Die Weltkrieg 1914 bis 1918, 6:409–11.
22. Wernecke, Der Wille zur Weltgeltung, 289–93, 298; Tirpitz, Politische Dokumente, 59; Tirpitz, Erinnerungen (Leipzig, 1919), 479.
23. Both Ambassadors Wolff-Metternich and Bernstorff criticized this misapprehension by their superiors
in the chancellery and Foreign Office: Wolff-Metternich to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 711, 7 Dec. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei
183, vol. 40; Bernstorff, Erinnerungen, 128, 140–41.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
ical core of the CUP. Zimmermann claimed that “our alliance rests on the six eyes of 269
Talât, Enver, and Halil.”24 The CUP aim of independence also predisposed the Turks to
chafe at German or Austrian criticism, which sensitized German diplomats to the dangers
of falling into “England’s role after the Congress of Berlin, or recently Russia’s as a protector of the Armenians,” as Wangenheim put it.25 Unfortunately, four of the six eyes on
which the alliance allegedly rested belonged to the two men, Talât and Enver, most responsible for the genocide. And the chancellor’s and Foreign Office’s campaign for a third
front coincided with the height of the killing. Germany’s civilian, more than its military,
leadership was strongly tempted to underestimate Germany’s own strength in the alliance
and to reckon according to the imagined expediencies of realpolitik.
If OHL chose a backseat regarding Turkey, the German military mission there could
not. Allied contemporaries and some scholars subsequently have attributed great policymaking power to the military mission.26 But it was as ill-deﬁned and fractured as most ofﬁcial Wilhelminian institutions; it was incapable of forming consistent policy. The treaty
setting up the military mission was an entirely military product; neither the chancellor
nor the Foreign Office was well-informed about it.27 It was designed for peacetime and
had to be hastily renegotiated when war broke out. Its terms were vague.28 Its head from
the beginning in December 1913 to the end of the war was Gen. Otto Liman von Sanders.
He became the second or third highest ranking officer in the Turkish army, after War
Minister Enver, and the only German officer with ex officio command power. According
to the treaty, he was to participate in military decision making and to inspect units and
fortiﬁcations. The other forty German officers, whose duties were left unspeciﬁed, were
placed in staff and management positions; that is, they functioned like the general staff
system at home, where junior officers drew up plans but the command power rested with
the (in this case, Turkish) senior commanders. Their numbers grew slowly until October
1915; they had reached 290 by early 1916 and ultimately rose to almost 800, with 32,000
German troops.29 The number of German officers at the height of the genocide in 1915 was
thus relatively small.
Both the military mission treaty and Wilhelm’s parting instructions to his officers underscored that officers were to conﬁne their activities to the purely military, leaving politics and internal matters to their Turkish hosts.30 When Turkey entered the war, the inﬂuence of German officers increased because military operations were being conducted; the
disastrous campaign of 1914–15 and the attack on Suez were both German ideas, for ex24. Zimmermann in a conversation with Lepsius: Johann Lepsius, “Mein Besuch in Konstantinopel, JuliAugust 1915,” Der Orient 1:3 (1919): 21–33, here 30; Djemal, Erinnerungen, 116.
25. Wangenheim to Foreign Office, Pera, Nr. 228, 15 Apr. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 36, also Doc. 26 in
Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, 48–49.
26. Dadrian, German Responsibility, 109–16; Dinkel, “German Officers,” 100, 102, 104.
27. Wallach, Anatomie, 128.
28. It is reprinted in Mühlmann, Deutschland, Anlage 2, 88–92.
29. Wallach, Anatomie, 179; Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, xxvii; 25,000 troops: Trumpener, Germany, 104; Groener told the cabinet there were 32,000 troops in Turkey, Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 566.
30. Otto Liman von Sanders, Fünf Jahre Türkei (Berlin, 1919), 12.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
270 ample.31 But the war also decreased the German officers’ power in several ways. With
three exceptions, no German officer commanded troops. Moreover, whereas a peacetime
advisor might be able to afford to use threatened resignation to get his way, there was no
question of that in wartime.32 For the military, as for the diplomats, Germany’s perceived
need for allies and Menschenmaterial elevated the status of even weak allies in their eyes.
And once the threat to the Dardanelles had been beaten off, Enver and the CUP leaders
became swollen with self-conﬁdence and were even less likely to let a foreign power, even
an ally, interfere with “internal” matters.33
But more than this, the military mission was incapable of policy making altogether.
Policy, or at least coordination, would have rested with the chief, Liman. Alas, Liman was
not even on speaking terms with Ambassador Wangenheim, who complained that Liman
kept the Austrian military attaché better informed than he was.34 The archives are ﬁlled
with vociferous official complaints about the (admittedly) misanthropic, paranoid, and
downright peculiar head of the military mission. Furthermore, Liman and Enver were on
equally bad terms, so Liman lost whatever potential there was to inﬂuence Turkish policy
at the top. Liman’s relations with his subordinates were no better. Neither those who supported or condoned the genocide nor those who actively opposed it could stand him.
Once Liman left Constantinople on 25 March 1915 to command the defense of the coast,
he was geographically cut off as well.
But even a congenial chief would have had to struggle against the familiar fracturing
of military authority. OHL received reports directly from Liman, the German military
and naval attachés, the chief of the Mediterranean naval divisions and coast fortiﬁcations,
the German chief of the Turkish General Staff (Gen. Friedrich Bronsart von Schellendorf), Field Marshal Gen. Colmar von der Goltz (after December 1914, personal advisor
to the sultan and the war minister), and later from General Falkenhayn, after he assumed
command of Turkish and German troops in the Near East.35 All of these incumbents were
free to act independently. In short, policy making, or at least decisions with policy consequences, could and did easily devolve downward. There was a good chance that the embassy would learn of military decisions belatedly, if at all, and no chance that the decisions
would be coordinated.
There was one more immense hindrance to concerted military policy. Only two officers, neither one a member of the military mission proper, knew anything about Turkey.
General v. d. Goltz had supervised Turkish military education from 1883 to 1895. OHL reexiled him to Turkey in December 1914 after he had demonstrated unacceptable leniency
toward Belgian civilians as ﬁrst governor-general there. His new position was personal
31. Wallach, Anatomie, 167–68.
32. Felix Guse, Die Kaukasusfront im Weltkrieg bis zum Frieden von Brest (Leipzig, 1940), 113.
33. Self-conﬁdence: Colmar von der Goltz, Denkwürdigkeiten, ed. Friedrich von der Goltz and Wolfgang
Foerster (Berlin, 1929), 427.
34. Wangenheim to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 1629, 16 Dec. 1914, PA-AA, Türkei 139, “Überlassung von preussischen offizieren und Finanzbeamten an die Pforte zu Reorganisationszwecken,” (1914–1920), vol. 33. Vols. 33–49
are replete with complaints about Liman. See National Archives Microﬁlm Roll T 136/81.
35. On personal and institutional hindrances to policy making: Carl Mühlmann, Das Deutsch-Türkische
Waffenbündnis im Weltkriege (Leipzig, 1940), 285–314, esp. 291–96; Kress, Mit den Türken, 22; Wallach, Anatomie,
174–82, 189, 191, 206.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
advisor to the sultan and, after February 1915, to Enver, who apparently agreed with OHL 271
that Goltz was “too old” and “soft.”36 Goltz remained the outsider he had always been, institutionally isolated until his death in 1916 during the quixotic expedition to Mesopotamia and Persia.37
The second officer was naval attaché Lt. Cdr. Hans von Humann. The son of an
archeologist, he had grown up in Turkey and had become friends with Enver during
Enver’s time as military attaché in Berlin. Humann’s continued close personal ties made
him useful as an unofficial conduit to the war minister for the German embassy during
the war. Humann was a rabid anti-Semite and enthusiastic expansionist, whose views
placed him close to the Pan-Germans. While his official position as attaché carried neither command nor policy-making power, his personal connections and ideological convictions opened the possibility of inﬂuence beyond his station.38
None of the other officers had prior experience in Turkey, nor could they speak Turkish (or Armenian or Greek). They were completely dependent for information on their
Turkish fellow officers. The Turkish interpretation of the treacherous Armenians and
Greeks and of the requirements of “military necessity” became for many German officers
simply facts that formed the basis of their own reckoning. Developing or retaining a critical distance from Turkish (mis)information would have required considerably more historical, linguistic, and political education than most officers possessed. The credulity of
many German officers toward the prodigious Turkish propaganda campaign thus came
from several sources: tendentious information, lack of a robust contrary perspective
(from prior education or from public announcements of the German government), contractual loyalty to their comrades and allies, and the similarity between the story that
Turkish officers told and their own military-cultural assumptions about a world of enemies and traitors, the instrumentalization of civilians for military purposes, and the necessity of using force to the end.
Thus the embassy was hobbled by Turkish sensitivity to foreign meddling and by its
own sense of weakness, while the military mission concentrated on military operations.
Neither was nearly as powerful as contemporaries thought.39 And neither controlled the
officers on the spot. If there was direct German involvement in the Armenian genocide, it
came from those officers.

The Deportation Orders
The radical wing of the CUP had been making ideological and institutional preparations for the “ﬁnal solution to the Armenian problem” since 1909.40 The 1909 CUP party
36. Enver, cited in Trumpener, Germany, 89.
37. Uninﬂuential in the army: Goltz, Denkwürdigkeiten, 154–57, 159–60, 377, 380–81, 393, 401.
38. BA-MA Freiburg, RM 40, Nr. 456, “Besprechungen mit Enver Pascha, Sammlung Humann,” 1–105;
“Vertrauliche Mitteilungen,” 106–411; Ernst Jäckh Papers, Yale University Library.
39. Trumpener, Germany, 68–69; Wallach, Anatomie, 158, 167; Mühlmann, Deutsch-türkische Waffenbündnis, 285–314; Joseph Pomiankowski, Der Zusammenbruch des Ottomanischen Reiches (Graz, 1969), 163; Liman,
Fünf Jahre Türkei, 31, 34; Pallavicini to Foreign Office, Pera, tel. Nr. 588, 10 Oct. 1914, in Institut, Armenian Genocide, 2:170–71.
40. Critical German consuls recognized the genocide as a ﬁnal solution and used that language to describe

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
272

Portrait of the German embassy staff in Constantinople, 1914 or 1915. Painting by W. V. Krauss; in
Joseph Pomiankowski, Der Zusammenbruch des Ottomanischen Reiches (Vienna: Amathea-Verlag,
1928), Tafel 3.

statute had proclaimed homogeneity as its national goal. In August 1910, a secret CUP assembly ﬁrst discussed deportation as a possible route to this aim.41 Two years later, the
party entrusted the minority problem to its chief ideologue, Ziya Gökalp, the author of
Pan-Turanism (the consolidation and expansion of Turkey from an Anatolian core), for
study. Two weeks after the Reform Agreements were signed in February 1914, Enver convened the ﬁrst of a series of secret meetings to plan for removal of the “non-Turkish population centers that were exposed to negative foreign inﬂuence and were located at strateit: For example, Hoffmann to embassy, Alexandrette, 8 Nov. 1915, Nr. 944, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 41; Scheubner-Richter to Bethmann, Munich, 4 Dec. 1916, in Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, Doc. Nr. 309, p. 307;
Bernstorff to Foreign Office, Constantinople, 23 May 1918, tel. Nr. 782, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 51; Bergfeld to
Bethmann, Trabzon, 9 July 1915, Nr. 35, ibid., vol. 37; Rössler to Bethmann, Aleppo, 27 July 1915, Doc. 120, Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, 110; Scheubner-Richter to Foreign Office, “Denkschrift über die ArmenierFrage,” Erzerum, 10 Aug. 1915, Nr. 582, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol.39.
41. Taner Akçam, Armenien und der Völkermord (Hamburg, 1996), 36–37. My discussion of the early preparations for genocide follows Akçam, whose account is based on the documents admitted as evidence in the Istanbul war crimes trials of 1919.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
gic points,” as a participant later reported.42 The Greeks of Thrace and western Anatolia 273
were the ﬁrst target. The Special Organization (armed irregulars used for guerrilla and
terrorist warfare), assisted by government and army officials, deported all Greek men of
military age to labor brigades beginning in summer 1914 and lasting through 1916. A
leader of the Special Organization claimed that 1.15 million people had been deported.
The postwar Turkish parliament spoke of ﬁve hundred to ﬁve hundred and ﬁfty thousand
deaths as a result of these actions.43
Preparations for “solving the Armenian problem” followed the same pattern and
seem part of the same campaign. On 2 August 1914, the CUP ordered the formation of
more Special Organization units under the leadership of CUP party leader Dr. Bahaeddin
Shakir, who became the chief technician of the Armenian genocide. He established his
headquarters at Erzerum in the heart of Armenian Anatolia. Later in August, moderate
civil bureaucrats and military men were removed from office in Anatolia. The Special Organization bands began extortion and murder campaigns against Armenians in late August and September, apparently trying to provoke armed resistance that would provide
an alibi for government retaliation.44
The CUP therefore hardly needed Colmar v. d. Goltz or Paul Rohrbach to give them
the idea for mass population removal.45 Mass deportation, together with widespread massacres and ethnic evacuations, had already characterized the Balkan Wars of 1912–13 and
been under discussion in CUP circles for several years. Goltz did believe Turkey should
cut its European losses and concentrate its strength in Anatolia, but at least in the 1890s,
when he ﬁrst expounded these views, he advocated liberal constitutional and economic
reforms to integrate non-Turkish populations into a progressive state.46 For his part,
Rohrbach adamantly rejected the Armenian genocide, as he had the similar “solution” in
SWA, and agitated tirelessly in Berlin to get the government to take active steps against
it.47 Anyway, as Arnold Toynbee remarked in 1915 against the same charge of German ideological authorship, “The Turks do not need tempters.”48 But the CUP went from mere
preparation to actual deportation in winter and spring 1915. What precipitated this shift?
The means of violence provide a clue.
42. Testimony of Kushçubashi Eshref, a leader of the Special Organization (Teskilat-i Muhsusa), cited in
Akçam, Armenien, 41.
43. Akçam, ibid., 42–43. Bloxham disputes the deaths: Donald Bloxham, “The Beginning of the Armenian
Catastrophe,” in Der Völkermord an den Armeniern und die Shoah, ed. Hans-Lukas Kieser and Dominik J.
Schaller (Zurich, 2002), 101–28, here 106.
44. Akçam, Armenien, 52–53; Yves Ternon, Les Arméniens (Paris, 1977), 201–3. On the military background
of the Special Organization see James J. Reid, “Militarism, Partisan War, and Destructive Inclinations in Ottoman Military History,” Armenian Review 39, no. 3/155 (autumn 1986): 1–21; Donald Bloxham, “Power Politics,
Prejudice, Protest, and Propaganda,” in Völkermord, ed. Kieser and Schaller, 213–44, here 220–21.
45. Dadrian, German Responsibility, 20, 113–16.
46. Colmar von der Goltz, “Stärke und Schwäche des Türkischen Reichs,” Deutsche Rundschau 93:1 (Dec.
1897): 46–70, esp. 65, 70. The Denkwürdigkeiten are not a reliable source for Goltz’s own views; they contain
strong völkisch additions by Goltz’s apparently National Socialist son, Friedrich, who edited them with Wolfgang Foerster.
47. Rohrbach to Ernst Jäckh, 15 Aug. 1916, copy, BA Koblenz, Nl. Rohrbach, vol. 112; Trumpener, Germany,
227n63.
48. Toynbee, Armenian Atrocities, 108. Same point: Pomiankowski, Zusammenbruch, 161.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
274

The killings were mostly orchestrated and carried out by the Special Organization.
These ad hoc units had been engaged in dirty, guerilla warfare against the Italians in
Tripoli in 1911 and against Turkey’s Balkan enemies during the First Balkan War.49 The
military mission had reorganized the Special Organization before the First World War.50
After August 1914 the CUP organized such units again and used them in two mutually
supporting ways to pursue the goal of Pan-Turanism: by engaging in guerrilla raids across
the Russian border and by provoking Armenians through extortion and killings.51 The
Special Organization units began as a mixed military-CUP institution. Nominally subordinate to the local army (in Anatolia, the 3rd Army), they were called into existence by the
CUP but drew arms and intelligence from the military. Units destined for trans-Caucasus
ﬁghting sometimes had German officers.52 Beginning in February 1915 the Special Organization began to be removed from army control and placed entirely under the command
of the CUP zealot Dr. Shakir. Shakir had returned to Constantinople on 13 March 1915
from his provincial headquarters in Erzerum in order to take part in several meetings of
the CUP Central Committee. The process of transferring command of the Special Organization to CUP control was complete by May 1915 when the ﬁrst mass deportations from
eastern Anatolia started.53 Thereafter, orders for “deportation” generally came from
Talât’s Ministry of the Interior and went to the Special Organization, to provincial heads
of government (valis), half of whom in Anatolia served double duty as part of the Special
Organization anyway, and occasionally to regular military units.54 Institutionally, then,
the mechanism for genocide shifted from the military to the CUP and the government at
about the time the killings became widespread and systematic.
This institutional history suggests that an original military impetus was transformed
and systematized by the CUP for its own ideological purposes.55 The army in question was
the Turkish 3rd Army, ﬁghting in eastern Anatolia, commanded by Mahmut Kâmil,
whose chief of staff was the German Lt. Col. Felix Guse. Military defeat was the precipitator. Pressured by Chief of the (Turkish) General Staff Bronsart, who wanted Turkey to tie
down Russian troops as soon as possible, and ﬁred by his own reckless ambition, War
Minister Enver had forced the 3rd Army into a premature winter campaign against the
Russians in the Caucasus in mid-December 1914. Liman had warned that Turkey was un49. Erik J. Zürcher, Turkey (London, 1997), 110–11, 114.
50. Bloxham, “Power Politics,” 220–21.
51. Ternon, Arméniens, 202–3; Dadrian, German Responsibility, 44–46.
52. Austrian Consul Kwiatkowski to Foreign Minister Berchtold, Trabzon, Nr. Z. 79/P, 8 Nov. 1914,
reprinted in Institut, Armenian Genocide, 2:171.
53. Akçam, Armenien, 64–65.
54. Ibid., 65–67; Dadrian, German Responsibility, 41.
55. The Turkish General Staff documents support the conclusion that “at the highest levels, Enver Pasha and
the military staff appear to have generated the basic idea of the forced evacuation of the Armenians in response
to a military problem which threatened the security of the Turkish Third Army and therefore of the empire itself.” Edward J. Erickson, Ordered to Die (Westport, Conn., 2001), 103. Another recent survey based on archival
documentation (and which hews to the current, official Turkish line of denial) also concludes that an original
military situation was taken over by the Interior Ministry: Mim Kemâl Öke, The Armenian Question, 1914–1923
(Nicosia, 1988), 127–33.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
prepared. Of ninety thousand soldiers who set out in December, only twelve thousand 275
lived through the frigid retreat in January and February.56 That retreat took the army
through largely Armenian-populated territory. Reports from the 3rd Army began to repeat the widespread fear that local Armenians would side with the advancing Russians
and perhaps rise up in anticipation of being freed from centuries of Turkish oppression.
An American military historian, Edward Erickson, who was recently permitted partial access to the Turkish General Staff archives, reports that the documents give the impression
of “a rising pattern of civil unrest, followed by an armed rebellion [in mid-March in
Van].” They “also show an escalating response by the military culminating in the mass deportation of the Armenians.”57 Erickson’s impressions are precisely what German staff ofﬁcers would have received from their Turkish sources.
There are excellent reasons to doubt the smooth narrative moving from revolt at Van
to deportation.58 The number of Turkish-Armenian defectors ﬁghting with Russia was
militarily insigniﬁcant.59 Civil unrest was mostly provoked by the Special Organization.
The major conﬂicts in Van (c. 20 April–17 May 1915), and later Urfa and Mossa Degh, were
all cases where Armenians fought to save themselves from deportation and massacre.60
Turkish government officials gave three conﬂicting accounts of events at Van. Chronology
and geography also argue against Van as the “cause.” Enver’s directive for “increased security precautions” against Armenians preceded the Van conﬂict. So did deportations and
massacres at Adana, Zeitun, Marash, and Dörtyol. Furthermore, these occurred in western not eastern Anatolia, where the 3rd Army operated. Deportations therefore began in
two separate regions. Nonetheless, the legend that a dangerous uprising at Van caused and
justiﬁed the deportations was almost universally accepted by contemporary German observers (even by those who tried to stop the genocide).61
Did German staff officers initiate the deportations in eastern Anatolia? And if they
did, what did they mean by deportation? We know that some German staff officers did indeed advise the Turkish army to deport Armenian civilians. But the timing of their advice
is unclear. After the war, Lt. Col. Otto von Feldmann (who had been head of operations in
the Ottoman General Staff) wrote:
Even German officers—I myself among them—were forced to advise freeing the
rear of the army from Armenians in certain areas at certain times. The duty of selfpreservation of the Turkish army did not permit leaving strong forces to guard
rear lines. Without that, however, no operation was possible, no reverse at the
56. Zürcher, Turkey, 119.
57. Erickson, Ordered to Die, 96.
58. For a contrary but carefully differentiated view, see Bloxham, “Beginning,” and Bloxham, “Power Politics,” 219.
59. Akçam, Armenien, 380n39.
60. Dadrian, German Responsibility, 31–34.
61. Three accounts: Trumpener, Germany, 222. Timing: Erickson, Ordered to Die, 98; Akçam, Armenien, 63.
Credulity of genocide critics: Scheubner-Richter to embassy, 5 Aug. 1915, Doc. 129 in Lepsius, Deutschland und
Armenien, 117.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
276

front could be sustained, so long as Armenians lived in the rear. The experience
right at the beginning of the war in the east had shown this lesson.62
Feldmann’s reference was to the disastrous retreat in January–February 1915, though his
statement does not date the advice. His account suggests that German officers recommended not universal deportation but speciﬁc deportations, which nonetheless encompassed the entire Armenian population of an area, not just draft-age males. Guse, the
chief of staff of the 3rd Army, described military fears as anticipatory: “In the event of a
Russian advance one had to reckon with the possibility of an Armenian uprising,” he
noted in his memoirs.63 Both Guse and Feldmann could have been referring to the period
February to April 1915. The other three documented examples we have of German officers
advising deportation all occurred after the genocide was well underway. Bronsart ordered
Armenian males working in forced labor brigades to be removed on 25 July 1915; and he
advised Liman (who refused) to deport Greeks from the coast in August 1916.64 In October 1915 Lieutenant Colonel Böttrich appended his signature to a decree from the Turkish
War Ministry for the deportation of 848 Armenian railroad workers from the BerlinBaghdad railway.65 No other documents directly linking German officers to deportation
have come to light.
It is possible, in my judgment likely, that Bronsart, Guse, and Feldmann (who all accepted the standard Turkish stories of Armenian perﬁdy) recommended clearing the rear
echelon of the 3rd Army by deportation in late winter and early spring 1915. That advice
inadvertently gave Enver and Talât the cover they wanted to pursue the CUP’s ideologically driven “ﬁnal solution,” whose ﬁrst steps they had already taken.66 Feldmann and
Guse explained the standard logic behind the German recommendations: the military necessity to save the weak Turkish army required removing all potential threats and, without
hesitation, instrumentalizing civilians. This thinking was consistent with standard assumptions of military culture as we have seen them operate elsewhere. Enver cloaked the
provisional law of 27 May 1915, which was the legal cover for the genocide, in the mantle of
military necessity. It gave military commanders from the division level and higher the
power “in the case of military necessity, or when spying or treason are suspected, to remove inhabitants individually or en masse from villages or cities and settle them in other
62. Feldmann, “Zum Talaatprozess,” Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung 301 (30 June 1921), 2, cited (in a different
translation) by Dinkel, “German Officers,” 96. Emphasis in original.
63. Guse, Kaukasusfront, 27; Dinkel, “German Officers,” 101.
64. Dadrian, German Responsibility, 117; Dinkel, “German Officers,” 88.
65. The order is Anlage 3 of Foreign Minister to Treutler, Berlin, Nr. 209, 13 Nov. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 152,
vol. 83. Number: Neurath to Foreign Office, Pera, tel. Nr. 2532, 2 Nov. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 39.
66. A German missionary with good sources of information from inside Turkey wrote unhesitatingly that
German officers had suggested deportations as the Turkish 3rd Army retreated in January–February 1915: Julius
Richter, “Die deutschen evangelischen Missionskreise und das armenische Volk,” Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift
46:2 (Feb. 1919): 33–45, here 36. The Austrian consul Kwiatkowski also heard from “usually reliable German
sources” that German officers advised deportation, “but not in the manner in which these were then done.”
Kwiatkowski to Burián, Nr. 70/P, Vertraulich, Trabzon, 22 Oct. 1915, HHStA PA XII 463, in Institut, Armenian
Genocide, 2:252.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
areas.”67 Apparently Enver showed this order to General v. d. Goltz, who approved it, 277
since it was entirely consistent with military practice, especially in occupied zones.68
Goltz’s later actions to stop deportations indicate it is unlikely he understood its larger
signiﬁcance. Enver’s order was simultaneously approved by the Interior Ministry and by
the cabinet three days later, and was passed by the Ottoman Assembly on 15 September
1915.69
Standard military thinking easily suggested deportation, but not genocide. German
officers had no plausible reason to recommend such a staggering breach of commonly accepted norms.70 Genocide was not necessary to pursue the war; in fact, it was counterproductive. It harmed the war effort by consuming resources that might have supported the
army; it ruined the economy (of which Armenian craftsmen and traders were the linchpin); and it destroyed the security of the rear lines it was supposed to protect, especially
regarding the 4th Army, whose supplies stopped ﬂowing on roads choked with corpses
and rank with typhus.71 And most German officers, like Guse and Feldmann, had no ideological reason to favor genocide.
Two officers, Bronsart and Humann, did seem ideologically prepared to accept or
even advocate genocide. Bronsart’s views at the time are hard to reconstruct because his
memoirs project his later National Socialist convictions backward.72 Certainly, Bronsart
seemed well informed about the decision for “deportation.” In February 1919, in a letter
defending German officers’ conduct, he wrote that “the entire plans and orders for the repression of the uprising [in Van, which Bronsart consistently interpreted as the “cause”]
were done by Turks in the Turkish War Ministry (not the General Staff) and in the Ministry of the Interior.”73 When German civilian officials of the Baghdad Railway asked him
to prevent the deportation of Armenian employees, Bronsart remained passive, hiding
behind technical excuses, apparently motivated by careerism, not conviction.74 However,
as we have seen, Bronsart twice ordered deportations for military reasons.
But Bronsart’s wartime job was to oversee the Turkish war effort, not to create the
long-term circumstances for a consolidated nation-state, even if he believed that the permanent disappearance of the Armenians would have beneﬁted that goal. In his memoirs,
Bronsart remarked that he had to remind Enver repeatedly that the war would be won in
Europe, not Turkey, which suggests that Bronsart kept his own eyes on the narrow mili67. Karl Axenfeld, “Zur Steuer der Wahrheit über die Deportation des armenischen Volkes,” Allgemeine
Missions-Zeitschrift 46:3 (Mar. 1919): 57–64, here 58; Erickson, Ordered to Die, 102.
68. Dinkel, “German Officers,” 81.
69. Öke, Armenian Question, 132–33. Öke believes Talât authored the order at Enver’s repeated request.
70. For a different argument arriving at the same conclusion: Bloxham, “Power Politics,” esp. 214–17, 222.
71. Kress, Mit den Türken, 130, 132; Guse, Kaukasusfront, 64–65, 96; Trumpener, Germany, 67.
72. Dinkel, “German Officers,” 103. On Bronsart in the Böttrich affair: Hilmar Kaiser, “The Baghdad Railways and the Armenian Genocide, 1914–1916,” in Remembrance and Denial, ed. Richard Hovannisian (Detroit,
1999), 67–122, here 82–83.
73. Bronsart to Karl Axenfeld, Damerow, 10 Feb. 1919, copy, PA-AA, Nl. Göppert, Nr. 5. Emphases in original omitted.
74. Kaiser, “Baghdad Railways,” 82–83.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
278 tary task at hand.75 His marginalia critical of consular intervention also focused on alleged
Turkish military needs.76 Despite his racially based anti-Armenianism, Bronsart continued to maintain that the annihilation was an unintended consequence of Turkey’s technical inability to carry out a humane deportation, an unfortunate byproduct of “military
necessity,” as he put it.77 Unlike Trotha, Bronsart did not explicitly embrace genocide as a
policy.
Lieutenant Commander v. Humann was an earlier and better informed pro-Turkish
ideologue than Bronsart. Unlike the chief of staff, Humann called a spade a spade—and
cheered the results. Already on 15 June 1915 he informed his naval superiors in Berlin that
“because of their conspiracy with the Russians, the Armenians are being more or less annihilated. That is hard, but useful.” He cited Talât’s words as to why it was useful: “In
order to be better allies for you, that is, without the weakness of an internal enemy.”78 This
was a longer-term, geopolitical perspective, far beyond merely securing the rear lines. But
Humann’s job as naval officer would not have positioned him to urge such a sweeping
and expensive policy or even to broach the narrower issue of deportation from behind the
3rd Army. It is more likely that Humann learned early on of the true scope and goal of the
“deportation” program from his friend Enver and gave it his blessing.
Although the documentary evidence will only permit us to speculate about whether
German officers’ recommendations helped precipitate the shift in CUP policy from
provocative killing to mass murder via deportation, it clearly shows that a few officers advised deportation even after they knew that deportation meant death. It is impossible to
tell if they actively approved of the consequences (as did Humann) or were simply indifferent to them. “Military necessity” covered both positions. And Guse, Feldmann, Humann, and Bronsart all continued to cite military necessity to justify the genocide into the
1920s and beyond.79 Even Liman, who several times intervened to protect Armenians and
Greeks from deportation, testiﬁed at the 1921 trial of Talât’s assassin that military necessity caused the deportations, which had turned deadly because of mismanagement, not
intention.80
Few German officers actively participated in the genocide. Field Marshal v. d. Goltz
came close on one occasion. After having responded to a governor’s request for military
75. Bronsart v. Schellendorf, “Lebenserinnerungen,” BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Fragment Bronsart (MSg.
1/2039), p. 164.
76. Dinkel, “German Officers,” 106.
77. Bronsart, “Ein Zeugnis für Talaat Pascha,” Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung (DAZ) 342 (24 July 1921).
Racism and military necessity: Bronsart to Hanseatische Verlagsanstalt Hamburg, 23 Nov. 1939, BA-MA
Freiburg, Nl. Bronsart. Emphasis in original.
78. Humann marginalium (dated 15 June 1915) to a telegram of the consular deputy in Mosul of 10 June 1915,
BA-MA Freiburg, RM 40, Nr. 456, p. 93, cited in Dinkel, “German Officers,” 113.
79. “x—” (probably Humann, editor of the Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung), “Zum Talaat Prozess,” DAZ 255
(3 June 1921), 2; “x—,” Der Freispruch des Mörders,” DAZ 256 (4 June 1921), 2; “Zum Talaat-Prozess—von einer
deutschen Persönlichkeit die in der kritischen Zeit lange in dem umstrittenen ostanatolischen Gebiet an leitender Stelle tätig war,” whom Dinkel identiﬁes as Guse, DAZ 297 (28 June 1921), 2; Feldmann, “Zum Talaatprozess,” DAZ 301 (30 June 1921), 2; Bronsart v. Schellendorf, “Ein Zeugnis für Talaat Pascha,” DAZ 342 (24 July
1921). See Dinkel, “German Officers,” 93–99.
80. “Ks” (author), “Die Ermordung Talaat Paschas,” DAZ 254 (3 June 1921), 2.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
help against Armenian and Syrian Christian rebels near Mosul, Goltz was informed by the 279
German deputy consul there that the “rebels” were defending themselves against the governor’s designs to kill them. Goltz immediately called back the detachment, because he
“did not want German officers to intervene in this matter.”81
The only well-documented case of active German participation concerns the shelling
of Urfa, where Armenians fought against their deportation and murder from fortiﬁed positions in the Armenian church and surrounding quarter. In early October 1915, Turkish
commander Fakri Pasha ordered his aide, Maj. Eberhard Wolfskeel von Reichenberg, to
train his artillery on the Armenian quarter. Wolfskeel complied and Urfa soon fell; its surviving inhabitants were driven off into the maelstrom they had fought to escape. Wolfskeel described the action to his wife as a regular battle, although he referred to the Armenians as “bands.” “But it is a battle again, and it is truly a joy to hear bullets whistling once
more,” he reported enthusiastically. The artillery job itself he found “quite interesting and
pretty [hübsch]. Now the unimportant part begins, the removal of the civilian population
and the courts-martial. Thank God, I don’t have to concern myself much with these. They
are internal Turkish matters and don’t concern me, but one can’t avoid seeing them and
that is not pleasant.”82 Wolfskeel participated in the house-to-house searches that followed, attributing resistance to fanaticism or bad conscience, never to desperation or innocence. Insofar as the ﬁghting differed from the usual, he explained it as “the horror of
civil war.”83 Consul Rössler protested Wolfskeel’s participation at Urfa (and Mossa Degh),
but the major found it merely his soldierly duty.84 Wolfskeel denied rumors the Armenians had slaughtered Muslims or rebelled.85 He did not act from revenge or from ideology.
Wolfskeel, instead, neatly compartmentalized responsibility—here, military duty, there,
Turkish internal affairs. He soldiered along the road to genocide one dutiful step at a time.

German Diplomatic Intervention
It is unclear how much embassy personnel knew about the role German officers
played in the decision for deportation or in actual deportations themselves. Wangenheim,
who was ambassador until his sudden death in October 1915, was on good terms with
Bronsart and Humann. His reports, as we shall see, for too long uncritically accepted the
“military necessity” argument. But the ﬂap over Lieutenant Colonel Böttrich’s signature
suggests that civilian leaders, at least in Berlin, were shocked at any direct German involvement in deportation. Böttrich, railroad section chief in the General Staff, had signed
an order to deport Armenian railroad workers.86 The Foreign Office collected the agitated
correspondence on the case under the heading “Mistakes of Lt. Col. Böttrich”; Legation
81. Neurath to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 669, copy, 12 Nov. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 40.
82. Wolfskeel to his wife, Urfa, 12 and 16 Oct. 1915, BA-MA Freiburg, Nl. Wolfskeel, vol. 6, pp. 14, 16–17.
83. Wolfskeel to his wife, Urfa, 19 Oct. 1915, ibid., 20. Also, Bloxham, “Power Politics,” 219.
84. Dadrian, German Responsibility, 58.
85. Rössler to Bethmann, Aleppo, Nr. 108, 16 Nov. 1915; Oppenheim’s report, forwarded by Wolff-Metternich to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 701, 29 Nov. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 40.
86. Kaiser, “Baghdad Railways”; cf. Dadrian, Armenian Genocide, 261–62; Dadrian, German Responsibility,
19, 22–23, 131–33.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
280 Secretary Constantin von Neurath wrote that the case “showed again [Böttrich’s] complete lack of understanding of conditions here.”87 Foreign Secretary Jagow was incensed
that Böttrich “not only did not protest the committee decision [to deport the Armenians]
to the war minister, but he condescended to send it on with his signature.”88 Jagow apparently expected German officers to protest Turkish policy. He tried to get Falkenhayn to
remove Böttrich, but Falkenhayn refused, citing “military interests.”89 He seemed not to
understand or share Jagow’s fears that a German signature on a deportation document
would play into Allied propaganda about Germany’s complicity. However, Falkenhayn
did follow Jagow’s request to ask Enver to postpone deportation until after the war, a successful ploy that saved many of the Armenian workers from death.90 It is hard to believe
that Berlin would have attached such importance to Böttrich’s signature if the diplomats
had known about the deeper involvement of officers like Bronsart, Guse, or Feldmann.
The story of Germany’s inconsistent and ineffective diplomatic intervention has been
well told by Trumpener.91 It remains to focus on the military reasoning that saturated and
paralyzed German diplomacy.
The ﬁrst (willing) victim of the military chimera was Ambassador Wangenheim.92
Wangenheim had energetically protested “atrocities” (Ausschreitungen) against Armenians in late December 1914. In late March 1915, when the ﬁrst deportations from Zeitun had
begun, he supported Consul Rössler’s efforts to stop these, and he substantiated the accounts by the Armenian Patriarch of Constantinople of what had happened.93 But as reports of violence mounted, Wangenheim began to close ranks with the Turkish government. On 15 April he still believed the Armenians were largely innocent of organized
revolutionary activity, but he began to have doubts because German officers reported disloyalty of Armenian troops in the campaign against Russia. These doubts conveniently
ran in the same direction as diplomatic reason, which warned against assuming the same
role as Armenian protector that the Allies had recently played. Protection seemed especially unwise because of the “currently so unfavorable mood in governmental circles
against the Armenians. . . . Otherwise we run the danger of risking more important interests that are closer to us for a perhaps vain cause,” he wrote.94 Safeguarding these interests
meant accepting inevitable Allied charges holding Germany responsible for the “injus87. Neurath to Foreign Office, Pera, Nr. 2563, 8 Nov. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 152, vol. 83.
88. Marginalium to report A 32601, ibid.
89. Falkenhayn to Treutler, General Headquarters, Nr. 930, 19 Nov. 1915, ibid.
90. Kaiser, “Baghdad Railways,” 86.
91. Trumpener, Germany, ch. 7.
92. U.S. Ambassador Henry Morgenthau pilloried his colleague in several inﬂuential memoirs. Unfortunately, parts of the memoirs were manipulated for wartime propaganda purposes. Rather than risk error, it is
better to rely on contemporary German documents whose authenticity is unquestionable and whose scope
reaches far beyond the limited sources available to the U.S. embassy in Turkey. Henry Morgenthau, Ambassador
Morgenthau’s Story (New York, 1918); Morgenthau, Secrets of the Bosphorus, 1913–1916 (London, 1918); Morgenthau, The Tragedy of Armenia (London, 1918).
93. Wangenheim to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 342, 30 Dec. 1914; Wangenheim to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 191, 26
Mar. 1915; Wangenheim to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 195, 29 Mar. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 36.
94. Inevitability was also Bronsart’s reasoning in the Böttrich case: Kaiser, “Baghdad Railways,” 83.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
tice” done to the Armenians.95 Wangenheim thus outlined German policy for the next 281
two years or more: If the CUP was set on persecution, Germany could not stop it anyway
and might lose the alliance trying. Germany would simply have to accept Allied blame.
A week after writing these thoughts, Wangenheim received the ﬁrst word of Van. German military conﬁrmation of the “uprising” gave Wangenheim the excuse he needed to
drop the balance he had hitherto uncomfortably maintained between the conﬂicting Armenian and Turkish accounts and to come down hard on the Turkish side.96
On 31 May Wangenheim telegraphed Berlin of his meeting with War Minister Enver
about Enver’s deportation order of 27 May. Enver, Wangenheim reported, had told him
that Turkey would counter the Armenian revolts by using the wartime emergency to deport “from the insurgent Armenian areas all not entirely trustworthy families to
Mesopotamia.” Although the measures “certainly mean great hardship for the Armenian
population, in my opinion we might mitigate the form but not fundamentally hinder the
measures. The Armenian subversion, fed by Russia, has assumed dimensions that
threaten the substance of Turkey.”97 Wangenheim’s recommendation was exactly what
Enver had requested: “He [Enver] asked urgently [dringend] that we not hinder him in
this.” Wangenheim thus did three things: he accepted the Turkish argument of military
necessity, he acquiesced to Enver’s request to let the Turks proceed, and he hinted by underlining “entirely” that the deportations would be massive and entail “great hardship.”
Wangenheim instructed the German consulates identically.98 The consuls resisted
Wangenheim’s view. In desperate, shrill reports they marshaled fact after gory fact to
argue against the Turkish claims Wangenheim had accepted. They railed against the “barbaric” measures; they argued that a “deportation of this magnitude is synonymous with
massacre.”99 And they argued that the measures were not justiﬁed by military necessity.
The rejection of military necessity became a trope, showing the broad recognition that it
was the fundamental justiﬁcation for “deportation.” Major General Posseldt had dismissed the military necessity claim out of hand already in April. Not surprisingly, military
men, including Consul Max Erwin von Scheubner-Richter, who was also an officer, felt
more secure than did mere civilians in contradicting the military excuse.100 In the end, it
95. Wangenheim to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 228, 15 Apr. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 36.
96. Wangenheim to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 286, 8 May 1915, ibid. The consul at Mosul also conﬁrmed the uprising at Van: Wangenheim to Foreign Office, tel. Nr. 1091, 10 May 1915, ibid.
97. Wangenheim to Bethmann, Pera, tel. Nr. 1268, 31 May 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 37. Emphasis in
original.
98. The embassy compiled a brief history of its diplomatic actions in report Nr. 669, 12 Nov. 1915, PA-AA,
Türkei 175a, vol. 36.
99. Büge to embassy, Adana, 18 May 1915; Scheubner-Richter to embassy, Erzerum, tel., 2 June 1915; Rössler
to embassy, tel., Aleppo, 6 June 1915; and so forth; PA-AA, Türkei 183, vols. 36 and 37. Also in Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, Docs. 20, 27, 42, 47, 58, 66, 73, 76, 78, 79, 80, 100, and so on.
100. Memo of German embassy Dragoman Mordtmann, 26 Apr. 1915; Rössler to embassy, Aleppo, tel., 20
Apr. 1915; Scheubner-Richter to embassy, Erzerum, tel., 2 and 26 June 1915; Rössler to embassy, 27 July 1915;
Stange to German military mission, Erzerum, 23 Aug. 1918; Scheubner-Richter to Hohenlohe-Langenburg,
Erzerum, Nr. 580, 5 Aug. 1915; Kress v. Kressenstein to Hertling, Tiﬂis, Nr. 787, 3 Sept. 1918; PA-AA, Türkei 183,
vols. 36, 37, 53, and in Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, Docs. 27, 31, 81, 98, 120, 149.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
282 was the consuls who gave Wangenheim the arguments he subsequently used to criticize
deportation.
The intense pressure to which the consuls and other German critics in the Turkish
countryside subjected Wangenheim was compounded by neutral and Allied opinion.
After repeated urging by Russia, the Allies publicized on 24 May an extraordinary statement condemning what they called “massacres” and averring they would “hold all the
members of the Ottoman Government, as well as such agents as are implicated, personally responsible for such massacres.”101 As Wangenheim had feared, the Allies used the deportations to their advantage. The German records show growing sensitivity to charges of
German complicity; the desire to counter such charges surely encouraged the shift from
passivity to official protest.102 But the killings also had taken on dimensions that Wangenheim doubtless had not foreseen when he passed along Enver’s order.
On 17 June Wangenheim began to retreat from Enver’s position, citing his consuls’
and other reports of massacres and pointing out that the “banning of the Armenians was
not only motivated by military considerations,” but aimed, as Talât had admitted to him,
“thoroughly to cleanse [aufzuräumen] [Turkey] of its native Christians without being disturbed by diplomatic intervention.”103 Once Wangenheim had taken the ﬁrst step, Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs Zimmermann okayed the ﬁrst formal protest (of the execution of Armenian political leaders).104 Berlin had thus left Turkish policy to its
ambassador,105 who in turn had subordinated diplomacy to alleged military necessity. Finally on 4 July Wangenheim delivered his ﬁrst official protest of the deportations, but he
did so within the military parameters that remained effective for Germany until the end
of the war: “We approve of the deportation of the Armenian population only insofar as it
is done because of military considerations and to secure against revolts”; removals outside military zones or massacres were unacceptable.106
Accepting “military considerations” was a fatal limit to effective intervention. Talât,
Enver, and German military supporters of the genocide maintained to the end that the
“deportations” were militarily necessary and that deaths were accidental.107 Civilians
found it hard to argue on military turf. German Turkish policy in 1915 displayed the same
self-hobbling that civilian leaders suffered concerning the Belgian deportations the next
year: if one could not reject the mass deportation of civilians on principle, one was left to
101. Cited from The Times (London) in Institut, Armenian Genocide, 1:306; Sir G. Buchanan to Sir Edward
Grey, Petrograd, 11 May 1915; Sir Edward Grey to Sir Francis Bertie, Nr. 1168, 11 May 1915, and Nr. 1185, 12 May
1915, in David Stevenson, ed., British Documents on Foreign Affairs; The First World War, 1914–1918; The Allied
and Neutral Powers: Diplomacy and War Aims, August 1914–July 1915, pt. 2, ser. H, vol. 1, general editors Kenneth
Bourne and D. C. Watt (Frederick, Md., 1989), Docs. 585, 586, 594.
102. Blair believes Germany’s protests were cynically designed for public relations: Susan K. Blair, “Excuses
for Inhumanity,” Armenian Review 37, no. 4/148 (winter 1984): 14–30, here 20–22.
103. Wangenheim to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 372, 17 June 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 37.
104. Zimmermann to Wangenheim, Berlin, tel., 18 June 1915, Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, Doc. 83.
105. Trumpener, Germany, 215.
106. Wangenheim to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 433, 7 July 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 37.
107. For example, Talât: Wolff-Metternich to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 725, 18 Dec. 1915; Enver to Hindenburg,
Constantinople, tel., 3 Aug. 1918 in Bernstorff to Foreign Office, Constantinople, tel. Nr. 1255, 3 Aug. 1918, ibid.,
vols. 40, 53.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
ex post facto, generally ineffective efforts at amelioration. The deportees were usually al- 283
ready dead. The Turkish government responded not at all to Wangenheim’s protests, and
by 16 July Wangenheim had given up and gone on sick leave.
If Wangenheim had set diplomatic policy inside military parameters, he had done so
with Zimmermann’s blessing. Wangenheim’s temporary successor, Prince Ernst zu Hohenlohe-Langenburg, protested much more energetically, but he still felt compelled to
keep to the limits Wangenheim had recognized, focusing on how the deportations were
being handled, rather than rejecting them outright. Hohenlohe-Langenburg’s exhortations had no effect on the Turks, other than having them block his appointment as permanent ambassador. Meanwhile in Berlin, protests by inﬂuential private persons, such as
Johannes Lepsius, Paul Rohrbach, and numerous pastors, missionaries, and professors
caused Bethmann and Jagow temporarily to dislodge Zimmermann from his sway over
Turkish policy.108 Bethmann and Jagow appointed Paul Wolff-Metternich to replace Wangenheim, and Wolff-Metternich went on a crusade of vociferous criticism as soon as he
arrived in Constantinople in November 1915.
By 7 December, in the face of continuing failure, Wolff-Metternich saw the situation
clearly and presented Berlin with an ultimatum. He argued, ﬁrst, that Germany must
cease private, diplomatic protest and go public. Second, in its public statement Germany
must declare that there was an absolute legal and moral limit to what war or self-defense
permitted. That limit was reached at the point where “an entire ethnic group, including
old people, women, and children, suffered.” Third, Germany had to recognize that it, not
Turkey, was the stronger alliance partner. “Without our help the bloated frog will collapse.
We do not need to be so anxious in dealing with the Turks.” And ﬁnally, “To have success
in the Armenian question we must make the Turkish government fear the consequences.
If military reasons prevent us from taking a stronger position, then nothing remains but,
while continuing unsuccessful protests that anger more than they help, to look on as our
ally goes on massacring.” Not surprisingly, Zimmermann’s ﬁrst response was that such a
declaration had to be watered down before Germany dared print it.109 In the end, “military reasons” prevented such a statement from being issued at all. On 22 December 1915
the Turkish government made its ﬁrst official reply to Germany’s protests. Citing “military reasons” and “legitimate defense,” it strongly rejected interference in its domestic affairs. This sufficed to stop Berlin.110 Wolff-Metternich was left to periodic “unsuccessful
protests” and became more and more isolated and ineffective in Constantinople.
German policy reverted to the position Zimmermann had published on 6 October
1915. In that official statement the Kaiserreich recognized “the harsh but militarily understandable measure,” regretted the “primitive” conditions in Turkey that caused hardship,
but in the end claimed that “moral guilt for these events belongs to the Armenians themselves [for revolting] and their instigators in London, Petersburg, and Paris.” It continued,
“As regrettable as it is from a Christian and general human viewpoint that, along with the
108. Trumpener, Germany, 227–28.
109. Wolff-Metternich to Bethmann, Pera, Nr. 711, 7 Dec. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 40, incompletely reproduced in Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, doc. 209.
110. Trumpener, Germany, 232–33; Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, Doc. 218.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
284 guilty, hundreds of thousands of innocents should perish by this Turkish measure, the
sons of Germany, whose sacriﬁcial bloody ﬁghting in the west, east, and south is considerably eased by the military aid of our Turkish allies, stand closer to the German government than the Armenians.” For this reason it was impossible to break relations with
Turkey.111 The official press guidelines for 1917 were more succinct: “It is best to keep
silent about the Armenian question.”112
Although the killing continued in 1916 and 1917, Germany made only sporadic verbal
protests. The pattern in 1915 clearly shows that vigorous leadership made a difference, at
least inside the German bureaucracy. Berlin had allowed Wangenheim (and occasionally
Bronsart) to dampen the activities of the consuls, who chafed at these restrictions.113 Hohenlohe-Langenburg and Wolff-Metternich encouraged more consular intervention; following their example, embassy personnel became more active, and even Berlin seemed
more daring. But once Bethmann and Jagow shrank from the alternative Wolff-Metternich had so clearly outlined, they sent a message that activity was unwelcome. The next
German ambassador to Turkey, Richard von Kühlmann, told his Austrian colleague when
he arrived in Constantinople that he would not repeat Wolff-Metternich’s mistake and
begin his tenure lecturing the Turks on Armenia.114 Consuls continued to channel relief
and to intervene humanitarily, but their job was a lonely one.
One hundred years ago diplomacy was not generally the domain of humanitarianism,
although beginning steps in that direction had been taken. Austria’s record of insight and
intervention in the Armenian genocide was no better than Germany’s, and I am unaware
of Entente protests to their Russian partner concerning the ill-prepared, deadly mass deportations it visited on its own citizens.115 The Armenian case was different, of course, because it was obvious by late May 1915 that the object of Turkish policy was mass extermination. The question remains: Could Germany have stopped the genocide if it had
threatened to revoke the alliance? Unfortunately, this seems improbable, given the importance of the genocide to CUP national policy. However, 1918 gave both allies the chance to
replay 1915. This time, Germany was much more energetic and even proactive in trying to
prevent genocide, but it was equally ineffective.
The Bolshevik Revolution took Russia out of the war and permitted Germany and
Turkey in 1918 to expand into the Caucasus, where perhaps one million Armenians, some
111. Undated draft in PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 43; published version in Yale, Jäckh Papers, Box 2; also
Trumpener, Germany, 221–22.
112. Guidelines issued by the Oberzensurstelle des Kriegspresseamts at the beginning of 1917, cited in Institut, Armenian Genocide, 1:609–10.
113. Wangenheim to consuls, 31 May 1915, slightly amended in Wangenheim to Consul at Erzerum, 21 June
1915, in Anlage to Report Nr. 669 of 12 Nov. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 175a, vol. 36; Austrian Consul Kwiatkowski to
Count Czernin, Samsun, Nr. A. 21/P, 26 May 1917, HHStA PA XII 463, in Institut, Armenian Genocide, 2:378;
Scheubner-Richter to Hohenlohe-Langenburg, Erzerum, Nr. 580, 5 Aug. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 38; Paul
Leverkuehn, Posten auf ewiger Wache (Essen, 1938), 45.
114. Pallavicini to Burián, Constantinople, Nr. 89/P.A., 21 Nov. 1916, HHStA PA XII 463, in Institut, Armenian Genocide, 2:365.
115. Trumpener, Germany, 268; Institut, Armenian Genocide, vol. 2. U.S. Secretary of State Robert Lansing
accepted Turkish claims of military necessity, though he condemned the brutality of the deportations: Samantha
Power, “A Problem from Hell” (New York, 2003), 13.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
of them survivors of 1915, now lived. The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk ceded three predomi- 285
nately Armenian districts (Kars, Ardahan, and Batum) to Turkey. As Turkish troops
moved in, they resumed the genocide by massacre and starvation. To make matters worse,
the Turkish army advanced farther into Armenian-settled lands, beyond the Brest-Litovsk
borders, into Baku.116
Germany’s greater activity in protesting Turkish actions had many causes. By 1918
German officials knew the CUP’s actual goal and recognized its lies and subterfuges.
Brest-Litovsk made Germany more obviously liable for Turkish misdeeds.117 German
public opinion was also forewarned and organized: the German-Armenian Society predicted new massacres, and the Reichstag, led by the Independent Socialists, held a vigorous debate about Germany’s responsibility for the Armenians under the treaty. More important, OHL and the Foreign Office pulled roughly in the same direction because
German national interests now clashed with Turkey’s. OHL opposed Turkey’s advance
across the designated line, and it wanted stable, pro-German successor states to emerge,
not embittered, depopulated zones of chaos. Until his dismissal in July, Foreign Secretary
Kühlmann issued repeated, energetic instructions to Ambassador Bernstorff to pressure
the CUP leaders to stop massacres and atrocities, and withdraw to the original treaty borders. Kühlmann made threats of real substance: if the Turks misbehaved, Germany would
abrogate that section of the alliance committing it to guarantee Turkish territory against
Allied occupation.118 Finally, Germany had a dedicated and perceptive officer on the spot
(who was serving as diplomatic representative to the Transcaucasian Republic), Gen.
Friedrich Kress von Kressenstein, who acted independently and creatively to thwart Turkish measures.
Nonetheless, Turkey did just about as it pleased until the armistice caused the collapse
of the CUP government. The CUP government’s war aims were expansion and eradication
of “internal weakness”; only force could make it abandon these. Stopping Turkish policy
in the Caucasus would have required Germany to send troops to the new Armenian state.
OHL was pleased to encourage Austria to do so but declined for itself. So, Enver was free
to counter Hindenburg’s plea in August 1918 for the return of refugees with a lecture on
the military necessity of keeping the rear lines free of Armenians.119 The events of 1918 suggest that even a courageous policy in 1915 probably would not have saved the Armenians.

Resistance to the Chimera of Military Necessity
Military culture predisposed officers to see enemies everywhere and to demand complete security from perceived threats. Instrumentalizing civilians in the name of military
necessity was built into the priorities of ﬁghting and winning that saturated officers’ assumptions about their jobs and themselves. But the Armenian genocide shows that it was
116. See the account in Trumpener, Germany, 248–68, and the documents in Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, 367–454.
117. Kühlmann to Berckheim, Berlin, Nr. 1178, 3 June 1918, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 51.
118. Kühlmann to Berckheim, Berlin, Nr. 1178, 3 June 1918, ibid.
119. Trumpener, Germany, 260–61.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
286 possible for officers to hold all the conventional ideas and still act against the grain. The
surviving evidence is not rich enough to allow ﬁrm conclusions, but the cases that follow
suggest some of the parameters that permitted (or hindered) counteraction.
Liman is instructive because he not only believed in the propriety of deportation
under certain circumstances, he actually ordered one. After receiving reliable evidence in
July 1917 that the Greeks in the coastal town of Ayvalik were helping the enemy prepare a
landing on Mytelene, Liman ordered them all deported. He insisted on careful preparations and humane handling of the deportees. When local Turkish authorities failed to do
so and two hundred people died, Liman cancelled his order, repatriated the survivors,
and admitted that such a large deportation had been unwise and unnecessary.120 In November 1916 Liman forced the return of Armenians just deported from Smyrna, thereby
thwarting an order from Talât. Liman happened to be near Smyrna when the deportation
occurred. Unable to discover any military reason for it, he forced the local vali to rescind
the order. Liman succeeded because he commanded troops and threatened to use
them.121 Many of the people Liman saved did not live long, however; as soon as he left the
area, the Turkish authorities tried again.122 The last Armenian survivors in Smyrna were
murdered in 1922 under the Kemalist regime.123
Liman’s actions show that it was possible to interpret military necessity narrowly. His
distrust of others and resulting isolation predisposed him to be skeptical of standard explanations and more likely to go see for himself. But, above all, Liman alone, except for
Goltz and Falkenhayn, had command power. That increased his independence and made
his interventions (momentarily) effective.
Field Marshal v. d. Goltz also enjoyed high rank, the independence of command, and
a certain distance and unﬂappability that comes with age and experience. In December
1915, Goltz learned by chance that Armenian deportees who had made it to Mosul were
about to be redeported on orders of the supreme commander in Mesopotamia. Goltz intervened immediately, at ﬁrst without effect. Persisting, he forced the authorities to postpone the decision, and when no formal resolution had been reached by mid-January 1916,
he simply forbade the Armenians’ departure. When Constantinople continued to insist,
Goltz threatened to resign. Enver then acceded to Goltz’s wish but pointed out that “his
command authority did not entitle him to intervene in Turkish domestic affairs.”124 Goltz
persisted in wanting to resign, which probably indicated his disgust at the deportations in
general, not simply this one episode. But “he felt it his duty to remain at his post in view
of the difficult military situation.” He was also on record as protesting deportations of
Greeks.125 His success in the Mosul case rested entirely on his unequalled reputation and
120. Dinkel, “German Officers,” 86–93.
121. Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, Docs. 306, 307; Kühlmann to Bethmann, Nr. 710, Pera, 17 Nov.
1916, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 45, which contains the complete version of Liman’s memorandum.
122. Austrian Consul Radimsky to Pallavicini, Smyrna, Nr. 90/P., 13 Dec. 1916, HHStA PA XII 463, in Institut, Armenian Genocide, 2:367–68.
123. Housepian, Smyrna.
124. Legationsrat Dieckhoff memo Nr. A. 49466, Berlin, 19 Nov. 1918, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 53; also Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, Doc. 224.
125. Dadrian, German Responsibility, 127.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
high status as advisor to the sultan and the war minister, and hence on the forcefulness of 287
his threat. It was unheard of for a military man to resign in wartime, and in the end Goltz
was too much a soldier to take that ﬁnal step. His actions, like the others taken by military
men, did not become publicly known and therefore had no larger political effect.
Unlike Liman and Goltz, Kress v. Kressenstein lacked command power when he intervened to help deportees, but he was experienced, thoughtful, and independentminded.126 As operations chief in the Turkish General Staff in September 1914, he
arranged for his dour assessment of Turkish military strength to ﬁnd its way to Moltke
behind Liman’s back.127 Still, Kress depended on his Turkish comrades for information
and accepted their negative views of Armenians; he never seems to have concluded that
the genocide was due to policy rather than ineptitude.128 But on a return trip to the Turkish 4th Army in late October 1915, he saw the full extent of the horror and was galvanized
into action. He convinced his Turkish commander, Cemal, to inspect the transit camp at
Aleppo, and then, using funds at his own disposition, he paid to clean the camp and erect
a hospital and orphanage. Next, he and Cemal journeyed to Constantinople to complain
in person that the deportations were destroying the rear echelon of the 4th Army. Kress
also tried to ﬁre up Germany’s diplomatic protests.129
In November 1917 Kress intervened again, this time to prevent Cemal’s scheme to deport the entire Jewish and Christian populations of Jerusalem (seventy thousand people).
He convinced the German consul to pressure the embassy, while he went through military channels to Enver. Kress threatened to withdraw all German officers from the southern front if Enver did not relent.130
And then in 1918 Kress found himself in Tiﬂis (Tbilisi), where the Caucasus front was
in danger of dissolving and taking the remaining Armenians with it. He worked tirelessly
that summer to move Germany to force Turkey to withdraw its troops, permit the Armenians to take in the harvest, and let refugees return to eastern Anatolia. He proposed using
German and Austrian troops to provide “safety” for Turkey’s rear lines (thus disposing of
that excuse for genocide); he wanted to divert precious stores of central European grain
from Turkey to Armenia; he called for a German battalion to enter Baku to protect civilians there. Finding a reasonable Turkish leader in Gen. Halil Pasha, Kress worked to convince him that “the slogans like ‘military necessity,’ ‘threat to rear lines’ and whatever
else . . . are devoid of any justiﬁed basis.”131 In short, Kress was daring and imaginative in
thinking of diplomatic, military, political, and economic solutions. His arguments to the
Foreign Office were equally interesting, for he dared to represent the plight of the Arme126. Kress joined the military mission as a major and swiftly became a lieutenant colonel. He was promoted
to colonel in Feb. 1917 with the Turkish rank of major general and brieﬂy commanded the Turkish 8th Army
until Liman removed him in Nov. 1917 after the defeats in Gaza. Kress left the military mission and returned to
the area in 1918 with the rank of general as diplomatic representative to the Transcaucasian Republic in Tiﬂis
(Tbilisi). Wallach, Anatomie, 218–19, 220, 231–32.
127. Schulte, Europäische Krise, 258.
128. Kress, Mit den Türken, 127–29, 133.
129. Ibid., 132–37.
130. Ibid., 248–49.
131. Kress to Hertling, Tiﬂis, Nr. 787, 3 Sept. 1918, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 53.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
288 nians as a moral, not just a practical, issue. He wrote to the chancellor that “it is not my
place to remind Your Excellency of the duties that Germany as a Christian nation has visà-vis the Christian Armenians, and of the impression it will make upon our public opinion and that of the entire Christian world, if we fail to save the Armenians from downfall.”
But having done so, he only then went on to adduce economic and geopolitical reasons to
do the moral thing. Two weeks later he repeated these arguments, in the same order.132
Kress was one of the few contemporaries to write (in 1938!) that the failure of the German
government and of public opinion to disassociate themselves from Turkey during the war
had made them “moral accomplices” to the killings.133 Kress was an unusual man. He was
also a disappointed man, because neither the Foreign Office nor OHL adopted his
schemes in 1918. A German coconspirator of Kress’s, Lieutenant Colonel Paraquin, Halil’s
chief of staff, was abruptly removed from his post for trying to protect the Armenians of
Baku.134
The examples of Liman, Goltz, and Kress show that successful intervention required
real power: command power, the use or withholding of troops, independent resources
(Kress’s funds), or threatening with one’s very high status. Three other, lower-ranking
German officers, whose documented opposition to the genocide has survived, illustrate
the hurdles they faced.
Major General Posseldt commanded the fortress at Erzerum. He rejected the cover
story of military necessity from the beginning, in April 1915, and, working together with
Consul Scheubner-Richter, tried to prevent the arrests of Armenians. Posseldt was
promptly replaced by a Turkish commander.135
Lt. Col. August Stange had commanded one of the Special Operation units involved
in guerrilla activity in the Caucasus from December 1914 to August 1915. Ill and no longer
silenced by his command duties, Stange wrote a thorough report about the genocide while
waiting in Erzerum to return to the western front (where he died in a gas attack in 1918).136
Stange’s report named names and exposed the “deportations” for what they really were.
He reasoned from the fact that “hundreds and thousands have simply been murdered”
that “military reasons are only secondarily behind the evacuation.” Instead, the Turks
were fulﬁlling “a long-held plan fundamentally to weaken, if not to destroy, the Armenian
people.” Because of Stange’s position in the Special Organization, he knew that the “destruction” of the Armenians “was decided on and well organized in Constantinople by the
Young Turk Committee using the army and voluntary bands with members of the CUP
present at the localities.”137 Stange sent his report to the military mission, where it rested
in the ﬁles.

132. Kress to Hertling, Tiﬂis, 11 July, and tel. of 26 July 1918, ibid.
133. Kress, Mit den Türken, 138, cited by Wallach, Anatomie, 207.
134. Trumpener, Germany, 266.
135. Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, Doc. 31; Lepsius, Untergang, 36.
136. Stange’s command over the Special Organization detachment ended on 15 Aug. 1915: BA-MA Freiburg,
MSG. 2, Nr. 3739, preface to Stange’s war diary.
137. Stange to Military Mission, Erzerum, 23 Aug. 1915, Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, Doc. 149;
Dadrian, German Responsibility, 61–62.

The Armenian Genocide
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Scheubner-Richter, temporary consul at Erzerum until August 1915 and then, like 289
Stange, detached as officer to a guerrilla unit, is an interesting case for several reasons.
Scheubner-Richter’s political views were heavily inﬂuenced by Friedrich Naumann, who
was one of the most vociferous defenders of wartime Turkey and belittlers of the Armenian genocide.138 Scheubner-Richter’s prewar attachment to Naumann and his early membership in the Nazi Party (and “martyr’s death” during the Beer Hall Putsch) run directly
counter to his stance toward the Armenians—again a warning against reasoning “logically” from ideology. For no consul was more vocal or active in the defense of the Armenians than Scheubner-Richter. He early recognized that the “deportations” were not justiﬁed by military necessity but aimed at extermination. He intervened with military and
civilian Turkish authorities to stop deportations and personally organized food relief for
deportees, actions that earned him a veiled threat to his safety from the local vali.139 Wangenheim’s instructions in late May 1915 that consuls limit intervention to friendly advice
undercut Scheubner-Richter.140 The consul felt embattled enough to defend his actions in
a long report submitted as he left the consulate for the ﬁeld. Two months later Zimmermann retrospectively approved of Scheubner-Richter’s actions as consul.141 As a ﬁeld officer, Scheubner-Richter continued to help Armenians, but he explained to the chancellor
in 1916 that being directly subordinate to a Turkish commander “naturally burdened me
with greater caution [Zurückhaltung] regarding intervention in Armenian questions.”142
Scheubner-Richter’s position as an officer was thus double-edged. On the one hand, it
carried greater authority. For example, he reported that a moderate CUP general-inspector, Omer Nadji, who opposed the Armenian policy, “was happy to have in me, a German
officer, support for his moderate position against other committee members.”143 On the
other hand, Scheubner-Richter’s status as an officer subordinated him to anti-Armenian
pressure from Bronsart in the military mission and from Turkish commanders. Military
prestige, and especially the military command system, were thus powerful tools that could
work in either direction; a coherent military policy (as opposed to piecemeal interventions) would have given Germany much more leverage to affect Turkish policy.
Like Stange, when Scheubner-Richter was ﬁnally released from the fetters of direct
military duty, he wrote a long report to the chancellor in which he denounced Turkish
policy as “annihilation,” not only of Armenians but of all non-Muslims and also Islamic
non-Turkish peoples (Arabs) in the service of Pan-Turanism. Military necessity was the
138. Leverkuehn, Posten, 187; Trumpener, Germany, 252.
139. Scheubner-Richter to Hohenlohe-Langenburg, Erzerum, Nr. 580, 5 Aug. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183,
vol. 39.
140. Dinkel writes that Bronsart “inﬂuenced” Wangenheim’s instructions, which is possible, although
Bronsart’s dismissive marginalia about Scheubner-Richter’s stance are appended to a report that arrived at the
embassy on 1 June, ten to twelve days after Wangenheim’s ﬁrst instructions to Erzerum and Adana and a day
after Wangenheim’s general instruction to all consuls dictating that they not hinder Enver’s “security measures.”
Dinkel, “German Officers,” 107; Anlage to Embassy Report Nr. 669, 12 Nov. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 175a, vol. 36.
141. Scheubner-Richter to Hohenlohe-Langenburg, Erzerum, Nr. 580, 5 Aug. 1915; Zimmermann to Wangenheim, Berlin, Nr. 782, 20 Oct. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 39.
142. Scheubner-Richter to Bethmann, Munich, 4 Dec. 1916, ibid., vol. 45; also, with some changes, in Lepsius, Deutschland und Armenien, Doc. 309.
143. Scheubner-Richter to Bethmann, Munich, 4 Dec. 1916, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 45.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
290 excuse used to dupe Germany. He recommended strong public repudiation, because Germany’s silence “is interpreted by many in Turkey and Persia as weakness.”144 ScheubnerRichter’s report, like Stange’s, was apparently laid ad acta.
Scheubner-Richter was not a professional officer; he had volunteered when the war
broke out. And his position as consul encouraged the wider, extramilitary perspectives he
brought to his job. It is telling that when he argued with the Turks he cited practical,
mostly foreign-political reasons for rescinding the killing policy, but when explaining his
actions to his own government, he said he proceeded from moral and legal conviction. “I
assumed,” he wrote, “that my government would be pleased to know its representative
used every legal means at his disposal to intercede for humane and just treatment for suffering innocents.”145
About a year later, Legation Secretary Hoesch explained the two principles that were
the basis of governmental policy: “First, not to interfere in the business of a foreign state,
especially of an ally, and, next, the consideration that a state ﬁghting for its existence is
justiﬁed in the interests of its internal security to take extraordinary measures that could
be labeled as acts of self-defense.”146 The standards of existential military struggle that
Germany applied to itself, its troops, civilians, and those in its occupied zones, it also applied to Turkey, where going to extremes took the form of genocide. As long as German
leaders, civilian and military, acted from these premises, they could not take effective action—or permit other Germans to do so—to stop this process.
We now return to the last act of existential military struggle back in Europe. There,
the process of going to extremes seemed almost as hard to stop as in Anatolia.
144. Scheubner-Richter to Bethmann, Munich, 4 Dec. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 175a, vol. 36.
145. Scheubner-Richter to Hohenlohe-Langenburg, Erzerum, Nr. 580, 5 Aug. 1915, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol.
39. After Germany’s defeat, Scheubner-Richter embraced a German version of Pan-Turanism. He called for the
“ruthless ﬁght against everything foreign in Germany’s national/racial body.” Cited in Leverkuehn, Posten, 190.
146. Historical report by Legation Secretary Hoesch, in Wolff-Metternich to Bethmann, Therapia, Nr. 567,
12 Sept. 1916, PA-AA, Türkei 183, vol. 44.

121
Repetition and Self-Destruction

T

he acquiescence of Ludendorff and Hindenburg to strategic retreat and the defensive in 1917 shows that the third OHL was capable of departing from the set script
of German military wisdom, even if the manner of the retreat—absolute destruction—was consistent with it. The combat of 1917 also demonstrated movement
on the operative and tactical level, for example, the willingness to abandon territory under
attack in order to defend more ﬂexibly.1 But apart from such mostly tactical lessons that the
German army continued to learn, it was the retreat and consolidation of 1917 that were
uniquely at variance with the default program. Otherwise, the third OHL continued to follow this program to the end: it pursued a purely military victory of force, rejecting negotiations out of hand. This all-or-nothing stance required taking extreme risks, which it attempted to counterbalance with a series of techniques: taut, detailed planning combined,
inconsistently, with high reliance on the individual initiative of unit commanders (Auftragstaktik); operative and tactical excellence at the expense of strategy; and the use of
wonder weapons. The cleft between reach and grasp, made worse by willful ignorance of
economic realities, made poor treatment of soldiers inevitable and encouraged the instrumentalization of civilians for a conception of military necessity that steadily expanded to ﬁll
that cleft. The risks were apparently too great to allow realistic assessment of danger, making the risk takers unwilling to admit when the gamble had failed. The feedback loop did not
function; instead, the unrealistic conviction of professional superiority, wishful thinking,
belief in miracles or in Kriegsglück (the fortunes of war), and compulsory optimism created
a working atmosphere in which admitting defeat became almost impossible.
1. Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 250–51; Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:11; Einem, Armeeführer, 309; Germany, Reichsarchiv,
Die Weltkrieg 1914 bis 1918, 12:29, 40–50 (hereafter Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg).

291

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
292

The radicalization that characterized the German war effort after mid-1916 was
achieved not because of something qualitatively different in military practices or because
ideology now drove processes forward (though ideologization began to happen) but because the same military frames and procedures met with less resistance from civilian government and parliamentary leaders, and the inherent dynamic pushing toward extremity
was allowed to develop further than it had ever done before. The great catastrophe was
reached with small steps, which is why the actors thought they were defending an old
order rather than ushering in a new one. The ideological justiﬁcations and reinterpretations came later, after the war was over. The accommodation the German military made
to the changed circumstances of combat—for example, the use of small groups of storm
troopers operating opportunistically or the checkerboard system of ﬂexible defense—became part of a new military culture, especially among younger officers. But that is another
story. Ours concerns the older officers in leadership positions, who continued to act
largely within the conﬁnes of the military culture of the Bismarckian-Wilhelminian period. The extremes of World War I on the German side were its product.
It is not possible to present an adequately detailed account of the last two and one half
years of the war. Instead, the following pages will highlight the recurring patterns in the
third OHL’s conduct of the war. The retreat and strategic defensive of 1916–17 occurred simultaneously with three major initiatives running in the opposite, offensive direction: the
Hindenburg program (October 1916), the decision to begin unrestricted submarine warfare (winter 1916–17), and the decision in late fall 1917 to launch an all-out offensive in
March 1918.

The Decisions for Retreat and the Defensive, 1916–1917
Most historians present Germany’s defensive posture in 1917 as self-evident, given the
lack of reserves, ammunition, transport (horses), and the general depletion of the army
after Verdun and the Somme.2 In similar situations in 1918, however, OHL was not so sensitive to the data of reality. Why was 1917 different? The main reason is probably that when
Ludendorff and Hindenburg took over supreme command they had no knowledge of the
western front. They canvassed and recanvassed the western commanders, whose much
more modest views of military possibilities (caused by the repeated frustrations of
1914–16) provided the basis for OHL’s assessment of the military situation. Unlike Falkenhayn, who made decisions almost by himself, Ludendorff and Hindenburg relied heavily
on the advice of both ﬁeld commanders and General Staff officers, even if they did not always follow it. In 1916 and 1917 they were more dependent than at any other time. Fortifying the Siegfried line was a relatively easy decision for Ludendorff, since his “gigantic”
eastern offensives had always occurred with strong defensive lines to his rear.3 It was more
remarkable that Falkenhayn had prosecuted the war in the west for almost two years
without them. Finally, the third OHL encouraged self-criticism, especially at the tactical
2. Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 12:1; Klein, Deutschland, 2:584; Chickering, Imperial Germany, 173; Herwig, First
World War, 246, 249.
3. Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 12:61. “Gigantic”: Eisenhart-Rothe, Im Banne der Persönlichkeit, 103.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
and technical levels. Hindenburg produced a major document, “War Conduct and the 293
General Staff,” which he distributed to all General Staff officers at the end of November
1916.4 In it he charged that the army “had learned more slowly than its enemies.” Staff ofﬁcers “must think ahead of our own experiences and continuously develop tactics and
techniques.” But Hindenburg’s criticism even reached to strategy. The nature of war had
changed: “The idea of destruction [Vernichtungsgedanke] now seeks its goal [through attrition].” Therefore, saving resources was paramount, making the defensive more appropriate than the offensive.
The hardest decision for Ludendorff was the retreat to the Siegfried line. It took him
over four months of constant discussion from the time he ordered it fortiﬁed to the time
he gave in to Crown Prince Rupprecht’s arguments for retreat. Rupprecht had to insist
that “many experienced troop commanders with very good judgment, who are not pessimists,” favored it.5 The commanders Rupprecht had in mind were doubtless subordinates close to the troops. For even well-prepared strategic retreat was so at odds with German military culture that the decision was opposed by the army commanders in Crown
Prince Wilhelm’s army group, by Gen. Max von Gallwitz, and by some army commanders
under Rupprecht himself.6 Even after he had been persuaded, Ludendorff called the retreat “highly regrettable” and continued to worry that it broadcast Germany’s weakness
and undermined troop morale.7 Once convinced, however, Ludendorff made what German military language called an “entire decision,” meaning he held ﬁrm against pressure
from his staff officers and from Crown Prince Wilhelm to sweeten the pill by making limited attacks.8
Most remarkable of all, Ludendorff ’s decision brought with it a modiﬁed view of victory. Instead of the usual standard of the battle of annihilation, Ludendorff now (February 1917) claimed that “we will win [the campaign of 1917] if we hold on to our [occupied]
territory throughout the great coming defensive battles.”9
This was not a permanent insight, however, but a temporary expedient. OHL had
given up on neither military victory nor the verities of military culture. Hindenburg said
as much in his November statement to General Staff officers. Having acknowledged the
need to cater to the war of attrition, Hindenburg nonetheless continued: “The offensive
battle that seeks decision in movement and great battles with other armies, and which we
know how to execute correctly, remains our military ideal of the future, on which Germany’s future will continue to be built.”10 Both Hindenburg and Ludendorff believed that
Germany would return to this type of warfare, if the war continued long enough. For
them, 1917 was analogous to the “risk years” when Germany built its battle ﬂeet; it was a

4. Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 12:56–57. Emphasis in original.
5. Kuhl’s testimony, UA 3:1, 71.
6. UA 3:1, 71–72; Gallwitz, Erleben im Westen, 163; Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:61; Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern,
Mein Kriegstagebuch, 3:126.
7. Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 12:25, also 129, 145.
8. Ibid., 12:72–73; Kronprinz Wilhelm v. Preussen, Deutschlands Heldenkampf, 279.
9. UA 3:1, 69.
10. Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 12:57.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
294 moment of inactivity while Germany built up its offensive capability through the Hindenburg program. In the meantime, the offensive had shifted to another theater: the sea.
The third OHL expected unrestricted submarine warfare to bring Germany its military
victory, or to so weaken its opponents that Germany could once again wage offensive
land warfare according to the Schlieffen model.11 Unlike the rethinking that Falkenhayn
had done in November 1914, for Ludendorff and Hindenburg none of the basic operating
assumptions had been dislodged in 1917. We now turn to the expedients by which the
third OHL hoped to return to the default program.

The Hindenburg Program
The Hindenburg program reprised Falkenhayn’s idea of militarizing the civilian population, that is, making all civilians of both sexes from their late teens on liable to conscription for war work. Subjecting the nation to forced labor was supposed to solve Germany’s fundamental raw materials and manpower problems by doubling munitions and
tripling artillery and machine gun production, while simultaneously bringing three hundred thousand more workers into the factories. What is more, it was to do so by May
1917.12 The Hindenburg program was thus a gigantic program of imperative wish fulﬁllment. The temptation simply to order an end to Germany’s problems by force was so
strong that the idea occurred three times: once under Falkenhayn, once as the Hindenburg program of October 1916, and again in June 1918.
One historian has suggested that the Hindenburg program was modeled after forced
labor in the occupied zones.13 Although the utter disposability of civilians for military
purposes was a principle that saturated occupation policy, it is unlikely that it was imported from the occupied zones into Germany. Falkenhayn’s plan (of June 1915) arose simultaneously with and independent of local calls for forced civilian labor in France and
Belgium. Instrumentalizing civilians was a widespread underlying assumption of military
necessity shared by most officers, and so it surfaced repeatedly in different contexts.14 Nor
was the proindustrialist bias of the Hindenburg program new; both plans relied on the
self-interested “expertise” of the leaders of heavy industry to work out the economic details of which officers were ignorant.
The Hindenburg program went beyond Falkenhayn’s in three ways, however. First,
Falkenhayn had been open to the excellent economic and political arguments against his
idea; Hindenburg and Ludendorff were not. Bethmann produced an impressive list of
reasons why the Hindenburg program was doomed: all able-bodied men had been either
drafted into the army or were working; drafting sixteen year olds would pull them out of
factories; more women were already looking for work than were ﬁnding it; and creating a
tier of forced or conscripted laborers would disturb the economy and foster political dis11. Gallwitz, Erleben im Westen, 163, 508–9; Kuhl’s testimony, UA 3:1, 68; Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 12:2–4, 62;
Kielmansegg, Deutschland, 339.
12. Chickering, Imperial Germany, 76–81.
13. Liulevicius, War Land, 55, believes the eastern occupation was the model for the Hindenburg program.
14. For example, Einem, Armeeführer, diary entry, 18 Nov. 1916, 267.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
content. Ludendorff never bothered to counter these arguments, he simply restated his 295
opinion: “In my view there is lots of hidden manpower that has not yet been used, or used
enough for the common [cause].”15 Opinion was the only thing Ludendorff could offer,
since the Hindenburg program was based not on fact but fantasy. In historian Gerald
Feldman’s words, the Supreme Command had “decided to dismiss all ﬁnancial considerations and to embark upon a program whose practical feasibility . . . had never been seriously investigated. The deadline for the fulﬁllment of the program, May 1917, was based
upon purely military calculations.”16 Military considerations were, of course, behind
Falkenhayn’s idea too, but under the third OHL they now became not merely predominant but exclusive. The bitter, peremptory tone of the program was new as well. Hindenburg told Bethmann that “the whole German people must live only in service to the fatherland. Achieving success makes quick action necessary. Every day is of importance. The
necessary measures are to be taken immediately.”17 If put into practice, the requirement
that civilians had to work to receive food meant that some would surely have starved to
death. The command tone of the battleﬁeld, with all its ruthlessness and haste, now resounded in matters that were essentially political and economic.
The Hindenburg program was not implemented as OHL had drafted it. Ludendorff
and Hindenburg insisted on plebiscitary approval by the Reichstag, which substantially
modiﬁed the most outlandish and draconian features. The Reichstag acted as a brake on
military extremism at home. But in the occupied zones, where the military faced fewer
hindrances to its logic, parts of the program went ahead, as in the Belgian and Polish-Jewish deportations, with the results we have seen.

Unrestricted Submarine Warfare
The January 1917 decision to carry out unrestricted submarine warfare (USW) shows
how mired the Supreme Command and the political system were in the assumptions and
doctrines of military culture and the decision-making processes that followed from them.
It is striking how closely USW repeated the formal patterns of the Schlieffen Plan and the
decision to go to war in July 1914. And, as with the Hindenburg program, Falkenhayn had
already blazed the trail.
Originally skeptical of USW, Falkenhayn had embraced it in the winter of 1915–16 as
the last chance to win the war. Indeed, he felt the decision was simply inevitable for this
reason; no one could ﬁght that existential logic.18 Ludendorff and Hindenburg arrived at
the same conclusion: given the stalemate on land and with time running against Germany, only the submarine could win the war. As Hindenburg later put it, in an unconscious echo of Lothar v. Trotha in 1904, “[Doing] anything else would have appeared as
15. Bethmann to Hindenburg, 30 Sept. 1916, Ludendorff to war minister, 5 Oct. 1916, in Ludendorff, Urkunden, 72–73, 76.
16. Gerald D. Feldman, Army, Industry, and Labor in Germany, 1914–1918 (Princeton, 1966), 154.
17. Hindenburg to Bethmann, II Nr. 34 647 op., 13 Sept. 1916, cited in Ludendorff, Urkunden, 67. Emphasis
in original.
18. Falkenhayn to Wild, 5 Feb. 1917, Wild, Briefe, 223.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
296 cruelty against our own blood.”19 OHL therefore issued what Bethmann called “an open
threat” to civilian leaders in December 1916. USW, they claimed, was “the only means
whereby we shall be enabled to bring the war to an end promptly. . . . Our military situation is such as not to permit negotiations of any kind to divert from their course military
measures that have ﬁnally become recognized as correct, and thereby to cripple the energetic conduct of the war.”20 Again we see the standard argument: the need for haste, rejection of negotiation, and the requirement to use any means necessary for a purely military
victory. USW, like the Schlieffen Plan, was thus not a sign of “exuberant conﬁdence” but
of desperation.21 It risked the almost certain entry of the United States into the war in
favor of a wonder weapon pitting German technical ability and daring against the superior sea power of Germany’s strongest foe, Britain. Like all wonder weapons, it was experimental, which meant that opponents, such as the chancellor, had little data they could
use to argue against it.22 Expert testimony therefore weighed heavily. The navy had
learned from its earlier policy defeats; Admiral v. Holtzendorff had honed his statistics
and presented an essentially technical case with “mathematical precision.”23
The errors in Holtzendorff ’s reasoning have been nicely dissected by Holger Herwig.24
His ﬁndings can be consolidated into four categories of mistakes that illustrate the limits
of the navy’s technical thinking. First, the navy assumed a static, autistic world resembling
the one it mentally inhabited, rather than an interactive, mutually dependent system in
which learning and accommodation took place. Therefore, it failed to see that domestic
economic damage could be made good with foreign credit, that modern economies were
ﬂexible, that one could substitute other starches for grain, that prices and wages would
move up together, or that defensive techniques, such as the convoy, might be developed.
The second error lay in uncritically accepting data favorable to the navy’s case, for example, taking the poor U.S. grain crop of 1916 as typical, or optimistically undercounting
the gross tonnage available to Britain. Third, the navy underestimated Britain. It ascribed
less intelligence and less willpower to its foe than it assumed for Germany. Underestimating the enemy is one of the ubiquitous patterns in German military thinking of this period—indeed, many officers mentioned it self-critically at speciﬁc moments, but rarely
managed to banish it from their reasoning.25 It is evident again in the blithe attitude
toward the entry of the United States into the war. Its undeniable economic resources
19. Hindenburg, Aus meinem Leben, 220.
20. Bethmann, testimony before the Reichstag, 31 Oct. 1919, Germany, National Constituent Assembly, Ofﬁcial German Documents, 1:344.
21. Prince Max v. Baden’s characterization of the earnest impression the naval officers made on him as they
argued for USW, Erinnerungen, 53.
22. Bethmann called it an “experiment,” Betrachtungen, 2:132.
23. Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 53.
24. Holger Herwig, “Total Rhetoric, Limited War,” in Great War, Total War, ed. Chickering and Förster,
189–206, here 200–204.
25. Concerning Falkenhayn, see Janssen, Der Kanzler, 51, 51n3, 100, 184, 222; Thaer, letter of 24 Aug. 1916,
Generalstabsdienst, 86; Hugo von Freytag-Loringhoven’s observation of 14 Feb. 1915, in Rupprecht Kronprinz v.
Bayern, Meine Kriegstagebuch, 1:300; Rupprecht’s self-criticism, diary entries of 16 June 1917, 20 Aug. 1917, 20
Sept. 1917, yet his return to the same thinking on 31 Dec. 1917, 2:200, 247, 263, 305–7; Wild, Briefe, diary entries of
4 Nov. 1915, 11 Dec. 1915, 6 July 1916, and then his admission of 15 July 1916, 101, 120, 176, 177.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
were discounted as irrelevant because USW was supposed to force the war to end early; 297
militarily, the United States was dismissed out of hand, even by opponents of USW.26 The
ﬁnal sort of error was the corollary to underestimating the enemy: overestimating oneself.
In this case that meant “forgetting” a 1914 internal naval study that had estimated it would
take 222 submarines to blockade Britain effectively. On 1 February 1917, when USW went
into effect, Germany had 111 submarines, of which only 32 could be on duty at any given
time, not all of them in British waters.27 This was a staggering shortfall. The twinning of
wishful thinking and risk, the hallmarks of the Schlieffen Plan, had now moved ﬁrmly
into the realm of the unreal.
Holtzendorff ’s predictions for victory were as fantastic as the Hindenburg program.
The navy promised to “bring England to its knees” in six months. But one can detect two
backhanded acknowledgments that the whole house of cards was extremely fragile. One
was a “window of opportunity” caveat: USW could only be successful if it were launched
by 1 February 1917; otherwise the harvest would save England, while the time deadline for
Germany elapsed. When USW failed, one could always argue, as Tirpitz and many officers did, that it simply had not been resorted to early enough.28 The window of opportunity was the same argument Moltke had made for going to war in 1914 (before the Russian
railroads were ﬁnished), and, as in 1914, it placed great pressure on the chancellor to acquiesce to the military experts.
There was a second indirect admission that the navy’s plan was hollow. As in Falkenhayn’s justiﬁcation for Verdun, Holtzendorff explained that “bringing England to its
knees” did not mean materially forcing it to quit but making the cost so great that England, unwilling to make the same heroic sacriﬁces as Germany, would negotiate on Germany’s terms.29 That is, it was at base a psychological argument.30
As in the decision to replace Falkenhayn with Ludendorff and Hindenburg, there was
a strong plebiscitary element in USW. Admiral v. Tirpitz’s propaganda machine had
drummed up widespread support in the press and Reichstag for USW. USW functioned
as a wartime analog to the navy’s peacetime role as ﬂagship of Weltpolitik. Holtzendorff
included a panoply of civilian economic experts as scientiﬁc witnesses for his economic
predictions. In October, the Reichstag went on record in favor of USW, thereby, in the
words of one of its leaders, “renouncing entirely its own judgment in favor of the authority of the [Supreme Command].”31 The Reichstag’s action left the chancellor’s opposition
to USW without organized public support.
26. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Meine Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 11 Feb. 1917; he changed his mind
on 6 May 1917: 2:97, 161. Tirpitz, Politische Dokumente, 455–56. Ludendorff was still denying U.S. troops were
militarily signiﬁcant on 17 Oct. 1918, Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 426; and Hindenburg denied in 1920
that they had been signiﬁcant in causing the German defeat, Aus meinem Leben, 324.
27. Bernd Stegemann, Die deutsche Marinepolitik, 1916–1918 (Berlin, 1970), 26–29; Herwig, “Total Rhetoric,”
204–5.
28. Tirpitz, Politische Dokumente, 564, 588; Einem, Armeeführer, 413.
29. Stegemann, Die deutsche Marinepolitik, 57–64; and Herwig, “Total Rhetoric,” 195–97.
30. Groener recognized its psychological basis and rejected USW on this account. Diary entry of 25 Sept.
1916, Lebenserinnerungen, 325–26. Also, Tirpitz, Politische Dokumente, 525–26.
31. Payer, Von Bethmann Hollweg, 195, 206–7.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
298

There was, nevertheless, strong opposition to USW among both civilian and military
leaders; they recognized that unleashing USW was probably the pivotal decision of the
war. But they had been worn down by the juggernaut of interlocking arguments that mutually supported one another and reﬂected the most basic assumptions of military thinking. Bethmann tried a last tactic—his peace proposal of December 1916. When the Allies
rejected it out of hand, he had no further fallback position. On 9 January 1917 the Kaiser
adopted USW effective 1 February. And then one last repetition occurred, the analogue to
the Halt-in-Belgrade scheme of late July 1914. President Wilson’s offer of peace mediation,
which Bethmann learned about on 28 January, moved the chancellor to plead for postponement of USW until Germany could sound out the proposal. But the U-boats were already at sea and the navy argued that it was technically impossible to contact them in
time, just as it had been technically impossible to meddle with the Schlieffen Plan to suit
diplomatic requirements.32 Visiting Berlin in late January, Prince Max von Baden “found
the politicians in a frame of mind that can only be described as stolid loyalty.” Bethmann,
he thought, could not bring himself “to be responsible for a rotten peace without having
used the last chance of victory.”33
Among officers, widespread happiness at the decision was probably the most common response.34 But there were also doubters (including many who simply believed the
navy was the inferior service and could not possibly win the war by itself). Powerful
forces, both personal-psychological and institutional, hindered thoughtful officers from
resisting the logic of the wonder weapon once it had been adopted. The skeptics now had
to accommodate themselves to it. Some did so by agnostic deference to their fellow experts. Gen. Max Hoffmann declared the matter “beyond my judgment”; Col. Albrecht v.
Thaer thought that “if the navy feels certain it can do it, then one must not consider [the
danger from the United States].”35 Others, such as Crown Prince Rupprecht, let themselves be convinced against their better judgment. But such people were probably more
inclined to let the navy’s assertions be tested and then become disillusioned when the sixmonth deadline passed with England still on its feet. Still, it was hard not to hope; the psychological need to believe, the peer pressure to be upbeat, the emotional preparation necessary for the spring offensive, all these kept Rupprecht nursing his hopes into November
1917 that, even if they could not win the war by themselves, perhaps the U-boats might yet
make a difference.36 Tirpitz’s ﬁgures had converted General v. Einem, but he too had
doubts as the six-month period ended inconclusively. “I don’t want to be a pessimist, but
I cannot believe in a big victory now, unless God works a wonder. May he do so!”37 But
Einem only deﬁnitively gave up on the submarine wonder in June 1918.38
32. Bethmann’s testimony before the Reichstag, 31 Oct. 1919, Germany, National Constituent Assembly, Ofﬁcial German Documents, 350.
33. Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 54.
34. Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 277.
35. Hoffmann, Aufzeichnungen, diary entry of 9 Jan. 1917, 153; Thaer, Generalstabsdienst, had adopted this
position during the ﬁrst debate: letter of 14 Mar. 1916, 61.
36. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entries of 15 Feb. 1917, 2:9; 20 Aug. 1917,
2:248; 17 Nov. 1917, 2:289.
37. Einem, Armeeführer, letter of 4 July 1917, 324.
38. Ibid., diary entry, 30 June 1918, 413.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu

The March Offensive
The United States joined Germany’s enemies in April 1917, and most historians agree
with Bethmann that the war was deﬁnitively lost at that point. But it was lost more
quickly and spectacularly because of the March offensive of 1918. The offensive squandered Germany’s last reserves of troops and made it incapable of sustaining a longer defense that might have frustrated the Allies into negotiating before it was too exhausted to
resist their terms. By 1918 Germany lacked both the manpower and mobility to convert a
breakthrough into a strategic victory; the March offensive demanded the impossible.39
The alternative most suitable to Germany’s eroded position in 1917–18 would have been
the strategic defensive and the simultaneous pursuit of negotiations. But OHL never seriously considered this alternative, and no institutions or civilian or military leaders were
strong enough to stop the decision for self-destruction.
The March offensive and the three mini-offensives that followed it in April,
May–June, and July 1918 repeated the old pattern once again: a rush to embrace an unrealistic risk; the attempt to master the risk by technical virtuosity (detailed, taut planning)
or by contradictory measures or by sheer denial; the trust in a wonder weapon; and the
omission of preparations for possible failure. This template had failed all its strategic tests
so far, yet the third OHL tried it again. It had been successful, however, in achieving operative victories against Russia, where Ludendorff and Hindenburg had amassed most of
their practical experience and their nimbus of fame. Russia’s collapse in revolution encouraged the comforting illusion, widespread in the upper officer corps, that the old lessons were right after all.
Ludendorff had contemplated a 1918 offensive since April 1917; concrete planning had
begun in October.40 Those plans originally envisaged a limited attack designed to spoil
Allied plans, but even before the Bolshevik Revolution, Ludendorff had approved the idea
of his operations chief, Maj. Georg Wetzell, for an “annihilating blow” against the
British.41 Just three days after Lenin announced on 8 November 1917 that Russia would
withdraw from the war, Ludendorff told the two royal army group commanders, Crown
Prince Rupprecht and Crown Prince Wilhelm, that Germany would launch a major offensive that spring.42 Russia’s withdrawal evened the military strength of the Central and
Entente powers, but it did not create the numerical superiority with which Moltke the
elder had defeated France in 1870. The submarine campaign had failed to knock England
out of the war,43 but it had brought the United States into the war, which made the blockade for the ﬁrst time truly strangling. Germany’s reserves of munitions and manpower
39. Deist, “Der militärische Zusammenbruch des Kaiserreichs,” 215; Deist, “Strategy and Unlimited Warfare,” 278; Kuhl’s testimony, UA 4:3, 56, 97, 144–45, 200; Delbrück’s testimony, UA 4:3, 301–3; Groener,
Lebenserinnerungen, 427. The recent historical revision of Dieter Storz is self-contradictory but ultimately concludes that the plan was impracticable: Storz, “ ‘Aber was hätte anders geschehen sollen?’ ” in Kriegsende 1918,
62, 69.
40. Martin Kitchen, The German Offensives of 1918 (Charleston, S.C., 2001), 21–26.
41. Herwig, First World War, 393–94; Meier-Welcker, “Deutsche Führung,” 166.
42. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Meine Kriegstagebuch, entry of 11 Nov. 1917, 2:285.
43. Ludendorff had given up on USW by November 1917, Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, 2:287.

299

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
300 now neared their absolute limit, and U.S. troops were expected to arrive in Europe in the
summer. This dismal situation starkly repeated Germany’s old military dilemma, which
OHL and many commanders interpreted as the same kind of limited “window of opportunity” for offensive action as in July 1914 or January 1917.44
After the war had been lost, defenders of OHL’s decision claimed that the defensive
alternative had been carefully weighed.45 It had not. Ludendorff was set on an offensive
since at least 11 November; the planning sessions he held thereafter with his western commanders focused purely on tactical questions.46 Whereas Ludendorff had found the decision for retreat in 1917 “uncommonly difficult,” the decision to attack he characterized as
“not hard, even if the task is huge.”47 Gen. Hermann von Kuhl, who was skeptical of the
offensive’s chances at the time, later explained that the decision itself “seemed almost selfevident. It lay, so to speak, in the air.” He then recounted Germany’s critical military situation, its increasingly despondent home front and weakening allies, and concluded that
one simply could not wait until fresh American troops arrived on the scene. “The ‘halfyear danger zone’ [for the Allies] could not be left unused,” when Germany ﬁnally had
more troops free to deploy in the west than ever before. And ﬁnally, Kuhl cited Germany’s
military culture, without calling it that, of course: “Attack is the strongest form of war; it
alone leads to a decision. It gives the troops pep and raises their spirit. In peacetime we
were raised to go on the offensive, it was our strength.”48 In Germany’s hour of greatest
need, it therefore reached for its strength. Most officers welcomed the offensive plan.49
Nonetheless, important military and civilian voices counseled against it. Doubts
within the military concerning the March offensive (and USW) showed that military culture did not operate like indoctrination; it did not make it impossible to see danger or to
appreciate the limits of reality. Instead, it provided strong reasons to overcome the resulting caution or to discount it as pessimism or as being incompatible with the proper performance of one’s duty. The most severe skeptics were Crown Prince Rupprecht, his chief
of staff, Kuhl, and Crown Prince Wilhelm’s chief of staff, Count Friedrich von der Schulenburg.50 None believed Germany had much chance of success. Yet none of them recommended the “pure defensive.”51 They preferred the active defensive of German counterattacks, which worked only if the Allies attacked ﬁrst and thus wore themselves out. The
plans they submitted to OHL in October 1917 were thus limited offensives, and easily became not a stark alternative to the grander offensive but a basis for one of the elements of
it.52 Once OHL had decided for the March offensive, the skeptics were called on to hone
44. Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 90; Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:686–87.
45. Hindenburg, Aus meinem Leben, 299; Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:289.
46. Rupprecht sent his recommendation for the March offensive to Ludendorff on 20 Nov. 1917; the big
planning session of 19 Jan. 1918 was strictly tactical: Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch,
3:222–24, 2:319–20.
47. Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 12:129; Meier-Welcker, “Deutsche Führung,” 166, 181.
48. Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:288–90; identically: Kronprinz Wilhelm v. Preussen, Deutschlands Heldenkampf, 293.
49. Thaer, diary of 12 Feb. 1918, letter of 16 Aug. 1918, Generalstabsdienst, 164, 223; Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit,
314; Storz, “ ‘Aber was hätte,’ ” 56.
50. Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:92–93.
51. Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:293.
52. Klein, Deutschland, 3:232, 236. See also Army Group Crown Prince Rupprecht to OHL, 20 Nov. 1917, Ia
Nr. 4501, geheim (secret), in Rupprecht, Mein Kriegstagebuch, 3:222–38.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
offensive alternatives among which OHL would choose. Their doubts then became veiled 301
and merged with the position of another group of officers who favored the last-ditch effort, but who knew that the war was lost if it failed. To increase its chances of success,
Rupprecht, Kuhl, Gallwitz, and Lossberg recommended ﬂexibility: if the original attack
stalled at an enemy strongpoint, it should immediately be shifted elsewhere in hopes of
ﬁnding a weak spot for the breakthrough.53 This view made incisive criticism of the ensuing campaign more difficult for at least two reasons. It increased uncertainty among commanders about the nature of the attack in their sector: Was it a probe, a diversion, or an
attempt at a breakthrough?54 That uncertainty encouraged attempts to achieve breakthrough where diversion was the operative goal. And it opened the door to Ludendorff ’s
senseless repetition of attacks, which became hard to distinguish from ﬂexibility. In fact,
the skeptics were mostly inconsistent in their advice and criticism during the series of offensives after the ﬁrst one, which was code-named Michael.
In late 1917 and early 1918, the drift of military culture toward a last, huge risk was
again supported by a faulty political process. It is unclear whether a better process would
have made any difference, however. After all, the fatal decision for USW was taken despite
signiﬁcant extramilitary input and many rounds of discussion involving the Reich’s political leadership. The weak position of the navy as a new service had permitted that uniquely
broad decision-making process, but the political leadership still could not outweigh the
military during an existential-seeming war. The General Staff ’s competence for land warfare was so unchallenged, however, that no war council occurred in 1917–18 to discuss the
merits of an offensive strategy versus a defensive strategy combined with negotiations.55
Instead, individuals tried to inﬂuence OHL directly. Government officials were severely hampered by the absence of leadership provided by the aged Georg von Hertling
(chancellor from 25 October 1917 to 3 October 1918).56 Meanwhile, Ludendorff rejected
the arguments of inﬂuential public ﬁgures who feared a complete military victory was no
longer possible, with the words: “Only action brings success. That has been proven by the
success of our arms in other theaters. . . . Attack has always been the German method of
combat.”57
The plan displayed the strengths of the German military establishment but developed
the characteristic weaknesses ever further. Ludendorff meticulously and creatively retrained the exhausted army in the techniques of breakthrough. He built on and extended
Falkenhayn’s innovation of the storm battalion. Substantial quantities of ammunition
had been stockpiled. And the enormous buildup was successfully kept secret. When the
attack came on 21 March it was wildly successful in the ﬁrst days. General v. Kuhl described it to the Reichstag later as “an astonishing organizational and tactical achieve53. Gallwitz, Erleben im Westen, 294; Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 314; Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 59, 59n1, 67,
682–83.
54. See the disagreements in Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:313–14, 314n1, 317.
55. Deist, “Der militärische Zusammenbruch,” 213–14; Friederike Krüger and Michael Salewski, “Die Verantwortung der militärischen Führung deutscher Streitkräfte in den Jahren 1918 und 1945,” in Kriegsende 1918,
386.
56. Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 231, 235; Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 179.
57. Ludendorff to Ernst Jäckh, 22 Feb. 1918, cited in Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 93; Rüdiger Schütz, “Einführende Bemerkungen,” in Kriegsende 1918, 41–44.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
302 ment.”58 But it was fatal strategically and harmful operationally, for Ludendorff had reduced planning and action to the most technical level, the tactical. Rupprecht noted in
early April 1918 that OHL’s orders suggested it was “living from hand to mouth, without
recognizable operative intentions.”59
The tendency in the Wilhelminian military to substitute operations for strategy had
now plunged a notch further, to substitute tactics for operations. The operational was
now as fraught with depressing limits as the strategic had been earlier, so Ludendorff and
his advisors focused on the technical problem of breaking through the enemy’s lines, but
not on sustaining and developing that breakthrough into an operative, much less a strategic, victory. For by 1918 Germany lacked every objective measure for such an operative
success: it had numerical parity but not superiority (and even with superiority, the Allies
had never broken through the German lines); it lacked adequate reserves (one million
men remained in the east); it had fewer heavy artillery and airplanes than the Allies; and
above all, it lacked trucks, horses, and horse fodder for the transportation needed to pour
troops and supplies through the hole.60 Faced with these dismal ﬁgures but unwilling to
give up on military victory, Ludendorff abandoned the operational. He blurted out to
Rupprecht, “I forbid the word ‘operation.’ We are simply going to punch a hole [in the
lines] and everything will happen from there. That is how we did it in Russia!”61
Like Schlieffen in a similar operative dilemma, Ludendorff now tried overcontrol and
taut planning, intruding into tactical decisions normally reserved for lower command
levels.62 But, also like Schlieffen, he depended at the same time on the creative leadership
of lower-ranking officers to exploit victory opportunistically, wherever it arose. He did
not see the contradiction.
Virtually everybody at the time realized that Ludendorff was playing Germany’s last
card—this was the phrase they commonly used.63 Yet Ludendorff constantly expanded
the risk. He took Rupprecht’s plan, which aimed at rolling up and defeating part of the
British army, and extended it to target the entire British army. Then, in March, Ludendorff followed the advice of Gen. Oskar von Hutier of the 18th Army to transform a diversionary attack against the French into a second encirclement/annihilation. Ludendorff
thus proposed to defeat both his enemies in a dual, simultaneous encirclement.64 This
grandiosity cancelled Ludendorff ’s earlier insight of 11 November 1917 that Germany had
troops enough for only a single offensive.65 And, of course, it split Germany’s limited
strength.
What Ludendorff failed to do was to prepare strong rear defenses to shield retreating
troops and check Allied counterattacks. Several commanders and staff people suggested
58. Kuhl’s report, UA 4:3, 128–29, emphasis in original.
59. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 5 Apr. 1918, 2:372.
60. Deist, “Der militärische Zusammenbruch,” 215.
61. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, 2:372n.
62. Ibid., diary entries of 11 Feb. 1918, 28 Feb. 1918, 3:283, 287.
63. Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, diary entry of 19 Feb. 1918, 235; Thaer, Generalstabsdienst, diary entries of 31 Dec. 1917 and 12 Feb. 1918, 151, 164; Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry
of 19 Feb. 1918, 2:324; Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 318; Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:292.
64. Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:55, 91–92, 257.
65. Kuhl’s report, UA 4:3, 102.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
this obvious measure.66 But no preparations were made. This omission reﬂected the in- 303
grained bias against the defensive typical of the German military, ironically despite its
enormous success in defense during the ﬁrst three years of the war. It was also a consequence of the decision to launch an offensive, which diverted Germany’s inadequate
manpower resources entirely into hurried preparation for the coming attack—there was
scarcely labor left to strengthen defenses.67 And the lack of preparation for defeat reﬂected
the wishful thinking and unreality at the base of the decision.68 When Prince Max von
Baden confronted Ludendorff on 19 February 1918 about Germany’s slim, perhaps nonexistent, chances for success, Ludendorff could only reply, “You have to believe in victory.”69
Hindenburg had trouble explaining his and Ludendorff ’s thinking to his postwar readers:
It is a reasonable question: What justiﬁed our hope for one or more sweeping [offensive] victories [in spring 1918], when our opponents had always failed [to
achieve breakthroughs]? The answer is easy to give, but hard to explain. You can
say it in a single word, ‘trust.’ Not trust in your lucky star or vague hopes, even
less trust in numbers or external strengths. It was the trust a leader feels when he
sends his troops into enemy ﬁre, convinced that they will bear the utmost burden
and make the seemingly impossible possible.70
Hindenburg’s admission is extraordinary for its candor: even after the war he had not
thought of anything more reasonable to say in his defense. Equally striking is his rejection
of objective indicators such as numbers or troop or material strengths. Germany’s abiding
inferiority made bracketing them essential to acting according to the military culture’s aggressive expectations of a proper commander. And so one was left with the Wilhelminian
conundrum, “the necessity of the impossible.”
The March offensive, launched on the 21st, pushed back the front forty miles before it
bogged down on the 30th and was cancelled on 5 April. Just four days later, Ludendorff
launched a second offensive in Flanders that foundered in two days. Having twice failed
to defeat the main target, the British, Ludendorff planned the next offensive against the
French, to be launched at the end of May. It and the offensive that followed it in July were
ostensibly designed to lure British reinforcements away from Flanders, where Ludendorff
intended to try again (at the end of July). But a larger design was in fact lacking. When the
ﬁrst assault against the French unexpectedly took Soissons, OHL immediately dumped its
limited goal of diversion and went for a sweeping “decisive” victory. The result was the
same as in March: an indefensible salient and the “wastage” and exhaustion of troops.71
Einem described the ﬁrst two offensives as “a wild slaughter”; the victories had been won
“in a purely mechanical fashion” by repeating the same tactics. Ludendorff repeated them
66. Thaer, Generalstabsdienst, diary entry of 18 Apr. 1918, 183; Kuhl’s report, UA 4:3, 97, 200.
67. Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 259; Kuhl’s testimony, UA 3:1, 90; Meier-Welcker, “Deutsche Führung,”
182.
68. Michael Epkenhans, “Die Politik der militärischen Führung 1918,” in Kriegsende 1918, 220.
69. Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 236.
70. Hindenburg, Aus meinem Leben, 299.
71. Ibid., 333; Kuhl’s report, UA 4:3, 167, 171–72; Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:359.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
304 again on 15 July, but by then the French had ﬁnally caught on; they stopped the fourth and
ﬁnal offensive on 17 July and the next day began the Allied counteroffensives that ended
the war.72

Admitting Defeat
Admitting defeat is probably the most difficult task any organization faces. It was
doubly difficult for the German army because of its role as national symbol and its privileged place in the state, which rested on its guarantee to deliver military victory. Defeat
would sweep away the old order and, along with it, its army. The political stakes strongly
encouraged blindness to the catastrophic situation. But so did military culture, which affected behavior more thoroughly and systematically than abstract political worries. The
self-destructive dynamic that characterized the end of the war can only be understood if
one appreciates the organizational imperatives that kept officers from recognizing defeat,
adapting to it (operationally or strategically), and thus halting the spiral of violence.
From the foregoing chapters, the chief military-cultural mechanisms guarding
against (re)thinking will be abundantly clear. We must now ask, What experiences or subject positions allowed officers to escape these frames? and How did military culture tend
to thwart their insights?
Critical realism could sprout where military culture was weakest. Thus, younger OHL
staffers and those only recently called to the OHL were less saturated by the institutional
habits of denial. Two other groups beneﬁted from reality checks powerful enough—ﬁnally—to break through received wisdom. Extensive experience at the front helped
Colonel v. Thaer and General v. Lossberg, for example, to arrive at critical views, while
other, politically well-connected officers, such as Crown Princes Rupprecht and Wilhelm
(and possibly Gen.-Maj. Paul von Bartenwerffer, head of the political section of OHL)
had the advantage of extramilitary information and secret reports, which helped them put
the military situation into its larger strategic perspective. These officers arrived at their
dour conclusions independently over a period of months from April to early September
1918. They did not always conclude that the war was lost; the more palatable view held that
Germany could no longer win a purely military victory and therefore had to adopt the defensive and open negotiations. In either case, they faced tremendous opposition from inside the military institution.
One source of friction was not peculiar to Germany. Denial of impending catastrophe
is quite common, especially among organizations dealing with physical danger, and particularly when its warning signs become most apparent.73 Such organizations typically
place a high premium on physical courage and nurse feelings of invulnerability, both of
which would be injured by sounding a premature alarm. Any army is liable to this.
In Germany’s end phase, the ﬁrst such alarm should have come with the stalemate of
the “Michael” offensive. Several younger officers in the operations section at OHL, Maj.
72. Einem, Armeeführer, diary entry of 1 May 1918, 392, and letter of 19 July 1918, 418.
73. Turner, “Organizational and Interorganizational Development of Disasters,” 390–91.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Baron Erich von der Bussche-Ippenburg and Capts. Bodo von Harbou and Geyer, did 305
conclude that a Siegfrieden was now impossible and that Germany should give up its recent gains, return to the Siegfried line, and hold out on the defensive.74 Their views were
probably not widely known, however. Their section chief, Major Wetzell, did not share
their opinion and would have been unlikely to pass it on. Two other factors would have
discouraged them from pressing further. One was Ludendorff ’s intemperate criticism of
his subordinates, behavior consistent with the ruthless forcefulness appropriate to officers, which led his staff to suppress negative information “because they are loath to report
anything unpleasant.”75 The other was the disposability of staff officers, an institutional
adaptation to the army’s bifurcated organization. While the Military Cabinet overprotected commanders, the General Staff compensated by making staff officers particularly
vulnerable to removal. The unintended result was that staff officers “oriented themselves
more toward their superiors and Ludendorff than toward the enemy,” Gen. Adolf Wild v.
Hohenborn noted in late 1916. “Independence and willingness to act suffer from this.
Everybody is afraid of being thrown out.”76 Wild’s observation may have been truer at the
front than at OHL, but clearly systemic hindrances discouraged younger officers from expressing unpopular views to superiors.
What happened when one persevered anyway is shown by the case of Col. Albrecht v.
Thaer, chief of staff of the Wytschaete Korps in Flanders. Thaer had commanded seventy
different divisions before being appointed in April 1918 as Ludendorff ’s chief of staff for
provisioning. Thaer’s extensive battleﬁeld experience convinced him that Germany’s
troops were worn out and near collapse. On 1 May 1918 he summoned up his courage and
reported his views to Hindenburg and Ludendorff. Hindenburg brushed him off with the
Russian precedent. “There we did the same thing, attacking ﬁrst here, then there, and all
at once it succeeded. That’s how it will go in the west, too. You see, thank God we have ﬁve
more months until winter during which we can try a whole row of offensive attacks, attacking here and there, here and there.” In Thaer’s view, Hindenburg’s answer was simply
“irrelevant.” Ludendorff ’s response was typically pungent. “What is all this belly-aching
[Geunke]? What do you want me to do, conclude peace at any price?” Thaer replied that
he “must leave all the consequences to OHL.” “The result of my step with our great men:
zero,” Thaer concluded. “They are ﬁrmly convinced that they can wear the enemy down
to peace; Hindenburg believes it, and Ludendorff certainly hopes so.”77
OHL’s adamant refusal to recognize the situation made critics inside the military
question their own judgment. Thaer was no exception.78 But he recovered his conﬁdence
74. Wolfgang Foerster, Der Feldher Ludendorff im Unglück (Wiesbaden, 1952), 31; Siegfried A. Kaehler, “Vier
quellenkrische Untersuchungen zum Kriegsende 1918,” Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen I. Philologisch-Historische Klasse, no. 8 (Göttingen, 1960), 428n2.
75. Thaer, Generalstabsdienst, diary entry of 26–27 Apr. 1918, 187.
76. Wild, Briefe, letter of 18–19 Dec. 1916, 208; also, Einem, Armeeführer, diary entry of 3 July 1916 and letter
of 17 Nov. 1916, 238, 267; Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 1 Nov. 1915, 1:402;
9 May 1916, 1:461; 20 May 1918, 2:396.
77. Thaer, Generalstabsdienst, 196–97.
78. See also Crown Prince Wilhelm’s self-doubts about countering Ludendorff ’s after-offensives: Kronprinz
Wilhelm v. Preussen, Deutschlands Heldenkampf, 333–34; Herwig, First World War, 393.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
306 through self-criticism: “Unfortunately, I have caught myself up till now being too much
of an optimist.”79 Still, Thaer made sure to keep his doubts from his fellow staff officers.80
The atmosphere is clear from another officer’s remark (at the end of July 1918): “Anyone
who regarded the slogan ‘forcing the enemy down’ with skepticism was branded a weakling.”81 The stereotypical virtues of the officer undermined realism.
Higher-ranking officers were more secure than their younger colleagues, but they
were also more securely fettered by Imperial military culture. The advice of the highestranking skeptics after the failure of the “Michael” offensive makes the problem clear.
None advocated going on the defensive. Instead, they advocated a truly strategic offensive
that concentrated Germany’s forces in a single spot.82 Even as each offensive failed, attack
still seemed to them the best bet. Despite his skepticism about the prospects for success,
for example, General v. Einem recommended the more ambitious of two proposed offensives for his army in July 1918.83 And General v. Kuhl, who otherwise opposed Ludendorff ’s decisions in 1918, urged him to continue attacking on 15 July, after Einem had persuaded Ludendorff to halt this last offensive because of excessive losses. Kuhl wrote that if
excessive losses were the reason, “then we cannot expect anything great; without losses
nothing big can be gained.”84 Even after the successful French counterattack, Kuhl rejected the pure defensive, because “we must not relinquish the initiative to the enemy.”85
In short, critical leaders within the military did not provide a clear alternative to Ludendorff ’s “buffalo” tactics.86 The realism of the most realistic commanders and staff officers was severely checked by their standard assumptions about combat. The tactical perspective overwhelmed them. They remained convinced that, whether you aimed for a
“real” military victory (of annihilation), a lesser victory of attrition, or even a negotiated
peace, the method remained the same. The agreement on the general superiority of inherently risky offensive as against defensive tactics made it harder for critical commanders to
separate themselves from the repetitious, willful use of those tactics in strategic and operative situations where they could no longer succeed.87
Ludendorff and Hindenburg were, of course, both subject to the same pressures
stemming from military culture as were their subordinates. While popular opinion and
professional hopes had elevated Hindenburg to symbolic ersatz-kaiser, Ludendorff had to
incorporate the virtues of the fearless Schlieffen-genius, the guarantor of victory in actual
war, not just in war planning. He was in some ways a prisoner of that role, which military
79. Thaer, Generalstabsdienst, 194–99, here 196, 195, 197, 198.
80. Ibid., diary entry of 29 Apr. 1918, 190.
81. Major Niemann’s pamphlet, “Zur politischen Lage” (20 July 1918), cited in Schwertfeger’s report, UA
4:2, 216; Niemann, Kaiser und Revolution, 28; Meier-Welcker, “Deutsche Führung,” 179.
82. Gallwitz: On 3 June 1918, Gallwitz, Erleben im Westen, 323, 327. Rupprecht and Kuhl: Reichsarchiv,
Weltkrieg, 14:320–21; Meier-Welcker, “Deutsche Führung,” 170, 171–36; Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein
Kriegstagebuch, diary entries of 8 Apr. 1918, 2:374, 12 Apr. 1918, 2:388, 3 Oct. 1918, 2:455.
83. Einem, Armeeführer, diary entry of 17 June 1918, 408.
84. Foerster, Ludendorff, 17.
85. Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:534.
86. That includes Hoffmann, who in principle favored a single concentrated blow but who nevertheless in
June believed Germany should try yet another attack against the French. Hoffmann, Aufzeichnungen, diary entry
of 4 June 1918, 197, 198. “Buffalo strategy” was Foch’s term: Herwig, First World War, 233.
87. For example, Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:351–52; Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 346.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
culture had created and political culture supported. Like the keystone of an arch, Luden- 307
dorff was supposed to hold the ediﬁce together. He dared not weaken. Confronted with
the views of military skeptics, he seemed to fear, as Col. Herman Ritter Mertz von Quirnheim noted in his diary, “that people would accuse him of losing his nerve.”88
The genius motif encouraged contemporaries (and some historians) to locate the
main obstacle to realistic military policy in Ludendorff ’s personality and mental health.89
There is no question that the de facto head of an imperative chain of command exercises
great personal inﬂuence on decisions and staff. Ludendorff did become anxious, inconsistent, and refractory during Germany’s long defeat in 1918. But it is helpful to see how
much system there was to Ludendorff ’s behavior.
Ludendorff reacted to defeat much as Falkenhayn had done in 1916. Ludendorff too
clutched at a failed plan and attacked repetitively, as Falkenhayn had done at Verdun. Ludendorff too became lost in details: he micromanaged the March offensive and during
brieﬁngs ducked the unpleasant larger issues by changing the subject to minutiae.90 He
too began reckoning victories mechanically, claiming success “so long as we inﬂict more
losses on the enemy than we suffer ourselves.”91 He too vastly overestimated enemy
losses.92 And he too lied. Two months after he had calculated that Germany lacked the
necessary manpower reserves, he nonetheless told the new foreign secretary, Paul von
Hintze, that Germany could indeed win a ﬁnal, military victory, implying that negotiations were unnecessary.93 Unlike Falkenhayn, however, Ludendorff kept on lying to the
civilian leadership, which made it impossible for them to prepare for the impending defeat.94
In the end Ludendorff (and Hindenburg) behaved according to the expectations that
military culture and the war-transformed political culture held of them. This is surely one
reason why even officers who should have known better did not blame them for the defeat
or for their reluctance to admit it. For all his postwar criticism of Ludendorff, for example, in the end Col. Bernhard Schwertfeger, appointed by the Reichstag to analyze Germany’s defeat, exonerated OHL before the parliamentarians: “Courage and conﬁdence
are career requirements for soldiers, and no one should expect from the commanders
after such incredible battleﬁeld achievements that they would dwell on the reverse side of
the medal. Considering that was the job of politics.”95
Or, take General v. Kuhl’s lengthy report to the postwar Reichstag. Even though he
disagreed with almost every action Ludendorff took in 1918, Kuhl defended the quartermaster general’s step-by-step descent into the abyss because each decision was eminently
88. Diary entry of 26 July 1918, cited in Foerster, Ludendorff, 28.
89. Foerster, Ludendorff, provides the results of the Reichsarchiv’s research into the question of Ludendorff ’s mental health. Blaming Ludendorff: Kitchen, German Offensives, 233–34.
90. Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 326, 345; Foerster, Ludendorff, 35, 44–45, 56; Storz, “ ‘Aber was hätte,’ ” 95.
91. June 1918, cited in Storz, “ ‘Aber was hätte,’ ” 90.
92. Reicharchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:314–15.
93. Discussion of 9 July 1918, Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 209.
94. The most infamous example was the crown council of 14 August: Germany, Foreign Office and Ministry
of the Interior, ed., Amtliche Urkunden zur Vorgeschichte des Waffenstillstandes 1918, 2nd ed. (Frankfurt, 1988;
orig., 1924), 3–6 (hereafter Amtliche Urkunden); Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 224–32, quotations, 224, 229–30.
95. Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 180.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
308 reasonable according to conventional military wisdom.96 Thus, the March offensive was
defensible because Germany was “checkmated” and the visible risks “could not hold the
commander back from seeking a decision of force so long as there was any chance of victory. He had no choice. It was conceivable that the fortunes of war” would have granted
victory. Kuhl found the idea for the offensive “a great ‘attack plan,’ a ‘convincing and
rousing idea.’ ” When it failed, it was understandable that “the strong will of OHL did not
want to let go of the goal. Often in war standing ﬁrm has led to surprising victory in the
last second.” Negotiations were in any case unimaginable: “In this war it was a matter of
victory or defeat.” The continued offensives in May and June were logical: “One had to
act. Even most critics of the OHL agree with this.” Remaining on the defensive would
have meant losing the war: “Arriving at this timid conclusion was not necessary before
the last attempt at a favorable decision had been made.” And so forth.97 Kuhl and other
public defenders of OHL chose the arguments they found most convincing, those that
were most ﬁrmly anchored in Imperial military culture.98
Meanwhile, as OHL stalled, the skeptics among high-ranking commanders and
younger General Staff officers grew. Those of April and May were joined by others in
June.99 The successful French counterattack on 17 July hastened the process. Now Generals v. Gallwitz and v. Lossberg thought defense and negotiation were the only paths
open.100 They and the crown princes pressed in July, August, and September to conduct a
prepared strategic retreat to establish deep lines of defense from which Germany could
frustrate the Allies while initiating peace negotiations. Ludendorff resisted this advice
until the Allied breakthrough at Arras-Cambrai on 2 September forced him to order a retreat—though it was too late to do so in the way the critics desired. (Even then, some OHL
staffers opposed this heresy.)101
It was not until early September that the General Staff prepared itself organizationally
for admitting defeat. At the urging of Ludendorff ’s advisor, Col. Max Bauer, and with Ludendorff ’s acquiescence, two younger officers, Maj. Joachim von Stülpnagel and Col. Wilhelm Heye, joined the staff on 11–12 September in order to bring a fresh viewpoint.
Around the 25th, together with younger staffers and the older General v. Bartenwerffer,
they began to prepare Ludendorff to face the facts. Finally, on 29 September 1918 Ludendorff and Hindenburg admitted to their staff and to civilian leaders that Germany had
lost the war; without an immediate armistice, they claimed, the army would suffer com96. Cf. Niemann, Kaiser und Heer, 360–61, who called Ludendorff ’s decisions in 1918 “not always ‘the
best,’ ” but “reasonable,” and then cited Moltke the elder as having said that “it is enough if the commander always orders the ‘reasonable’; then he will always have the prospect of reaching his goal, although not the certainty, since ‘even the best man can fail because of the irresistible power of circumstance.’ ”
97. Kuhl’s report, UA 4:3, quotations in order: 189, 144, 136–37, 138–39, 165, 183.
98. For further examples, see Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:691; Freytag-Loringhoven, Menschen und Dinge,
329–30; Niemann, Kaiser und Heer, 141; Kronprinz Wilhelm v. Preussen, Erinnerungen, 186–87; Foerster, Ludendorff, 58, 68, 129.
99. Meier-Welcker, “Deutsche Führung,” 173n50.
100. Lossberg, Meine Tätigkeit, 346–47; Gallwitz, Erleben im Westen, 340–41. Foerster distrusts Lossberg’s
account, but most historians accept it. Foerster, Ludendorff, 22–25.
101. Kuhl diary, 3 Sept. 1918, cited in Foerster, Ludendorff, 55.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
plete military collapse. Ludendorff ’s admission ended what one close observer described 309
as the “terrible inner battle in which one saw the catastrophe, on the one hand, but on the
other could not and did not want to understand it.”102
OHL’s inability to admit defeat, its choice to conduct the war by relentless offensives
and then by a bitter ﬁghting retreat without relinquishing territory drifted toward totality
by driving up the casualty rate and exhausting an ever higher percentage of “human material.” In the ﬁve months after the March offensive began, Germany suffered one million
casualties (dead, wounded, missing, captured). From mid-July to the armistice, another
420,000 were killed or wounded and 340,000 were missing or captured.103
In the course of this organizational denial, a line was crossed separating mere
“wastage” from national suicide. Maj. Alfred Niemann was one of the ﬁrst to recognize
that line, on 20 July 1918, two days after the French counterattacks threw German troops
onto the defensive, permanently. “The slogan ‘holding out for a victorious end’ is just a
slogan, a euphemistic expression for voluntary ‘honorable death,’ which is only understandable to German idealism.”104 As a policy, “honorable death” developed in the summer and fall of 1918, unclearly and piecemeal by extending dicta or assumptions that had
been operating the entire time. It ended as one of the versions of Endkampf (ﬁnal battle)
envisioned by high-ranking officers that risked or even embraced the destruction of Germany in a ﬁnal battle against the Allies.105 In the Endkampf the full destructive force inherent in the military’s operative maxims turned on itself in a pyre of self-destruction.

Endkampf
Because of its obvious military-cultural logic, Endkampf was visible in outline long
before it became an actual plan. Crown Prince Wilhelm had expressed the logic in July
1917 when he proposed offering the Allies a negotiated settlement on the basis of the status
quo (a “peace of understanding”). If they rejected it, then one would rally the German
people and “strain the last nerve to block the [Allies’] plan [to destroy Germany].”106 The
practical foundation for Endkampf began the next year, in April 1918, with the defensive
plans of the younger staff skeptics and realistic commanders.107 They advocated a ﬂexible
defense in depth that would have created a broad swath of destruction across the rest of
occupied France and Belgium in order to slow or stop the Allied advance.108 By late July,
when the offensive was no longer possible, Rupprecht and other commanders now also
102. Maj. Gen. Hermann Mertz v. Quirnheim, note of 29 Sept. 1922, cited in Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2,
428.
103. Deist, “Der militärische Zusammenbruch,” 228–29. In the end, 3% of the German population and 15%
of its soldiers were killed in the war: Afflerbach, “ ‘Bis zum letzten Mann und letzten Groschen?’ ” in Die
Wehrpﬂicht, 89.
104. Major Niemann, memo, 20 July 1918, cited in Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 216.
105. The best account is Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 459–527. Also Krüger and Salewski, “Die Verantwortung.”
106. Kronprinz Wilhelm v. Preussen, Erinnerungen, 165.
107. Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 496.
108. Ibid., 495–97; Kaehler, “Vier quellenkritische Untersuchungen,” 428n2.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
310 called for such a defense from which “we can exercise resistance successfully for a long
time. Our last hope is to hold out long enough until the enemy concludes that the sacriﬁces in blood and material are out of proportion to the results, especially since every one
of our retreats means the complete destruction of the land between the lines.” This plan
assumed the severe destruction that Germany had used during its “Alberich” retreat of
1917. But Rupprecht’s goal was limited: after the ﬁrst major repulse of an Allied attack he
wanted to enter negotiations to end the war, even if that should mean “great sacriﬁces” on
Germany’s part.109 The means were thus more absolute than the end.
Three weeks later, at the crown council on 14 August, Ludendorff and Hindenburg
also adopted a bloody, destructive defense. Their plan differed from Rupprecht’s in two
ways. OHL still claimed it could win the war by using more violent techniques. And it ordered a slow ﬁghting retreat, clinging to every inch of territory, instead of Rupprecht’s
plan for a large strategic retreat, with systematically scorched earth and then limited
counterattacks. Ludendorff ’s type of retreat became the reality; it caused huge casualties
and much destruction, but it was not as systematic or thorough as 1917 had been.
These were the practical foundations of Endkampf. But the temptation to resort to increased force had obviously spread far beyond the military. OHL’s shocking announcement on 29 September immediately elicited all sorts of versions of the Endkampf idea,
many of them from civilians. The spectrum reached from Foreign Secretary Hintze’s
scheme to threaten (but not really carry out) all-out resistance in order to fool the allies
into offering better peace terms to industrialist Walter Rathenau’s romantic call for a German popular insurrection to win the war.110
The most realistic Endkampf conception took shape under Prince Max von Baden’s
new government, which had succeeded Chancellor Hertling’s on 3 October and inaugurated constitutional reforms designed to make Germany acceptable as a negotiating partner with the Allies and to legitimate a disappointing peace at home. Prince Max’s plan was
not a bluff; he and the cabinet were willing to break off armistice negotiations and continue the war for some months, if necessary by drafting the very last man capable of holding a gun, thereby shutting down industry in Germany—but only if the broad populace
supported such a move, and only if it stood a real chance of military success, deﬁned as
getting better peace terms. The cabinet discussed Endkampf at great length on 9 October
and 17 October, and again on the 19th and the 28th. At no time could military spokesmen
persuade the cabinet that Endkampf was either militarily or politically viable. Reluctantly,
Prince Max and the cabinet abandoned the scheme and voted to sign the armistice.111
The military’s version of Endkampf differed from the cabinet’s conception in two
ways. First, the goal was not limited to better peace terms, because much more was at
stake for the army as an institution than for Germany as a nation. Except perhaps for
France (which Britain and the United States would restrain), the Allies did not intend to
“destroy” Germany, that is, erase it as a sovereign entity. The officers and Wilhelminian
109. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entry of 27 July 1918, 2:428–29.
110. Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 251; Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 482–85; Prince Max v. Baden,
Erinnerungen, 309, 466; Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, entry of 17 Oct. 1918, 2:463.
111. Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 116–23, 205–15, 217, 226–53, 283, 398–411.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
leaders who hyperbolically claimed that the Allies were out to destroy Germany were elid- 311
ing the Kaiserreich’s outmoded institutions, preeminently the army and the Kaiser’s Kommandogewalt, with Germany, tout court.112 These were the institutions the Allies were
bent on destroying, and with them the military’s status, independence, and ethos. Therefore, for officers, Endkampf was not about amelioration of the peace terms for the nation
but about salvation for the military.
Consequently, Endkampf for them was not the ﬁrst act of a reform government or the
insurrectionary harbinger of a revolutionary age but the continuation to the death of the
old habits, scripts, and assumptions of Wilhelminian military culture. These now made
their ﬁnal, dramatic appearance: the principled rejection of negotiation, claiming it
would appear an admission of weakness or of failure to achieve military victory; the concomitant inability to admit defeat; the narrow understanding of defeat as destruction of
troops (not as the inability to prosecute the war economically or politically); the desperate belief that the fortunes of war (Kriegsglück) might turn; the personal identiﬁcation
with military honor; and the narrowly professional concern to save the army’s and navy’s
reputations for the future.
Endkampf ’s radical quality came from taking the old ways of doing business to their
logical extremes. These continuities are visible, for example, in the most concrete measure for Endkampf, which came from War Minister Heinrich Scheüch. On 9 October he
offered a two hundred thousand man one-time levy, and on 17 October he raised this ﬁgure to over six hundred thousand. These men were to be scraped up from industry,
schools, hospitals, and the premature call-up of draftees born in 1900.113 The levy was extraordinary in one sense, because it committed absolutely all the reserves and required
entirely shutting down the non-war-related economy. But in another sense it was simply
another—albeit ﬁnal—solution to Germany’s chronic reserve problem, raising and training men in the usual way for the front.114 Indeed, Scheüch’s predecessor, War Minister
Hermann von Stein, had already made the two-hundred-thousand-man offer in June
1918, contingent on OHL’s promise that the additional troops would permit Germany to
win the war.115 The drafting of every last man, at the cost of closing factories and shutting
down civilian life, had already been proposed twice by the OHL, once in the Hindenburg
program in 1916 and again in June 1918.116 The police measures to enforce the six-hundred-thousand-man levy, that is the elimination of freedom of movement by a pass system, had been in force in the occupied territories almost from the beginning of the war.
Even the recognition that Endkampf needed popular approval was a typically Wilhelmin112. The elision of military capacity with sovereignty was widespread during the war and became a major
political trope during the Weimar Republic.
113. Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 122, 226, 240, 242n58; Amtliche Urkunden, 90–91, 133–35, 145–46,
150.
114. Reserves: Groeber and Foreign Secretary Wilhelm Solf in smaller cabinet session of 16 Oct. 1918,
Amtliche Urkunden, 121; Erich von Gündell, Aus seinen Tagebüchern, ed. Walther Obkircher (Hamburg, 1939),
diary entry of 18 Oct. 1918, 292. Training: Groener in cabinet meeting of 5 Nov. 1918, Amtliche Urkunden, 249.
115. Ludendorff, Urkunden, 115; Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 439–45. Solf remarked at the 17 Oct.
cabinet meeting that the measure was not new: Amtliche Urkunden, 150.
116. OHL to Chancellor, II Nr. 877, geh. op., 18 June 1918, in Ludendorff, Urkunden, 108.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
312 ian half-measure; instead of democracy or plebiscites, proponents wanted a carefully orchestrated patriotic announcement from the Kaiser, the chancellor, and the Reichstag.117
For the military, Endkampf thus meant simply the continuation of the war and its ad
hoc measures. It was the culmination of a series of small, unremarkable steps. Nevertheless, Endkampf risked complete destruction. Was the military serious, or just bluffing?
How far was it prepared to take (self)-destruction?
As early as 10 October, some cabinet members thought Endkampf was a bluff, a way
for the military to claim they had tried to continue the war but had been blocked, and
thus to shift the blame for losing the war from the army to the new government.118 Historians are still divided, though most modern accounts tend to doubt OHL’s sincerity.119
There are good reasons for skepticism. Endkampf seems hard to reconcile with Ludendorff ’s call for an immediate armistice. Ludendorff rejected Scheüch’s ﬁrst offer of troops
to make Endkampf possible.120 Ludendorff could risk big talk because after mid-October
he could count more and more on being stopped by the cabinet’s scrupulousness. And
most important, the mere bluff of the Endkampf that never happened was enough to
launch the hugely successful “stab-in-the-back” myth that saved the army’s reputation
and poisoned the democratic Weimar Republic.121
However, many factors indicate that Ludendorff was serious about the Endkampf.
The possibility of ﬁghting on if the Allies refused to treat with Germany or offered a bad
armistice or peace terms was present in OHL’s plans from the beginning.122 Hintze had
had to argue with Ludendorff against the idea on 29 September, when Ludendorff made
his armistice announcement.123 Ludendorff had instructed Major v. d. Bussche to outline
the Endkampf possibility to Reichstag leaders, which he did on 2 October.124 Ludendorff
also discussed Endkampf privately with Gen. Ernst von Eisenhart-Rothe, and with
Colonels v. Thaer and v. Haeften on various days from 29 September to 1 October. He
told Thaer, “If we win some rest by the armistice, or if the enemy is too impertinent in its
demands, or if some other possibility appears to improve our situation by bitter ﬁghting,
then, believe me, we will ﬁght to the utmost.”125
In the ﬁrst half of October, Endkampf for Ludendorff was probably more a consolation than a plan. He had called for an immediate armistice because he feared an imminent
117. Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, cabinet meeting of 28 Oct. 1918, 402, 406, 407; Payer, Von Bethmann Hollweg, 142.
118. Solf and Roedern in cabinet meeting of 10 Oct. 1918, Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 127.
119. Serious: Foerster, Ludendorff, 88, 97, 129; Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:631–32; Goerlitz, Kleine Geschichte,
210–11, 212, 214; Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 494. (Probably) bluffing: Kaehler, “Vier quellenkritische Untersuchungen,” 432; Klein, Deutschland, 3:440, 470, 473; Erdmann, Der Erste Weltkrieg, 138; Kitchen, Silent Dictatorship, 265; Chickering, Imperial Germany, 189–90.
120. Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 449n1.
121. Ludendorff claimed that “only the revolution” had hindered Endkampf: Kuhl’s report, UA 4:3, 215;
Wild, Briefe, letter of 5 Nov. 1918, 249.
122. Klein, Deutschland, 3:432.
123. Foerster, Ludendorff, 90–91.
124. Amtliche Urkunden, 66–68.
125. Quote: Thaer diary, 30 Sept. 1918, Generalstabsdienst, 236; Eisenhart-Rothe, Im Banne der Persönlichkeit,
122–25; Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, diary entry of 2 Oct. 1918, 340.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Allied breakthrough and the consequent destruction of the German army. He held to this 313
view until around 14 October. On the 10th, the new foreign Secretary, Wilhelm Solf, reported that Ludendorff still believed the army could not hold out for three months. Ludendorff therefore pressed the reluctant cabinet to accede to President Wilson’s demand
to evacuate the occupied territories, which it did in the German reply of 12 October.126 A
quick evacuation would have made Endkampf impossible. But Ludendorff and Hindenburg thought Wilson would permit a slow retreat during which the army and its equipment could be safely brought back to the German border where it would stand ready to
take up the ﬁght again, if peace or armistice terms were unacceptable.127
Two factors in mid-October moved Ludendorff to back off his admission of 29 September. The most important, as Ludendorff told the cabinet on 17 October, was that the
Allies had not mounted the breakthrough he had feared, from which he concluded that
they were war-weary themselves and incapable of doing so. The “crisis” on the western
front was over, he claimed, and if Germany held out for another four weeks, it would be
“out of the woods.”128 The second factor was Wilson’s note of 14 October, his second. It
said the Allies would determine the timing of evacuation (which would doubtless be
quick); it demanded an end to the “illegal and inhumane practices” of the destructive retreat in Belgium and France; it required Germany to stop its only offensive weapon, the
submarine; and it repeated Wilson’s determination “to destroy every arbitrary power anywhere.”129 For Ludendorff, these demands were “nothing more or less than putting down
one’s arms and unconditional capitulation.”130 He advised the cabinet on 17 October to
continue to seek an armistice, but to counter these demands with a strong note, while
preparing the public to continue the war.131 A week later he and Hindenburg rejected Wilson’s third note, and with it the possibility of an armistice, demanding a ﬁght to the end.
The chancellor and cabinet refused; the Kaiser supported them and accepted Ludendorff ’s, but not Hindenburg’s, resignation on 26 October.
This chronology suggests that Ludendorff ’s insight of 29 September was a momentary doubt, not a genuine recognition of facts.132 It was so at odds with his usual thinking
that he was unable to hold on to it for more than two weeks. The widespread suspicion
among the officer corps that it had been due to an attack of nerves was their way of expressing the same judgment.133 In embracing Endkampf, its proponents reverted to the
logic of military culture. Its unreality did not hinder proponents from making the sugges126. Amtliche Urkunden, 92, 97; Gündell, Tagebüchern, 289–90.
127. Report of Berckheim to Foreign Office, General Headquarters, 11 Oct. 1918, Amtliche Urkunden, 96.
128. Amtliche Urkunden, 138, 139, 148, 150; Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 251.
129. Wilson Note of 14 Oct. 1918, U.S. State Department, Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations, Supplement 1, vol. 1: 359.
130. Admiral Levetzow’s summary of Ludendorff ’s views in a memo on the cabinet meeting of 17 Oct. 1918,
at which Levetzow was present, cited in Foerster, Ludendorff, 111.
131. Amtliche Urkunden, 150.
132. Even Hindenburg had once (March 1915) doubted whether Germany could defeat its enemies militarily, though he quickly recovered his adamantine optimism: Janssen, Der Kanzler, 90–91, 90n23.
133. Ferguson claims (incredibly) that Germany’s defeat was due to Ludendorff ’s nervous admission: Niall
Ferguson, The Pity of War (New York, 1998), 310–14.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
314 tion seriously, since it proposed a continuation of usual war conduct, not a break with it.
Furthermore, it was no more unreal than unrestricted submarine warfare or the March
offensive(s). And nobody had ever promised it would succeed (which is why the chancellor and cabinet rejected it).
Endkampf reprised the old thinking and assumptions. It built on what Schwertfeger
later called the myth of the impregnability of the western front, that is, the fact that it had
held so far meant it could hold indeﬁnitely.134 Behind that myth was the much larger one,
that Germany had not really been defeated. Michael Geyer, and before him Fritz Klein
and Joachim Petzold, have argued that the military leadership did indeed admit Germany’s defeat and that historians should be wary of seeming to give credence to the stabin-the-back legend by imagining that they did not.135 Yet even the admission of 29 September was only partial. Although Ludendorff said from one side of his mouth that
Germany was “militarily ﬁnished,” apparently it was not entirely defeated. The armistice,
he told his staff, was designed to save the army from “ﬁnal defeat.”136 For “defeat” still
meant military destruction on the battleﬁeld, which officers (and civilians) imagined à la
Schlieffen as the result of breakthrough, encirclement, and annihilation.137 That is why
Ludendorff ’s successor, Gen. Wilhelm Groener, was still repeating to the cabinet on 5 November (six days before the armistice) that OHL’s “ﬁrst duty is and will remain to avoid a
decisive defeat of the army.”138 It was in this Schlieffen sense that Germany was undefeated, and this operative sense was what had always counted for the old officer corps, not
the strategic (political and economic) sense.
If Ludendorff had truly accepted Germany’s strategic defeat, it is hard to see how he
could have imagined that the Allies would permit Germany to keep its huge eastern gains
(except for Romania); to withdraw at leisure in the west, keeping its army at full ﬁghting
strength; and to appear at the peace conference as an equal negotiating partner. Yet that is
what he and apparently most officers believed.139 As it was, the lack of a “decisive defeat”
was enough to allow the old illusions to surge back. The arguments for Endkampf were
replete with the old errors: underestimating the enemy, overestimating oneself, projecting
one’s methods onto the enemy, and so forth. For example, Ludendorff denied to the end
the importance of Allied matériel and manpower superiority. He allowed that the Allies
had more tanks and trucks, but told the cabinet (9 October) that he hoped to have six
hundred tanks by spring 1919 and he “did not believe that other forms of superiority were
dangerous.”140 Asked on the 17th about American reinforcements, Ludendorff discounted
them, even though he knew that the six-hundred-thousand-man call-up would face 1.1
134. Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 276–80. This is the same use of history as positive feedback that Hindenburg and Ludendorff adduced to silence critics such as Thaer about the March offensive.
135. Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 462–64; Klein, Deutschland, 3:431–32.
136. Thaer, Generalstabsdienst, 233, 234.
137. Niemann, Kaiser und Revolution, 122; Kronprinz Wilhelm v. Preussen, Erinnerungen, 229; “Auffassung
der Lage,” Political Section of OHL, 6 Oct. 1918, in Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:661; Matthias and Morsey, Die
Regierung, 211 and 246 (Haussmann), 340 (Friedberg), 373 (Scheüch), 402 (Gallwitz).
138. Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 530.
139. Berckheim to Foreign Office, General Headquarters, 11 Oct. 1918, Amtliche Urkunden, 96.
140. Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 121–22.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
million fresh American troops.141 So convinced was OHL that the Schlieffen break- 315
through was the only way to ﬁght that it misinterpreted the Allies’ “bite-and-hold” tactics
as proof that they were unable to prosecute a winning campaign.142 In their last instructions to the German armistice commission on 23 October, Ludendorff and Hindenburg
even indulged once more the fond dream of splitting the Allies and defeating them individually. They thought France and Britain would insist on such harsh armistice terms that
Wilson would refuse further American military aid. OHL accounted Germany’s chances
against Britain and France alone as “not at all hopeless, especially if Belgium also breaks
down and the war is limited to the German-French border.”143 Five days later, General v.
Gallwitz was still repeating to the cabinet the old hope to which the officer corps had been
clinging since at least April 1918: one last concerted effort would cause the war-weary Allies to sue for peace.144 Endkampf understood cognitively was thus merely another repetition of the standard assumptions, methods, and problem-solving techniques, and it was
by no means limited to Ludendorff.
However, Endkampf exceeded the usual by realizing the full extent of destruction and
objectiﬁcation of civilians that military practices contained as potentials. We have already
seen that military necessity “required” the total destruction and evacuation of a wide strip
of northern France during “Alberich” in 1917. Endkampf now elevated these means to the
end. Total destruction would not simply hinder the Allied military advance, it would
make it unthinkable, because Belgium and France would not be liberated but annihilated.
“Through the fault of the Entente the occupied areas will be given over to devastation
[Verwüstung],” declared the political section of OHL on 6 October 1918.145
This sort of destruction had already begun in August. Ludendorff interrupted it with
his order of 30 September that suspended destruction of housing while armistice negotiations proceeded. But once Ludendorff felt the “crisis” on the western front had passed, he
returned to total devastation. The general explained to the cabinet on 17 October what
conduct of the war in preparation for Endkampf entailed. First, “The general-government
of Belgium must become part of the rear echelon,” which would strip it of the protections
it had hitherto enjoyed and place it directly under military control. Next, Ludendorff proposed expelling the Committee for the Relief of Belgium, which would be told:
Do not send any more food. That will have a good effect in Belgium. In Tournai
the population did not want to leave [be deported], because they thought that
peace was now going to come. That idea cannot be allowed to crop up: one has to
say to Belgium, peace is a long way off and the horror [das Furchtbare] of war can

141. Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 437.
142. Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 468.
143. “Anweisung für die Waffenstillstandskommission,” 23 Oct. 1918, Amtliche Urkunden, 191.
144. Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 402. War Minister Scheüch had also indulged this illusion two
days earlier, 368, 373.
145. “Auffassung der Lage,” Political Section of OHL, 6 Oct. 1918, Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:661, also cited
in Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 474. See, too, Bernhard Schwertfeger’s article in early Nov. 1918 saying the
same thing (Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 495), and Rupprecht’s statement of 27 July, cited earlier.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
316

also happen in Belgium, compared to which 1914 will be mere child’s play. One
knows that even when commanders try hard, they cannot prevent all four million
people [of the German army] from engaging in acts of violence.
After complaining that not destroying houses was already militarily “irresponsible,” Ludendorff explained that the CRB had to end because Germany was already breaking the
contract: “Troops are quartering themselves and taking the cow from the ﬁeld and food
from the house. They have no choice.”146
Ludendorff in October 1918 was in the same position as General v. Trotha had been in
October 1904. The practice of unlimited violence was already occurring; he proposed to
make it explicit policy.147 Endkampf embraced the horror of war against “peace foolishness” (Friedensduselei)148 and widened that horror in extent (making Belgium a battle
zone) and degree (plunging the Belgian population into starvation, ﬁghting a war in its
midst, and visiting uncontrolled acts of individual terror against it). Endkampf used the
civilian population as hostages to achieve its goals.149 The tactic of 1870 had become widespread practice during the war and now was elevated to a wonder weapon against defeat.150
Destruction of occupied territory was one thing, but the destruction of Germany was
another. Whether one should risk national destruction by ﬁghting inside Germany seems
to have depended on how one deﬁned the goal of Endkampf. If one aimed to force better
peace terms, then clearly one stopped Endkampf at the border. This was the position of
the chancellor, the cabinet, the Foreign Office, and many officers (for example, Colonel
Heye and Generals Bruno v. Mudra and Max v. Gallwitz).151 Ludendorff and Hindenburg
always gave the cabinet the impression that ﬁghting would not reach Germany, but it is
hard to gauge what they really thought.152 Prince Max suspected that Ludendorff believed
ﬁghting would eventually occur on Germany’s borders or inside them.153 OHL’s last instructions to the armistice commission (23 October) suggest that, while they preferred
“resuming the war in Belgium and before Metz,” they thought it possible that Germany

146. Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 240–41; cf. Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 497.
147. In the 23 Oct. 1918 statement, in which Ludendorff sketched some of the features of an “intensiﬁed”
continuation of the war, he speciﬁcally mentions two things, both of which meant returning to older practices:
dropping the post–30 Sept. limits on destruction of civilian infrastructure and reactivating unrestricted submarine warfare (which the government had agreed to halt on 21 Oct.). Reichsarchiv, Weltkrieg, 14:671.
148. Ludendorff, in Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 444.
149. Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 495.
150. Recall Ludendorff ’s proposal in 1917 to use the forty thousand inhabitants of St. Quentin (France) to
prevent Allied shelling of that part of the Siegfried line. Colonel v. Haeften had to talk Ludendorff out of “terror
attacks on London” on 8 Oct. 1918. Klein, Deutschland, 3:467.
151. Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 217, 243–46, 339, 405–7; Kaehler, “Vier quellenkritische Untersuchungen,” 435; telephone conversation between Haniel and Foreign Office representative to the OHL Kurt
Baron v. Lersner, 25 Oct. 1918, in Amtliche Urkunden, 199; Gallwitz, Erleben im Westen, 423; Böhm, Adjutant, 38;
Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 403.
152. Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 118, 205, 244.
153. Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 395. Groener in July or August favored ﬁghting even behind the
Rhine, but by November he had changed his mind; Lebenserinnerungen, 436, 446–47.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
might ﬁght on the border “under very undesirable circumstances (war in one’s own land, 317
heavy loss of iron and steel production, endangerment of the entire war industry of western Germany, a difficult transportation situation).”154 But there is nothing to indicate that
they rejected this possibility.155 After the war, Rupprecht’s chief of staff, Kuhl, admitted
that German troops would have had to retreat to the border and then to the Rhine fortiﬁcations, destroying everything on the left bank of the Rhine. But typically, a few pages
later, Kuhl seems to retract the admission.156
It seems likely that the widespread ﬂirtation with the Endkampf idea among officers
was not any more realistic about actual costs than had been true of “planning” for some
time. But that does not mean they were unprepared to risk it. For much of the motivation
for Endkampf was not about planning and policy but about honor and humiliation. Vicechancellor Friedrich von Payer described the arguments that Ludendorff, General Hoffmann, Colonel Heye, and Admirals Ernst Ritter von Mann (secretary of the Naval Office)
and Reinhard Scheer (chief of the Admiralty) made at the 17 October cabinet meeting:
“There were lots of hopes and fears, surmises and reckonings, that were half-reasonably,
half-emotionally expressed, but then taken back or otherwise contradicted; they gave no
satisfactory basis for an objective judgment.”157 On the 25th Ludendorff and Hindenburg
made a last attempt to convince the government to adopt the Endkampf. Accompanied by
Admiral Scheer and War Minister Scheüch, they met with Payer because Prince Max was
in bed with inﬂuenza. Again Payer noted the unusual use of emotional words such as “dishonorable” and “disgrace.” When he repeatedly pressed them about whether continued
ﬁghting would bring better armistice or peace terms, he received “no direct answer.”158
Payer had discovered that army and naval officers could not politically or militarily
defend their emotionally motivated plan. They wanted to ﬁght the Endkampf to preserve
what they called “honor.” Partly, honor signiﬁed the personal identiﬁcation of each officer
with his corporate status-group, or Stand. Understood this way, it had a reactionary political valence. But honor was also the term used to sum up all those professional characteristics and expectations of the proper officer that the military culture had worked out
over decades of trial and error. Defeat and armistice were so thoroughly incompatible
with these expectations that it is hardly surprising to see honor reemerge as the emotional
weapon to reassert one last time the worth of the whole enterprise. Honor was always a
guide in bad times, and no times were worse than these. Honor was therefore a shorthand
formula standing for the entire way of thinking that had just failed, so it was not, as Payer
sharply observed, an actual argument; it substituted for one.
In difficult situations military honor drifted toward self-destruction. We have seen
this in the exemplary case of Captain Klein in SWA. The same maxim reappeared often
during the World War, now not only for individuals but for a larger “we.” Falkenhayn, for
154. Amtliche Urkunden, 192.
155. Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare,” 499.
156. Kuhl, Weltkrieg, 2:506, 511. Gallwitz foresaw war inside Germany if it agreed to evacuate the occupied
zones; Erleben im Westen, 410.
157. Payer, Von Bethmann Hollweg, 133.
158. Ibid., 141–44.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
318 example, had told an American journalist in January 1915, “If we shall go under in this
war . . . then we shall do so with honor, by relinquishing not a foot of territory and ﬁghting to the last man.”159 Einem’s reaction to the launching of USW in January 1917 was almost identical: “We will defend ourselves [including against America] and then go down
with honor.”160 When Wild heard that Austria had capitulated, his ﬁrst response was,
“Then we had better go down with honor!”161 The self-destruction of the Endkampf was
therefore well prepared, if unintentionally. It began with accepting death for one’s person,
then as appropriate for one’s corps, and it had expanded to include the entire army. Ludendorff ’s ﬁghting retreat since July 1918 had already shown his disdain for the unnecessary German casualties. On 31 October Ludendorff wrote that he was prepared in the
Endkampf “to risk actual defeat,” meaning a Schlieffen-type annihilation of the German
army on the battleﬁeld.162 Cabinet members thought this was no empty threat, and it
seems likely that many high-ranking officers preferred “actual defeat” to capitulation.163
Equating the army with the nation, a widespread position, suggested the next step: national suicide. But few officers appear to have been ready to take that step in autumn 1918.
Ludendorff gave it voice, however: “A people that accepts humiliation and conditions that
destroy its existence without having done its utmost is ruined. If it is forced to do the
same after making a last, extreme exertion, then it will live.”164
Although not all officers supported the Endkampf (Crown Prince Rupprecht rejected
it out of hand as useless and harmful because Germany had, in fact, been defeated),165 it
appears that some version of it enjoyed wide support among high-ranking officers.166
Even after Ludendorff had been dismissed on 26 October, the two generals whom the cabinet had called for advice, Generals v. Gallwitz and v. Mudra, defended the Endkampf.
More straightforward than Ludendorff, they admitted that Germany’s chances were slim
if Austria signed the armistice (which it did on 3 November). But signiﬁcantly, after they
had left the meeting and conferred together, they informed the cabinet that they had been
too pessimistic.167 Their retraction says a great deal about the pressure officers felt to go
against their reason in the direction of risk and destruction.
The cabinet and Reichstag stopped the Endkampf, though it lived on in powerful
myths and interwar planning.168 The navy, however, launched its version of the Endkampf. The navy’s last battle, of course, was considerably less radical than the army’s, because the glorious deaths would have been conﬁned to the sailors, not spread to civilians
159. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 263.
160. Diary entry of 3 Feb. 1917, cited in Wild, Briefe, 247n6.
161. Wild, Briefe, letter of 5 Nov. 1918, 249.
162. Ludendorff note of 31 Oct. 1918, Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 365.
163. Conrad Haussmann on 17 Oct., Matthias and Morsey, Die Regierung, 246; Kaehler, “Vier quellenkritische Untersuchungen,” 436.
164. Ludendorff note of 31 Oct. 1918, cited in Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 367.
165. Rupprecht Kronprinz v. Bayern, Mein Kriegstagebuch, diary entries of 17 and 30 Oct. 1918, 2:463, 469.
166. Kaehler, “Vier quellenkritische Untersuchungen,” 436.
167. Payer, Von Bethmann Hollweg, 145.
168. Geyer, “Insurrectionary Warfare.”

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
and possibly to Germany. Nonetheless, the navy’s action shows how acceptable self-de- 319
struction had become among the German military.
The navy and the army had been arguing with a single voice since 1916 when Falkenhayn embraced unrestricted submarine warfare. Both services clung to the old logic of ultimate risk/ultimate force. The navy was as loath to admit the defeat of USW as the army
was to admit its own defeat on land. As late as the cabinet meeting of 17 October, Admiral
Scheer repeated the claim that sooner or later USW would “be politically effective.”169 The
navy had also steadily produced ever more radical plans that were the reverse image of its
actual strength. In July 1918 the admiralty twice proposed increasing USW by extending
the blockade to the coast of the United States. The navy was prepared to risk a cascade of
war declarations by the neutral states that mostly steamed these waters, even though only
three U-boats were available to enforce the blockade!170 The Kaiser, guided by reasonable
arguments from the Foreign Office and two years of failed submarine policy, rejected this
idea. He and the chancellor also rejected (28 July 1918) the proposal to attack the British
ﬂeet in the English Channel.171 This hopeless enterprise returned to the “single battle of
annihilation” that, like the Schlieffen Plan for the army, had been the basic doctrine of
Tirpitz’s battle ﬂeet and the founding assumption behind naval officer training and socialization.172 In October 1918 naval leaders dusted off this plan to show that the battle
ﬂeet (as opposed to submarines) had, in fact, been useful to the war effort and deserved
future appropriations.173 They did not aim to send the German navy to a glorious doom,
but they were prepared to risk it. Captain Michaelis summed up the navy’s thinking: “I
know it is a pure risk, but if there is no alternative, then a risk is justiﬁed. If it succeeds,
then I’m convinced everything has been won; if it fails, nothing more is lost than is the
case anyway without it.”174 No one at OHL could have put the pure risk theory better, or
have demonstrated more succinctly the blindness caused by identifying the interests of
one’s own service with those of the nation. The naval command went ahead and ordered
the last battle without the approval of either the Kaiser or the chancellor. Only the sailors’
revolt, which ushered in the revolution, stopped it. The suicidal aspect of the plan, however, was carried out in spite of everything, when the skeleton crews sank the German ﬂeet
after it had surrendered at Scapa Flow.175
The Endkampf had to be stopped by external intervention, from the cabinet, the
Reichstag, and popular revolt. Inside the military the pressure to repeat violence through
to annihilation seemed almost irresistible. In this process the end, which had once been
victory, had now become death. The means had become the end.

169. Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 439–40.
170. Schwertfeger’s report, UA 4:2, 347, 349–52.
171. Ibid., 212.
172. Gross, “Eine Frage der Ehre?” 353–54, 358–59; Holger Herwig, “Luxury Fleet” (London, 1980).
173. Gross, “Eine Frage der Ehre?”
174. Michaelis to Levetzow, Berlin, 5 Oct. 1918, cited in Gross, “Eine Frage der Ehre?” 355n32. See also Prince
Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 574–75.
175. Gross, “Eine Frage der Ehre?” 365; Andreas Krause, Scapa Flow (Berlin, 1999).

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
320

Allied Comparisons
No comparative study of war conduct (Kriegführung) exists for the First World
War.176 It is only possible here to offer some observations about how Germany might ﬁt
into such a comparison with its fellow belligerents. The broadly shared military culture of
Western armies plus the length and difficulty of the war produced many basic similarities
in conduct. All the officer corps seemed to learn slowly: they remained ﬁxated on numbers and for a long time on clinging to territory; they indulged in staggering human
“wastage”; and they continued to champion the same sorts of soldierly virtues as they had
before 1914.177 Tim Travers found that, in addition to these similarities, the British and
French armies shared a number of characteristics, among them a personalized system of
advancement, devotion to the cult of the offensive, discouragement of criticism and innovation at higher command levels, and stiﬂing hierarchy.178 Like most historians, Travers is
struck by the greater adaptability and tactical effectiveness of the German army, which
means he underestimates how much the doctrinal hegemony of the offensive and hierarchical drag also marked it. In Germany criticism and innovation were generally limited to
the tactical level and occurred where the patterns of military culture permitted, but not
generally and not strategically.
All of the belligerent armies (and governments) interpreted international law in ways
most favorable to their own armed strengths and the new technologies that they successfully developed. Thus, Britain engaged in an illegal naval blockade and France accepted
“terror” as a legitimate goal in exercising its relative air superiority over Germany.179 But
Britain continued to show more spontaneous interest in and respect for international law
than Germany, which is why Allied propaganda could so successfully use allegations of
war crimes for popular mobilization.180 Britain rejected the French argument about air
terror, for example, and it managed the blockade against neutral shipping as gently as
possible.181 Nonetheless, an estimated seven hundred thousand German civilians died directly or indirectly as a result of the Allied blockade. In Germany, sensitivity to international law centered institutionally in the Foreign Office as an effect of concern about foreign public opinion. But the Foreign Office had so thoroughly accepted the dictum of
military necessity that it was a weak and uncertain bulwark against military pressure. Occasionally a minister or secretary would raise international law objections to a proposed
176. The prosecution of the war has been more fully studied regarding economic mobilization, technological development, and more recently the experience of trench warfare.
177. David French, “The Strategy of Unlimited Warfare?” in Great War, Total War, ed. Chickering and
Förster, 281–95; David Stevenson, “French Strategy on the Western Front, 1914–1918,” in Great War, Total War,
297–326.
178. Tim Travers, The Killing Ground (London, 1993), 253–57. Travers also lists lack of heavy artillery and
poor coordination of artillery and infantry; the latter was true of the German army until far into the war.
179. Christian Geinitz, “The First Air War against Noncombatants,” in Great War, Total War, 207–25, here
213.
180. Horne and Kramer, “German ‘Atrocities,’ ” 10, 32.
181. Geinitz, “First Air War,” 214; Paul C. Vincent, The Politics of Hunger (Athens, Ohio, 1985), 35, 38–39, 44.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
policy, but they did so unreliably and with less success as time went on.182 The weakness 321
of institutions meant that the strongest opposition to military contravention of international law tended to come from individuals, like the much maligned Governor-General
Bissing, who acted from conscience.
It is still uncertain how Germany’s treatment of prisoners of war compares with that of
other belligerents.183 On the one hand, POWs interned by Germany had a good overall survival rate that compared favorably with that of POWs captured by France and Britain.184
On the other, the Reichstag committee that investigated Allied charges produced a vigorously critical minority report.185 The Geneva Convention had found greater sympathy in
German military circles than had other international agreements. Nevertheless, no prewar
planning for prisoners occurred (nor did it among the Allies), and no central coordinating
office was ever established, so the same variation from camp commander to camp commander occurred here as in occupation policy and in the various military districts in Germany. Provisioning was terrible at both the beginning and the end of the war and may have
been worse than what poor planning and the blockade accounted for. In terms of prewar
planning, the pattern of provisioning shortfalls, lack of coordination, and the use of some
POW laborers under harsh conditions, the German pattern seems like the Russian, but
with a much lower mortality rate.186 Discipline in the German camps was harsh and had
the same punitive quality that characterized the treatment of occupied civilians, and prisoners of war were instrumentalized in the same way for labor.187 There were persistent reports that Russian and Romanian prisoners of war were treated worse, not only in the east
where the infrastructure hampered provisioning, but in the west, where they were used as
laborers.188 It is unclear how this situation compares with severe violations of the Geneva
Convention by Italy, Bulgaria, and others.189 Britain (which had many fewer prisoners to
worry about) and France both appear to have treated German prisoners fairly well.190
Concerning treatment of enemy civilians under occupation, the western Allies had
little chance to demonstrate how they would have behaved.191 Germany’s ally Austria built

182. Stenzel, Kriegführung, 51–52. Arnold Wahnschaffe welcomed potential Russian violations of law so he
could justify deportation as reprisal: Geiss, Der polnische Grenzstreifen, 77–78; but Minister of the Interior Friedrich
Wilhelm v. Loebell opposed the recruitment of Polish soldiers because it violated international law, 117–18.
183. As this manuscript was ﬁnished, Uta Hinz’s study of POWs had not yet appeared.
184. Rachamimov, POWs, 107, citing Prussian War Ministry statistics.
185. UA 3:3.1 and 3.2, minority report: 3:3.1, 24–27. Robert Jackson’s research in The Prisoners conﬁrms the
minority report, while Bruno Thoss wrote recently that German treatment was “comparatively decent”; “Militärische Entscheidung und politisch-gesellschaftlicher Umbruch,” in Kriegsende 1918, 17–37, here 32.
186. Rachamimov, POWs, 48–56, 93–96, 108–14.
187. Stenzel, Kriegführung, 49; minority report, UA 3:3.1, 24–25.
188. Jackson, Prisoners, 42, 48; Hoffman, In the Prison Camps of Germany, 119–20; Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 24–25.
189. István Deák, Beyond Nationalism (Oxford, 1990), 203; Violations of the Laws, 56; Mitrany, Effect of the
War, 150–51.
190. Jackson, Prisoners, 138–40.
191. Horne and Kramer believe that “differences in past experience and mentality” would have caused the
Allies to react differently: German Atrocities, 424.

part iii. the first wor ld war
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
322 civilian expertise into its occupation administrations and pursued occupation more systematically and professionally than did Germany. Austria handled its occupied Poles with
more sensitivity and success than Germany did, though the occupation was still oppressive. The Austrian occupation of Serbia was much harsher, particularly in its political
repression and massive economic exploitation. Nevertheless, the most recent study concludes that the principles of the bureaucratic Rechtsstaat, visible in the army’s autonomous interest in international law, limited the violence there.192 The Austrian occupation did not reach the same extremes as Germany’s occupation of northern France.193
Russia’s scorched earth retreats and mass deportations (of its own population!) are indeed
comparable to those of Germany and were perhaps signs of Russia’s own impending experiment with extremes in the Soviet Union.
The predominance of the military over the political that had distinguished Germany
from other countries before the war increased after 1914 and produced the main systematic differences between Germany’s conduct of the war and that of other countries.
Nowhere else did the General Staff run the war. Typically, other militaries enjoyed their
greatest reach of power at the beginning of the conﬂict. As things soured, the political
branch made a resurgence. Germany went the opposite way, leaving the ﬁeld free for its
military peculiarities to luxuriate even further. Stalemate in the west seduced all the
armies into focusing narrowly on tactics, for example, but none inﬂated tactics to the level
of operations or even strategy, as occurred in Germany.194 British Field Marshal Douglas
Haig represented the opposite tendency; he underestimated the operative success of the
tactics the Allies had devised in summer and fall of 1918. Both the British and French
armies displayed a livelier sense of their limitations: they could conceive of losing a battle,
they did not underestimate their enemy.195 They were also more economical or realistic
about their resources, apparently on their own, not simply because of political intervention. Although it took until spring 1918, the Allies also achieved much better coordination
among their armies; that is, they were less solipsistic.196 Their armies and navies also appear to have worked together better. Finally, one misses among the Allies the same repetitive move or urge to self-destruction. The potential may have existed, however, visible in
the repeated failed offensives both Britain and France undertook for three years. But by
fall 1917 the French army mutinies had led to political intervention that stopped this repetition; British politics ﬁnally hindered it without being prodded by mutiny. We cannot
know how France or Britain would have reacted to impending defeat. Would their desperation have produced an equivalent to Endkampf? Perhaps, given the potential of modern
militaries at that time to go to the limit of force. But an Allied Endkampf would likely
192. Jonathan Gumz, “ ‘Streams of Violence in the Land of Milk and Honey’ ” (Ph.D. diss., University of
Chicago, 2003), introduction accessed 4 July 2003 at cas.uchicago.edu/workshops/meurhist/paper.pdf, pp. 6, 14,
16–20. Aviel Roshwald disagrees: Ethnic Nationalism and the Fall of Empires (New York, 2001), 125–26.
193. Basler, Deutschlands Annexionspolitik, 112–13n106; Hugo Kerchnawe et al., Die Militärverwaltung in den
von österreich-ungarischen Truppen besetzten Gebieten (New Haven, 1928), 19–21, 53–268, esp. 57–58 on administrative principles.
194. Strachan, “From Cabinet War,” 31.
195. Burchhardt, Friedenswirtschaft, 248; David Stevenson, “French Strategy,” 324.
196. Thoss, “Militärische Entscheidung,” 28–29.

Repetition and Self-Destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
have been more ﬁrmly anchored in a popular uprising, such as the one that occurred in 323
France in 1870. It would have been a levée en masse instead of a General Staff scheme to
continue the old destructive tactics to the point of self-annihilation.
There were four kinds of constraints that operated against the tendencies within the
German military to run to extremes. First, Germany reacted to international pressure,
which was usually expressed in the language of international law. It altered military policy
according to such objections when it recognized that the war effort might be more
harmed by international reaction than it was helped by the policy. Submarine warfare in
1914–16 and the Belgian deportations are two examples. It is typical that both cases were
reactive; the policies were launched despite foreknowledge of heavy objection to them,
and then they were annulled.
A second constraint came from political considerations funneled mostly through
civilian government or the Reichstag. These were most successful against the junior service, the navy, and before the third OHL, after which civilian self-conﬁdence collapsed.
Even before August 1916, however, civilians readily acquiesced to the disabilities produced by the military’s high status in Germany and they never dared to contradict “military necessity.”
The weakness of civilian constraints also weakened critics within the military itself,
the third type of restriction. Governor-General Bissing, abandoned by Bethmann Hollweg, is a good example of this. Of course the imperative command system common to all
militaries was probably the greatest overt hindrance to successful internal criticism. But
the more subtle disincentives located in the expectations of military culture were equally
strong, both in promoting “institutional blindness” (Betriebsblindheit) and in discouraging “pessimism.” OHL’s secretive information policy relieved even army commanders of
responsibility to judge policy according to the entire situation, of which they were kept
ignorant.
And ﬁnally, there were circumstantial constraints: lack of time (to destroy northern
France more thoroughly in 1918), lack of resources (to build more submarines to produce
a truly unlimited submarine warfare), failing troop morale and civilian support (for the
Endkampf), and so forth.197 The weakness of the ﬁrst three constraints strongly suggests
that, had the fourth not operated, the German military might have reached far greater extremes in World War I.
197. Herwig, “Total Rhetoric,” 206.

1
Conclusions and Implications

I

mperial Germany and its military culture exemplify Hannah Arendt’s insight that
“the danger of violence, even if it moves consciously within a nonextremist framework of short-term goals, will always be that the means overwhelm the end.”1 In the
Kaiserreich, that is exactly what happened. The institutional locus of violence as
means (to political ends) in the state is the military. By examining how that institution
operated, I have tried to demonstrate how and why the means might come to displace the
end or, to put it another way, how and why the institution designed to wield controlled violence exceeded the reasonable, effective, or goal-oriented limits to its use.
A study of institutional extremes is therefore a study of limits and their transgression.
Most explanations for the kind of massive state-sanctioned violence we have been examining have concentrated on the transgressive aspect. They ask what impels organizations,
groups, or leaders to use excessive violence, and they often ﬁnd the answers in ideology
(like racism or imperialism, which we will discuss below). In ideologically driven systems,
extremes are contained as ends or goals in the motivating ideas themselves, and thus the
means stay subordinate to the ends, giving the extreme results a seeming Weberian rationality. The Imperial German case shows that militaries, because violence is their business, do not need external ideologies or motivations to encourage excess; their task and
the doctrines, habits, and basic assumptions (the military culture) they develop to handle
it may be sufficient in themselves. Even a deﬁned (and therefore limited) goal—of crushing a revolt, for example—can be enough to trigger a procedural dynamic ending in
genocide. In such cases, the rationality of extreme actions develops from the means, not
from the original end or goal.
1. Arendt, On Violence, 80.

324

Conclusions and Implications
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
If we allow that military institutions, at least in the late nineteenth and early twentieth 325
centuries, contained the transgressive within them, then our attention turns away from
the drive to excess and instead toward the limits and why they failed. There were limits to
excess internal to the military, based on humanitarian, practical, political, legal, and other
considerations. But the military culture arising from the “strong” organization made it
very hard for even critically minded, high-ranking officers to buck the scripts and deeply
ingrained expectations that constituted “military necessity.” Therefore, the main effective
limits to excess lay outside the military, in government, politics, law, and public opinion.
These could reinstate the superiority of the (limited) ends to the means. In Imperial Germany, these forces were too weak—or unwilling—to do this. That is what distinguished
Germany from other European states and what sustained and intensiﬁed its particular
military culture.
Germany’s military culture developed inside a threefold vacuum. First, the constitution shielded it from civilian oversight and external criticism. Second, the constitution
and the political system provided little coordination among agencies, which led to ministerial particularism and reinforced the military’s solipsism. Finally, after Bismarck’s fall,
the government barely provided a coherent policy (foreign or otherwise) that might have
guided or countered the drift of military activity.
The First World War is a splendid example. Having entered the war without war aims,
Germany’s leadership did not dare expose domestic political disharmony by setting goals
with which the left or center-right inevitably would have disagreed. On the one hand, silence left the ﬁeld open to those with unattainable visions of immense annexation, which
could hardly act as a limit to action.2 On the other hand, the government provided no
counter guidelines. The oft-repeated phrase about attaining or maintaining world power
status was actually a negative goal; it meant the destruction of Britain and its circle of allies. The most positive formulation of that goal was the claim that Germany was ﬁghting
for its existence. Contemporaries lamented the fact that, in Prince Max v. Baden’s words,
“Our claim to power has until now [1918] been justiﬁed only as securing our existence or
interests.”3 No ethical, moral, or universal grounds could be found to express the “national power-idea.”4 Why? Because the “national power-idea” was an empty substitute for
policy.
In the absence of a positive national war policy, practices and actionism took over.
The experts in war (the army and especially the General Staff) did their job according to
the assumptions, scripts, and expectations of military culture. Strategy dissolved into operations and ﬁnally, in 1918, into mere tactics. The military’s default programs expanded
to ﬁll the policy vacuum. And they were remarkably effective at the levels of tactics and
operations for which they had been honed. Years of careful training meant that despite
2. The Pan-Germans among the annexationists were ideologues, but most of the enthusiasts were opportunists who joined the bandwagon after the war began, such as Matthias Erzberger or Hugo Stinnes.
3. Prince Max v. Baden’s memorandum on “Ethical Imperialism,” in his Erinnerungen, 253.
4. Ethical: Prince Max v. Baden, Erinnerungen, 254. Moral: Niemann, Kaiser und Revolution, 57; Niemann,
Kaiser und Heer, 108–9. Universal: Ludwig Dehio, cited in Erdmann, Der Erste Weltkrieg, 91. “National poweridea”: Volkmann report, “Die Annexionsfragen des Weltkrieges,” UA 4:12 pt. 1, 23.

absolute destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
326 the lack of overall coordination there was system to the practices of the officer corps; officers produced the same sort of ordering and exploitation of human and material resources wherever they were. And, lacking braking mechanisms from without or within the
military, they repeated the script of violence, ratcheting it higher and higher, moving
closer and closer to an extreme end that they did not “intend.”
This processual understanding of Wilhelminian Germany will remind some readers
of Hans Mommsen’s structural explanation for the Third Reich. Rather than privileging
ideology as a causal factor, Mommsen concluded that the radicalization of Nazi (genocidal) policy and its irrationality were the result of several qualities of its government.5
Three of these—fragmentation (or polycratic administration), postponed decisions (or
policy unclarity), and lack of feedback—are much like what one sees in the Kaiserreich.
But there are important differences. Mommsen characterizes the “Führer myth” and
leadership rivalries as “atavistic principle(s)” at odds with “a great modern industrialized
state.” And he ﬁnds that decision making had reverted to the “personal level,” that is, it
had become simply idiosyncratic.6 The processes I have described as issuing from military
culture are organizational, meaning that they are not personal or idiosyncratic; furthermore, they are products of bureaucratic functioning. If one regards bureaucracy as a
modern phenomenon (which one need not do), then they are “modern.” More important, in the Third Reich radicalization (and not chaos) resulted from this kind of government because the “line of least resistance” through which policies developed was indeed
set by Nazi ideology as interpreted by Hitler: “The utopian dream of exterminating the
Jews could become reality only in the half-light of unclear orders and ideological fanaticism. Then, despite all opposing interests, the process developed its own internal dynamic.”7 In the Kaiserreich, the coordinating, magnetic pull of ideology was missing. The
smaller logic of practices and basic assumptions provided the motor and the direction of
radicalization.
The Kaiserreich was much less an outlaw state than the Third Reich. The extremes it
reached both in the colonies and in European warfare were strongly supported by international norms and assumptions that eroded limits to extremism. It is important to repeat: Germany was at the end of a spectrum it shared with the rest of the Western world.
The two most important shared norms concerned national sovereignty and war. The international system that had emerged from Napoleonic Europe placed the independent
state at the center of law and right. The more sacrosanct national sovereignty, the larger its
demands for sacriﬁce from its own soldiers and civilians, and the weaker the limits of international law on its actions against others. As to war, no Western government rejected it
as a legitimate tool of politics, and all considered the ability to wage war a deﬁning characteristic of a sovereign state. The late-nineteenth-century Western world thus placed
5. Hans Mommsen, “National Socialism,” in From Weimar to Auschwitz, trans. Philip O’Connor (Princeton, 1991), 141–62, esp. 157–61. I disagree with Mommsen’s interpretation of the Third Reich; I think ideology
was central to its genocidal policies.
6. Ibid., 161.
7. Least resistance: ibid., 158. Utopian dream: Hans Mommsen, “The Realization of the Unthinkable,” in
From Weimar, 224–53, here 251.

Conclusions and Implications
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
military might at the heart of state self-deﬁnition, though nowhere was the emphasis so 327
central as in Germany. By the beginning of the twentieth century, however, international
opinion among the self-proclaimed “civilized nations” (i.e., those organized as states) increasingly believed that war should be limited to self-defense, thus potentially placing a
limit on states’ untrammeled use of violence for political ends. Nonetheless, once World
War I broke out, the Allies’ reluctance to consider a negotiated peace encouraged the German military interpretation of (all) war as existential and fed the vicious circle of expanding violence to which the German military tended anyway.
The military’s default program of escalating violence was positively reinforced from
inside Germany, as well. Military culture, for all its autism, was enmeshed in a dialectical
relationship with government and political culture. The incapacities of Wilhelminian
government (to rein in, correct, or guide the military) intensiﬁed military culture, making it seem stronger and more reliable than mere “politics.” That encouraged civilian
leaders to rely more and more on the military and to submit to its perceptions of and solutions to problems, which increased the pressure on the army to succeed, which in turn
encouraged more extremes in the institution and its culture. Political culture reacted with
similar intensifying circularity.
Here Arendt’s distinction between power and violence is especially important. Power
is the strength and legitimacy that comes from (political) agreement, or as she puts it,
from “the human ability to act in concert.”8 The incomplete political system of Imperial
Germany lacked power in this sense. Its foreign policy was equally isolated and weak.
Again, as Arendt writes, “Loss of power becomes a temptation to substitute violence for
power.”9 As the Wilhelminian leaders succumbed to this temptation, the wielders of violence, the military, became more and more important. The military became a kind of
charismatic institution in the sense that its continued status and privileged place in government and society depended on its success.10 This is the reason, in abstract terms, why
the victory of annihilation, the tendency to “ﬁnal” solutions, was so predominant in prewar German military culture.
The interaction between military culture, government, and political culture seems to
have produced increasing congruence between military culture, foreign policy, certain
ideological trends, and some social groups—despite the absence of formal coordination.
The military’s default program, for example, was consistent with Germany’s foreign policy, Weltpolitik, which rested on the risk (or bluff) of pure force. Yet military and foreign
policy had never been synchronized, and the main contours of German military culture
had developed for twenty years under Bismarck’s “satiated” foreign policy. Nevertheless,
it is certainly true that once Weltpolitik was inaugurated in 1897, nothing in Germany’s
8. Arendt, On Violence, 44.
9. Ibid., 54.
10. Weber used the term “charisma” to deﬁne a type of legitimate authority of individual leaders that could
not be institutionalized and still retain its essential character. Nonetheless, the term is apt for describing the Wilhelminian military because of the way charismatic authority is sustained—by success recognized by the “followers.” See Max Weber, On Charisma and Institution Building, trans. S. N. Eisenstadt (Chicago, 1968), 3–77, esp.
20–22, 51.

absolute destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
328 foreign policy ran counter to its military-cultural habits. The military default program,
which amounted to the reduction of politics to the exercise of force, was also consistent
with ideologies such as social Darwinism and imperialism, which were fashionable
among the educated, organized, and politically indispensable middle strata. Support for
the military way of doing things also came from the “double militarism” that had saturated much of prewar civilian life.11 During the First World War, that process deepened as
military service became a kind of ersatz political participation and lent the military a deep
national legitimation it would ordinarily not have possessed.12 The war also seemed to
conﬁrm the military’s indispensability and its paranoid view of existential struggle; in a
world of total victory or total defeat, there could be no negotiation, only ﬁghting on until
death and destruction enveloped everything.
Germany’s military culture was thus multiply supported from outside itself. Inside, it
was even harder to break out of its thought and behavior patterns. Culture, after all, operates precisely to smooth operations, that is, to minimize resistance. “Strong” organizations, those characterized by rigid discipline and imperative command, are hardest to
counter, and these were surely the main hindrances to independent criticism from within
the officer corps. The military also made it easy to focus on one’s narrow, technical task
and to compartmentalize. Finally, the scripts and procedures of military culture were effective on the tactical and operative levels. It was hard to argue against (partial) success,
easy to imagine that just a bit more effort, a bit more luck, would convert the tactical into
the operative and the operative into strategic victory.
This study of military culture in practice raises questions about the possible relation
of the army’s institutional extremism to other causal explanations, such as technology,
ideology, racism, and imperialism. This is the place to draw together the implications of
what we have seen for these important subjects.

Technology
Already in the 1860s and 1870s Europeans were projecting onto Prussia/Germany
their nightmare vision of a new kind of warfare, war as machine. The Prussian General
Staff seemed to epitomize a conduct of war that followed the “logic of technology, science
and planning” and its excesses.13 Moltke’s use of modern management techniques would
seem to conﬁrm their intuition. But there is no simple causal relation between technology
and extremism. Above all, the organizational-cultural mechanisms we have studied do
not appear to have been “caused” by changes in industry and technology.
Technology seems most obviously to have been an enabler. Industry and technology
created the power gap between Europeans and non-Europeans, thus making possible the
second wave of imperialism in the nineteenth century. They greatly magniﬁed ﬁrepower,
leading to the deadly trench stalemate of World War I and the unimaginable casualty rates
11. Förster, Der doppelte Militarismus; Rohkrämer, Militarismus.
12. Michael Geyer, “The Place of the Second World War in German Memory and History,” New German
Critique, no. 71 (spring–summer 1997): 5–40, here 28–29.
13. Pick, War Machine, 165; excess: 154.

Conclusions and Implications
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
of the fruitless attempts at breakthrough. Increased ﬁrepower put armies under pressure 329
to become or stay technically up to date. But if technology had been a prime mover, then
one would expect the armaments race to have begun in 1871, not after 1906, and one
would expect greater technological acceptance and innovation among militaries.14
Armies did learn from technology, but they did so relatively slowly and unevenly.15
For the German army, trapped in its manpower dilemma, technology’s multiplier effect was indeed important: it made the army stronger than its numbers. New weapons
(gas, submarines, tanks, planes) might make the difference in a stand-off. But that possibility simply encouraged the already existing propensity of the German military elite to
focus on techniques in order to escape the bad news of Germany’s relatively weak strategic situation. Technological innovation was another factor contributing to the positive
feedback loop inside military culture.
Arden Bucholz has made the strongest argument for the causal effect of technology
on the German military. He has shown how the centrality of the railroad to mobilization
and deployment caused the railroad section of the General Staff to swell in importance,
and how it encouraged the expectation that exact, timetable-like advance planning could
overcome chance and friction in war. However, in other areas, such as transport,
weapons, and communications, the German army was no better at assimilating technical
advances than other armies, and was sometimes worse.16 Preexisting institutional
predilections thus seem to determine which aspects of technology will be adopted and developed. Once adopted, these new technologies are integrated into the existing military
culture and work in the same, often unintended, ways characteristic of military culture.

Ideology
Ideology is fundamentally different from the hidden basic assumptions of military
culture, and even from the explicit doctrines or norms and values of any culture or organization. Ideology is bigger, more systematic, and more all-encompassing. Ideology, in
Roger Chickering’s helpful words, is “a highly structured belief system,” a “political cosmology” that tries “to bring conceptual order to a world in which questions of power are
being debated.”17 The Third Reich was highly ideological and so was its Final Solution.
There is something logical and even comforting in expecting that ideology will always be
at the base of genocide or other forms of horrible extremity. In that case, human action
would follow a plan and thus lend itself to analysis according to goal rationality. Irrationality is thus displaced into the ideas themselves, exonerating, so to speak, the mechanisms (organization, bureaucracy, legalism, group pressure, and so on) to which we are
all subject as cultural creatures.

14. David G. Herrmann, The Arming of Europe and the Making of the First World War (Princeton, 1996),
7–36.
15. Storz, Kriegsbild.
16. Bucholz, Moltke, Schlieffen, 179–85, 241.
17. Chickering, We Men, 75.

absolute destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
330

But the ideological explanation is often too simple. It ignores the common, even
usual, contradiction between norms or overt values and behavior. It overlooks the role
that ideologies very often play in culture as ex post facto justiﬁcations for action.18 In the
events treated in this book, ideology is much more visible as a rationalization than a
cause. It appears because actors found it necessary to explain why they had caused
tremendous destruction or loss of life. Falkenhayn is a good example. His social Darwinism played no role in planning for Verdun, but he used social Darwinist verbiage in an
“attempt to obscure with argumentation a disaster that was growing daily,” as his biographer writes.19 Ludendorff is another. He practiced “total war,” in the sense of operations
without limit, for four years without enunciating its principles or reifying it. Only after
the defeat did he do so.20
Racism is a subcategory of ideology and is often used as a similar explanatory black
box. Yet it, too, often appeared as a result of imperial experiences, rather than being their
cause. Hannah Arendt recognized this chronology in her useful distinction between eighteenth- and nineteenth-century race-thinking and late-nineteenth- and twentieth-century racism:
Race-thinking was a source of convenient arguments for varying political conﬂicts; . . . it never created new conﬂicts or produced new categories of political
thinking. Racism sprang from experiences and political constellations which were
still unknown. . . . Imperialism would have necessitated the invention of racism
as the only possible “explanation” and excuse for its deeds, even if no race-thinking had ever existed.21
The memoirs of soldiers in SWA and China are replete with examples of the transformation of vague race-thinking into racism.
Yet there are undeniable racists in our story: Lothar v. Trotha, who became a racist
during his time of service in German East Africa in the 1890s, and Hans v. Humann (and
possibly Friedrich Bronsart v. Schellendorf). However, Trotha did not enact the race war
idea from the moment he landed in SWA. He pursued the usual illusions of envelopment
and military annihilation; only when these had turned nightmarish did he adduce the
“race war” to explain the results to Berlin. Trotha’s racist convictions made it easier for
him to resort to and name a “ﬁnal solution,” but they did not cause it. Racism is not necessary to produce such ﬁnal solutions. We have seen many examples of people performing the same actions and pursuing the same ends without beneﬁt of racism or other ideological motives. And we have examples of racists who explicitly rejected “ﬁnal solutions.”
Paul Rohrbach is the most stunning example, for nobody justiﬁed violent imperialism
18. Kluckhohn, “Concept of Culture,” 71.
19. Afflerbach, Falkenhayn, 455.
20. Speier, “Ludendorff,” 318. Even then, he clung to the hollow Wilhelminian claims that it was “defensive.”
21. Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (New York, 1951), 183. Robert Miles makes a similar distinction
between “racialization” and “racism”: Miles, Racism (London, 1989), 75–77.

Conclusions and Implications
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
and even the genocide of “useless” natives (such as the Nama, he thought) in more 331
straightforward language than Rohrbach.22 But he heatedly opposed the mass annihilation of both the Herero and later the Armenians, the ﬁrst apparently for practical reasons
but the latter for moral-ethical ones that were absent from his thinking in 1907. Like
Rohrbach, there were many soldiers whose race-thinking or even conventional racism
(toward Africans, Chinese, or Armenians) is evident but who acted against the grain of
mass slaughter or complicit cynicism. Obviously, the relation between race-thinking—
and even racism—and action is extremely complicated. Furthermore, the ubiquity of
racialist thinking in Europe and the West before 1914 makes it hard to see how racism
could tell us why Europeans went to extremes in some situations and not in others.
One of the most interesting cautions against using racism too freely as an explanation
is the German wartime treatment of Europeans. We have forgotten how thoroughly civilians in the occupied zones were instrumentalized in the name of war: photographed,
numbered, listed, labeled, expropriated, reduced to involuntary laborers, deported,
beaten, starved, and executed. This treatment was not meted out only to eastern Europeans, where it may seem to us in retrospect as a kind of preparation for the Third Reich;
it was equally the lot of Belgians and French. And wherever the limits to military rule
were weakest, there the process quickly reached what we think of as colonial extremes.
Indeed, contemporaries used the colonial analogy themselves. Wild von Hohenborn, for
example, advocated creating a postwar Belgium “like a kind of independent colony”
along the English dominion model. Friedrich von Schwerin, commissioned in 1915 by
Bethmann to redraw the map of eastern Europe, advocated creating a colony out of the
border strip to be annexed from Poland; while farther east, the Lithuanian Social Democrats protested that area’s treatment by asserting that Lithuania “was not Central
Africa.”23
Actions that seem racist can develop out of ordinary organizational dynamics. The
practices of occupation in Europe are one example; the conviction of German qualitative
military superiority is another. German military culture coped with Germany’s numerical manpower inferiority by assuming that superior organization and discipline would
compensate for smaller numbers. The postulate of qualitative superiority became necessary to the system, and it operated like racism, producing the same peculiar mix of arrogance and anxiety and the same cognitive blinders.
Distinguishing actual racism from military-cultural effects that functioned in the
same way is also difficult because the ideologies of racism and social Darwinism shared
signiﬁcant aspects of content and form with the practices of imperialism and war.
Through their shared logical structures, they mutually supported one another. A scholar
of racism has called this phenomenon “ideological articulation,” but it can be equally true
of practices.24 Racist and social Darwinist ideologies, on the one hand, and imperial and
modern warfare practices, on the other, reinforced each other, and ultimately they co22. Rohrbach, Deutsche Kolonialwirtschaft, 1:352.
23. Wild to his wife, 13 Apr. 1915, Briefe, 92; Geiss, Der polnische Grenzstreifen, 85; Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 60.
24. Miles, Racism, 87; also Finnemore, “Constructing Norms,” 173–74.

absolute destruction
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
332 alesced in National Socialism. But before the 1920s they were separate phenomena, and
their uneven mutual articulation is important in understanding the earlier period.

Imperialism
Imperialism did more than provide the European powers with the venue for their
wars from 1871 to 1914. The colonial situation itself was identical to war; it unleashed the
same dynamic of extremism and directly predicted the fate of the occupied populations of
Europe in the First World War.
Imperialism was war. As Governor Götzen of German East Africa explained in the
context of the Maji-Maji Revolt, “Colonial policy has always been conquest, and nowhere
in the world will the taking of land by a foreign people occur without ﬁghting.”25 “Colonization is a question of power [Machtfrage]” was the pithier formulation repeated by
countless soldiers in the colonies.26 The point was power instead of law: “Here only power
counts, which substitutes for law,” as a missionary told Bismarck in 1889.27 General v.
Hartmann had also postulated that in the absence of the limits of law that occurred in the
existential struggle of war, violence could develop untrammeled. Hannah Arendt thought
this development was the most destructive feature of modern imperialism:
Violence has always been the ultima ratio in political action and power has always
been the visible expression of rule and government. But neither had ever before
been the conscious aim of the body politic or the ultimate goal of any deﬁnite policy. For power left to itself can achieve nothing but more power, and violence administered for power’s (and not for law’s) sake turns into a destructive principle
that will not stop until there is nothing left to violate.28
The “economy of violence” in the colonies then began to unfold.29 The original violence begat resistance that refuted the self-expectation of European superiority and exposed the weaknesses of the colonizers in imposing their will. The fear of appearing weak
demanded a greater outlay of violence, a crushing demonstration of power that, in the absence of legitimacy, promised (temporary) success. No limits of morality or international
law—in the ﬁghting words of the times, no “moralizing self-deception or hesitant sentimentality,” no “sweet old wives’ views”—could be permitted to dull the edge of violence.30 The spiral was free to run its course; a “ﬁnal solution” was at hand.
Europe embarked on imperialism in the comforting illusion that the “civilized
world” was insulated from the results. Military men (and too many military historians)
25. Götzen, “Denkschrift über die Ursachen des Aufstandes in Deutsch-Ostafrika, 1905,” Dar es Salaam, 26
Dec. 1915, BA-MA Freiburg, RM 5, Nr. 6036, 133.
26. Max Schwabe, “Einige Lehren,” 461; Kurd Schwabe, Krieg in Südwestafrika, 18; Major Heydebreck, “Betrachtungen,” 462 (Heydebreck opposed Trotha’s Vernichtungspolitik).
27. Missionary Brinker cited by Rohrbach, Deutsche Kolonialwirtschaft, 1:230.
28. Arendt, Origins, 137.
29. Trutz v. Trotha’s phrase, in “ ‘The Fellows Can Just Starve,’ ” 422; Trotha, Koloniale Herrschaft, 37–44.
30. Rohrbach, Deutsche Kolonialwirtschaft, 1:285–86; Dove, “Deutsch-Südwest Afrika,” 195.

Conclusions and Implications
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
continued to believe the myth that imperial warfare had nothing whatever in common 333
with wars fought in Europe. The point, at least for this study, is not that Europeans
learned beastliness from their imperial encounters but that they could try out abroad the
techniques, assumptions, doctrines, and scripts they carried with them, in an atmosphere
relatively unlimited by law and conducive to the application of more force when the ﬁrst
allotment failed to achieve the goal. The Germans at least learned nothing from colonial
warfare that did not conﬁrm their prejudices about the correct way to ﬁght wars.31 Imperialism strengthened the military template.

The Legacy of Germany’s Military Culture
One of the most striking qualities of the imperial German military establishment was
the combination of operative and tactical effectiveness with apparent irrationality: the inﬂated and exclusivist deﬁnition of victory (in the Clausewitzian sense of complete annihilation of the enemy forces); the rigid adherence to the tactic of offensive envelopment;
the rejection of realistic planning for provisioning and maintenance; the inability to estimate the enemy’s strengths (a product of the necessity to assume professional superiority); the tendency to repetitive actionism at the cost of disproportionate destruction and
even self-annihilation; the inability to admit defeat or to learn from it; and the overreliance on officers’ moral qualities of daring, foolhardiness, and optimistic self-sacriﬁce.
Other explanatory frameworks, such as professionalism, doctrinalism, or the peculiar sociology of the officer corps, cannot account for this odd mixture. Military culture does a
much better job because, while it takes these factors into consideration, it emphasizes the
operation of hidden, prerational assumptions, the products of the organization’s history,
which actually motivate action and which are likely to produce seeming irrationality. Actual behavior, habitual practices, and powerful, motivating expectations are the results of
(military) culture.
It is in the realm of behavior that I believe military culture left its greatest unintentional legacy to National Socialism, a legacy of a different order from that of the prewar
extremist ideologies. Military culture bequeathed practices, habits of action, and ways of
behaving that were far more robust than ﬂat and lifeless ideas such as anti-Semitism or
social Darwinism, whose believers might or might not ever translate them into deeds. The
part of National Socialist ideology that came from the practices of military culture transcended the conventional split between norms and actions by elevating the actions themselves to norms. The “cult of violence” that epitomized National Socialism was simply the
reiﬁcation of practices and behavior (that is, action templates) that had become severed
from the old Imperial military culture.32 In the Third Reich they were easily harnessed for
the ideological ends of even greater mass destruction and death.
31. Also, Trotha, “ ‘The Fellows Can Just Starve,’ ” 433; Glenn Anthony May, “Was the Philippine-American
War a ‘Total War?’ ” in Anticipating Total War, ed. Boemeke et al., 437–59, here 457.
32. On the structural relation between World War I and National Socialism: Hans Mommsen, “Militär und
zivile Militärisierung in Deutschland 1914 bis 1938,” in Militär und Gesellschaft, ed. Frevert, 265–76, esp. 276.

Bibliography

UNPUBLISHED SOURCES
Bundesarchiv (Berlin-Lichterfelde)
R 1001 (Reichskolonialamt)
Nrs. 286–288: Militärische Expeditionen der Schutztruppe: Feb. 1895–Dec. 1897
Nrs. 721–725: Unruhen und Aufstände in verschiedenen Teilen Deutsch-Ostafrikas im Jahre 1905
und ihre militärische Unterdrückung, Bde. 1–4, 4 Aug. 1905–19 July 1912
Nr. 771: Bekämpfung von Hungersnöten in Deutsch-Ostafrika, Jan. 1899–Sept. 1917
Nr. 774: Bericht des Obersten v. Trotha über politische Verhältnisse, Missionen, kulturelle Entwicklung, Organisationen und Stationen in Deutsch-Ostafrika
Nr. 784: Sammlung der Gouvernementsbefehle des Kaiserlichen Gouvernements (DOA), Bd. 3, 30
July 1895–23 Jan. 1905
Nr. B 786/2: Runderlasse des Kaiserlichen Gouvernements, Bd. 4, Dec. 1895–March 1897
Nr. 1496: Informationsreise des Staatssekretärs Dr. Solf, Enthält: Denkschrift über SWA im Vergleich mit Britisch-Südafrika, June 1912–Aug. 1912
Nr. 2089: Differenzen zwischen Generalleutnant v. Trotha und Gouverneur Leutwein über das
Verhältnis von militärischen und politischen Massnahmen zur Beendigung des Krieges
Nrs. 2090–2091: Deportation der Kriegsgefangenen aus SWA in andere Kolonien
Nrs. 2111–2119: Aufstand der Hereros 1904–1909
Nr. 2120: Schriftliches Material aus Swakopmund
Nr. 2121: Denkschrift des Reichskanzlers für den Reichstag, Mar. 1904
Nrs. 2133–2134: Aufstand im Namalande im Jahre 1904, Bd. 1, Aug. 1904–1 Jan. 1905
Nrs. 2140–2141: Aufstand im Namaland und seine Bekämpfung, 8 Feb. 1907–June 1914
Nrs. 4704–4705: Bericht über die einheimische Bevölkerung SWA und ihre Behandlung durch die
Deutschen (Englisches Blaubuch), Bd. 1 und 2, Jan. and Dec. 1918
Nrs. 6466–6467: Deutsch-Ostafrika Allgemeine Jahresberichte, Bde. 1–2, Jan. 1894–Jan. 1989
R 151 F (Kaiserliches Gouvernement in Deutsch-Südwestafrika, 1884–1915)
Film FC 4704: Feldzug gegen die Hereros und Khauas-Hottentotten, 1895–1896 [D.IV.c.1., Nr. 436,
orig. microﬁlm 250]
Film FC 4705: Expedition gegen die Afrikaner-Hottentotten, 1897 [D.IV.d, Nr. 438] und gegen die
Zwartbooi Hottentotten, 1898 [D.IV.f., Nr. 440, orig. microﬁlm 251]
Film FC 4706: Expedition gegen die Afrikaner-Hottentotten, 1897 [D.IV.d, Nr. 438], und gegen die
Zwartbooi Hottentotten, 1898 [D.IV.f., Nr. 440, orig. microﬁlm 251]
Film FC 4711: Feldzug gegen die Herero, 1904–1906
Film FC 4712: Feldzug gegen die Herero, 1904–1906
Film FC 4713: Feldzug gegen die Herero, 1904–1906

335

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
336 Film FC 4714: Feldzug gegen die Herero, 1904–1906, Kriegsgefangene [D.IV.l.3, Nr. 454–456, orig.
microﬁlm 260]
Film FC 4715: Feldzug gegen die Herero, 1904–1906, Kriegsgefangene [D.IV.l.3, Nr. 454–456, orig.
microﬁlm 261]
Film FC 4720: Feldzug gegen die Hottentotten, 1904–1907
Film FC 4721: Feldzug gegen die Hottentotten, 1904–1907
Film FC 4722: Feldzug gegen die Hottentotten, 1904–1907, Kriegsgefangene [D.IV.m.3, Nr. 465–66.
orig. microﬁlm 268]
Film FC 4723: Feldzug gegen die Hottentotten, 1904–1907, Kriegsgefangene [D.IV.m.3, Nr. 465–66.
orig. microﬁlm 269]
61 Ko 1 (Deutsche Kolonialgesellschaft)
Film 39521: Deutsche Kolonialgesellschaft, Herero Aufstand
Film 39522: Deutsche Kolonialgesellschaft, Herero Aufstand
R 43 (Alte Reichskanzlei)
Film 13209/13210: Türkei
Bundesarchiv (Koblenz)
N 1408 (Nachlass Paul Rohrbach [1869–1956])
Bd. 25: Lebenserinnerungen, Bd. 1, Ausführliche Erstfassung, nur für die Familien, nicht zur Veröffentlichung bestimmt, Teile I–VI. S. 1–196
Bd. 67: Briefe an die Frau aus SWA, Sept. 1903–Apr. 1905
Bd. 68: Briefe an die Frau aus SWA, May–Dec. 1905
Bd. 69: Briefe an die Frau aus SWA, Jan. 1906–Mar. 1907
Bd. 112: Briefe u.a. von Ernst Jäckh, 1916
Bd. 123: Briefe u.a. von Ernst Jäckh, 1920
Kl. Erw. 16 (Carl Peters)
Briefe an Seine Excellenz betr. Fragwürdigkeit des preussischen Systems bei der Ausbildung der
ostafrikanischen Schutztruppe, Kilimandschar Station, 27 Oct. 1891
Kl. Erw. 275 (Friedrich v. Lindequist)
“SWA Erlebnisse,” ms.
Nl. 1030 (Nachlass Viktor Franke [1866–1936])
Bd. 3: Tagebuch, 5 Sept. 1903–18 Dec. 1904
Bd. 21: Der Aufstand in Deutsch-Südwestafrika und die nachfolgenden Jahre, 1903–1906
Bundesarchiv-Militärarchiv (Freiburg i. Br.)
RM 2 (Kaiserliche Marine-Kabinett)
Nr. 186: Expedition nach SWA, 1904

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
RM 3 (Reichsmarineamt)
Nr. 4745: Allerhöchste Befehle und Berichterstattung an Seine Majestät über China, 1900
Nr. 6822: Kriegszustand und Oberbefehl: Anweisung für die Kommandeur des Ostasiatischen Expeditionskorps
RM 5 (Admiralstab der Marine)
Nr. 6035: Aufstand in Deutsch-Ostafrika, Bd. 1, Aug. 1905–Nov. 1905
Nr. 6036: Aufstand in Deutsch-Ostafrika, Bd. 2, Nov. 1905–1908
RM 40 (Reichs-Marine, Dienst- und Kommandostellen der Kaiserlichen Marine im Mittelmeer und
im Osmanischen Reich)
Nr. 456: Archiv der Marine, Kriegsakten, Politisches, Bd. 1, Akten der Mittelmeerdivision, Aug.
1914–Feb. 1916
RM 121 (Landstreitkräfte der Kaiserlichen Marine)
Nr. 396: Tagebuch des Boxeraufstands vom 30. Mai bis Ende 1900 (Bd. 1)
Nr. 397: Tagebuch des Boxeraufstands vom 1. Januar bis Anfang Juli 1901 (Bd. 2)
Nr. 398: Befehle an den Oberbefehlshaber Graf Waldersee und Gen. Lt. von Lessel
Nr. 399: Nachrichten vom Oberbefehlshaber Graf Waldersee und Gen. Lt. von Lessel, Oct.
1900–Aug. 1901
Nr. 400: Kriegstagebuch des Kommandos des Expeditionskorps nach China, Befehlshaber: Generalmajor von Hoepfner, 25 June 1900–26 Nov. 1900
Nr. 422: Militärische Operationen, Bd. 1, 20 Jan. 1904–10 Mar. 1904
Nr. 423: Militärische Operationen, Bd. 2, 13 Mar. 1904–25 Sept. 1904
Nr. 424: Kriegstagebuch des Kommandos des Marine-Expeditionskorps, 1 Feb. 1904–7 Apr. 1904
Nr. 427: Kriegstagebuch des Korvetten Kapitäns Gudewill, 18 Jan. 1904–29 Feb. 1904
Nr. 429: Kriegstagebuch: Landungskorps SMS Habicht, 24 Feb. 1904–Feb. 1905
Nr. 430: Kriegstagebuch: 1. Feldkompanie, Marine-Inf.-Bataillon, 17 Jan.–4 June 1904
Nr. 431: Kriegstagebuch: 2. Feldkompanie, Marine-Inf.-Bataillon, 14 Jan.–9 July 1904
Nr. 432: Kriegstagebuch: 4. Feldkompanie, Marine-Inf.-Bataillon, 17 Jan.–18 June 1904
Nr. 434: Kriegstagebuch: 3. Kompanie, Marine-Inf.-Bataillon, Bd. 1, 10 Feb.–21 Nov. 1904
Nr. 435: Kriegstagebuch: 3. Kompanie, Marine-Inf.-Bataillon, Bd. 2, 23 Nov. 1904–5 Mar. 1905
Nr. 438: Kriegstagebuch: SMS Thetis (Ältester Offizier der Ost-Afrikanischen Station), Berichte
und Meldungen über Aufstand, 29 Sept. 1905–13 Mar. 1906
Nr. 439: Anlage zum Kriegstagebuch SMS Thetis (Ältester Offizier der OA Station), Bd. 1, 20 Oct.
1905–15 Dec. 1906
Nr. 440: Anlage, Bd. 2, 16 Dec. 1906–5 Mar. 1907
Nr. 441: Ältester Offizier der Ost-Afrikanischen Station: Geheim! Akten: Anlagen zum Kriegstagebuch, Fol. I, Aug.–Oct. 1905
Nr. 442: Aufstand in Deutsch-Ostafrika. Kriegstagebuch, 26 Sept. 1905–29 Mar. 1906
Nr. 443: Berichte und Meldungen über Aufstand, Sept. 1905–Dec. 1905 [“Der Älteste Offizier der
Ostafrikanischen Station. Geheim! Akten betr. Aufstand in Deutsch-Ostafrika, August-Sept.
1905”]
Nr. 448: Kriegstagebuch: Detachements, Samange, Kilwa, Mohorro, Lindi, Mikinda + Beilagen

337

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
338 Nr. 449: Berichte und Meldung des Hauptmanns v. Schlichting, Mtindji, Nov.–Dec. 1905
Nr. 450: Berichte und Meldung des Lt. Frhr. v. Stengel, Kilwa, Oct.–Dec. 1905
Nr. 451: Kriegstagebuch des Lt. v. Milczewski, Muansa, Oct. 1905–Feb. 1906
Nr. 452: Kriegstagebuch Oblt. z. See Paasche, Aug. 1905–Feb. 1906
Nr. 453: Kriegstagebuch Stabsarzt Dr. zur Verth, Mohorro, Nov. 1905–Jan. 1906
Nr. 454: Kriegstagebuch Seesoldatendetachment Kibata, Mtinzi, Sept. 1905–Feb. 1906
Nr. 455: Kriegstagebuch Matrosendetachement Wachtel, Oct. 1905–Feb. 1906
Nr. 456: Kriegstagebuch Detachement Mikindana, Aug. 1905–Feb. 1906
Nr. 457: Kriegstagebuch Detachement Kissidju, Oct.–Nov. 1905
Nr. 458: Kriegstagebuch Detachement Engelbrecht, Oct. 1905–Mar. 1906
Nr. 459: Kriegstagebuch Seesold, Detachement Lindi, Sept. 1905–Feb. 1906
RW 51 (Kaiserliche Schutztruppen und sonstige deutsche Landstreitkräfte in Übersee)
Bd. 2: Dokumentenzentrale, Schutztruppe Südwestafrika
Bd. 12: Bestimmungen für das Militärgerichtsverfahren, etc. während des Kriegszustandes in
Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika, 1904
Bd. 18: Überblick über die bei der Entsendung von Verstärkungen für die Schutztruppe in SWA
gesammelten Erfahrungen und die in den Kommissionsberatungen zu erörternden Fragen, 1
Nov. 1908
Bd. 19: Ergebnis der Arbeiten der durch AKO vom 14.11.1908 berufenen Kommission zur Beratung
aufgrund der bei der Entsendung von Verstärkungen für die Schutztruppen in SWA gesammelten Erfahrungen, 1908
N 38 (Nachlass Arnold Lequis [1861–1949])
Bd. 4: Privatkorrespondenz
Bd. 16: Urschrift: Erfahrungsbericht aus SWA, 15 May 1904–14 Dec. 1904
Bd. 17: Durchschrift und Abschrift des Erfahrungsberichts
Bd. 18: Erinnerungen an SWA, 1904–1905
Bd. 29: Kämpfe während des Boxer-Aufstandes, 13 June 1900–16 Oct. 1900
Bd. 30: Kriegstagebuch des Kompanie-Führers Lequis im Boxeraufstand, 17 July 1900–11 June 1901
Bd. 31: Anlage zu Kriegstagebuch
Bde. 35–38: Etappenkommandeur Süd: Tätigkeit während des Herero- und Witboi-Feldzugs
(3 May 1904–22 Jan. 1908)
Bd. 57: Schriften: u.a., “Militarismus und Weltpolitik”
Bd. 59: Kommission zur Bewertung der bei der Entsendung von Verstärkungen für die Schutztruppen in SWA gesammelten Erfahrungen. Bericht des Gen.-Majors und Quartiermeisters v.
Gündell an Kaiser Wilhelm II: Abschrift, 28 Mar. 1909
N 103 (Nachlass Paul v. Lettow-Vorbeck [1870–1964])
Bd. 1: Korrespondenz
Bd. 25: Einsatz beim Boxeraufstand in China, 1901
Bd. 32: Persönliche Tagebücher, Handschriften, 24 Sept. 1900–5 Jan. 1901: Lageskizzen von
Kämpfen in China
Bd. 34: Persönliche Tagebücher, Handschriften, 9 Aug. 1904–4 Oct. 1905: Kämpfe in Afrika
Bd. 35: Persönliche Tagebücher, Handschriften, 18 Oct. 1904–30 Apr. 1906

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Bd. 43: Tagebuchartige Aufzeichungen: Erinnerungen an den Einsatz während des Boxeraufstandes, 1900–1901
Bd. 44: Persönliches Tagebuch: Einsatz während des Boxeraufstands, 19 Oct. 1900–15 Apr. 1901
Bd. 70: Tagebuchaufzeichnungen, in SWA, 1905
Bd. 73: Kampfhandlungen während des Hottentottenaufstandes: Konzept-Kriegstagebuch, 17
May–18 Oct. 1904; Skizze Waterberg, 5 Aug. 1904
Bd. 74: Kriegstagebuch, 27 Aug. 1904–25 Sept. 1905
Bd. 75: Verlauf des Aufstandes in SWA: Denkschrift des Grossen Generalstabs, 16 Jan. 1904–3 Apr.
1905, u.a.
Bd. 77: Aufstand, erzählende Niederschrift von Lettow-Vorbeck, 1910
Bd. 84: Räumung der Malagarossi-Stellung: Antrag des Korvetten-Kapitäns Zimmer auf Einleitung
eines Kriegsgerichtsverfahrens wegen der ihm zu last gelegten Massnahmen: Beweisunterlagen
hierzu, 5 Sept. 1916–30 June 1917
Bd. 113: SWA: Hereroaufstand: Bilderfolge zusammengestellt von General-Leutnant v. Trotha,
1904–1906
N 138 (Nachlass Eberhard Graf. v. Wolfskeel [1875–1954])
Bd. 6: Privatkorrespondenz mit seiner Frau, 1 Oct. 1915–28 Feb. 1916 (Urffa)
N 156 (Wilhelm Souchon)
Bd. 2: Privatdienstliche Korrespondenz, u.a. mit Bronsart v. Schellendorf
N 187 (Nachlass Martin Chales de Beaulieu [1857–1945])
Bd. 3: Erinnerungen aus meinem Leben (Ausarbeitung des Gen. d. Inf. a.D. Martin Chales de
Beaulieu), Nov. 1940
N. 247 (Nachlass Hans v. Seeckt)
Nr. 42: Aufzeichnungen aus Konstantinopel und der Türkei, von der Hand Seeckts, 1917–1918
Nr. 50: Niederschrift: die Gründe des Zusammenbruches der Türkei Herbst 1918
Nr. 88: (Privat-) Dienstlicher Schriftwechsel 1919–1920
Nr. 175: Schriftwechsel
Nr. 178: Korrespondenz, 1914–1918
N 559 (Nachlass Berchtold v. Deimling)
Nr. 7: Nordfeldzug: Kriegstagebuch des Regimentsstabes des 2. Feldregiments für SWA, 1904 und
Südfeldzug
Nr. 8: Telegramme des Südfeldzuges, 11 June 1906–29 Jan. 1907
MSg. 1 (Militärbiographische Sammlung)
Nr. 2038: Aufzeichnungen, Korrespondenz und Presseausschnitte aus der Tätigkeit von Oberleutnant Eberhard v. d. Hagen bei der Schutztruppe in SWA 1905–1911.
Nr. 2039: Fritz Bronsart von Schellendorf, Autobiographie

339

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
340 MSg. 2 (Militärgeschichtliche Sammlung)
Nr. 3039: Einsatz des Hauptmanns Frhr. v. Welck in SWA, Schriftwechsel, Zeitungsausschnitte,
1904–1909.
Nr. 3739: Kriegstagebuch Oberstlt. August Stange, 7 Dec. 1914–10 Mar. 1915.
Nr. 5196: Tagebuch des Leutnants Franz Westermayer über den Boxeraufstand in China.
Nr. 5646: Expeditions-Korps in China: Kriegstagebuch und Bericht von Arthur Langlet, 1900–1901
Politisches Archiv des Auswärtigen Amtes (Bonn)
Türkei 152: betr. Eisenbahnen in der Türkei
Bd. 83: 1. Oct. 1915–30 Nov. 1915
Türkei 175: betr. Katholiken in der Türkei
Bd. 3: 1 Apr.–14 Dec. 1915
Türkei 183 (Armenien)
Bde. 36–55: 1914–1919
Nachlass Paul Weitz
Bd. 1: Briefe verschiedener Mitglieder des Auswärtigen Amtes, 1902–1917
Bd. 3: Briefe v. Frankfurter Zeitung, 1903–1920
Bd. 6: Briefe v. Richard v. Kühlmann, 1915–1916
Bd. 13: Verschiedenes
Bd. 14: Aufzeichnung mit 3 Anlagen
Nachlass Dr. Otto Göppert (20 May 1872—3 July 1943)
VI. Sonderaufgaben, 1907–1935
Nr. 5: Türkei- und Armenienfrage (1918–1919)
VII.
Nr. 1: Notizbücher (11 Stück), 1896–1921
Nr. 3: Persönliche Briefe (Curtius, Bülow, Köpke)
Politisches Archiv des Auswärtigen Amtes (Used in microﬁlm form from the United States
National Archives)
Türkei No. 139: Überlassung von preussischen Offizieren und Finanzbeamten an die Pforte zu Reorganisationszwecken, Bde. 33–49, 1914–1920 [Microﬁlm Roll T 136/77]
Türkei No. 142: Militär- und Marine-Angelegenheiten, Bde. 39–56 (1 July 1914–31 Jan. 1916) [Microﬁlm Rolls T 136/81–82]
Türkei No. 183: Armenia, Bde. 35–56, 11 Mar. 1914–Jan. 1920 [Microﬁlm Rolls T 139/463–464]
Archiv der Vereinigten Evangelischen Mission (Wuppertal) (Now called Archiv- und
Museumsstiftung Wuppertal)
RMG 1.606c: Philipp Diehl [previous Nr. B/c II 35,3]

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
RMG 1.609e: Wilhelm Eich, Bd. 5, Korr. 1906 [previous Nr. B/c II 36]
RMG 1.615: Eduard Dannert [previous Nr. B/c II 43]
RMG 1.644: August Kuhlmann (1871–1945), Bd. 1 (1892–1907) [previous Nr. B/c II 72]
RMG 1.660a: Heinrich Vedder (1876–1972), Bd. 1 (1894–1906) [previous Nr. B/c II 87]
RMG 2.499a: Franzfontein [previous Nr. C/h 8 a]
RMG 2.597: Die Witboois: ihre Geschichte und ihr Schicksal in Kamerun, 1894; 1904–1913 [previous Nr. C/i 17]
RMG 2.602: Herero-Aufstand, dazu Briefe aus Deutschland [previous Nr. C/i 22 (1903–1909)]
RMG 2.660: Deutsche Kolonialbehörden in SWA: u.a. Fürsorge für die Herero, 1901–1907 [previous Nr. C/o 5]
RMG 2.697e: Afrikareisen von Inspektor J. Spiecker (1902–1903; 1905–1906), Bd. 5, 1906 [previous
Nr. C/s 5, 5]
Archive of the von Trotha Family (Private Papers)
Lothar von Trotha Nachlass
Nr. B69: Tagebuch Lothar v. Trotha, May 1904–Dec. 1905 (typescripts)
Nr. 314: Lose Blätter (copies of original typewritten letters, speeches, plus other handwritten notes)
Nr. 315: Tagebuch Lothar v. Trotha, May 1904–Dec. 1905 (“Zusammengestellt von Frau Lucy von
Trotha, Bonn am Rhein 1930, Mit Anhängen”)
Yale University Library
Ernst Jäckh Papers
PUBLISHED SOURCES
Newspapers and Journals
Berliner Lokalanzeiger, 1904
Berliner Neueste Nachrichten, 1 Feb.–30 Mar. 1909
Berliner Zeitung, 1904
Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, 1921
Deutsch-Südwestafrikanische Zeitung, 1904–1905
Kölnische Zeitung, 1915
Militär-Wochenblatt, 1900–1914
Der Reichsbote, Jan.–June 1904
Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und Heereskunde, 1904–1914
Official Document Collections and Reports
Andonian, Aram, ed. Documents officiels concernant les massacres arméniens. Paris, 1920.
Belgium. Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Report Laid before the Belgian Parliament by the Minister of Foreign Affairs in Answer to the Reichstag Report on Belgian Deportations, 1916–1917. Brussels, 1928.
Belgium. Official Commission of the Belgian Government. Reports on the Violation of the Rights of
Nations and of the Laws and Customs of War in Belgium. 2 vols. London, 1915–16.
Beylerian, Arthur. Les grandes puissances, l’empire ottoman et les arméniens dans les archives
françaises (1914–1918). Paris, 1983.

341

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
342 Bland, J.O.P. Germany’s Violations of the Laws of War, 1914–1915: Compiled under the Auspices of the
French Ministry of Foreign Affairs. New York, 1915.
Bryce, James, and Arnold Toynbee, eds. The Treatment of the Armenians in the Ottoman Empire,
1914–16: Documents Presented to Viscount Grey of Fallodon by Viscount Bryce; Uncensored Edition. Ed. Ara Saraﬁan. London, 2000.
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Division of International Law. Violations of the Laws
and Customs of War: Reports of the Majority and Dissenting Reports of American and Japanese
Members of the Commission of Responsibilities, Conference of Paris, 1919. Pamphlet no. 32. Oxford, 1919.
Eiswaldt’s Handbuch für Einjährig-Freiwillige, Reserve-Offizieraspiranten und Offiziere des
Beurlaubtenstandes des Trains. 10th ed. Berlin, 1915.
Elsner von Gronow, Kurt, and Georg Sohl, eds. Militärstrafrecht für Herr und Marine des Deutschen
Reichs: Handbuch für Kommando- und Gerichtsstellen, für Offiziere und Juristen. Berlin, 1906.
Fitzner, Rudolf. Deutsches Kolonial-Handbuch: Nach amtlichen Quellen bearbeitet. Vol. 1, 2nd ed.
Berlin, 1901.
France. Foreign Office. Les Violations des lois de la guerre par l’Allemagne. Paris, 1915.
Germany. Admiralty [Admiralstab der Marine]. Die Kaiserliche Marine während der Wirren in
China 1900–1901. Berlin, 1903.
Germany. Foreign Office [Auswärtiges Amt]. Die völkerrechtswidrige Führung des belgischen Volkskriegs. Berlin, 1915.
Germany. Foreign Office and Ministry of the Interior [Auswärtiges Amt and Reichsministerium des
Innern], eds. Amtliche Urkunden zur Vorgeschichte des Waffenstillstandes 1918. Auf Grund der
Akten der Reichskanzlei, des Auswärtigen Amtes und des Reichsarchivs. Berlin, 1924.
Germany. General Staff [Grosser Generalstab]. Heeresverpﬂegung. Berlin, 1913.
——. “Aus dem Südafrikanischen Kriege 1899 bis 1902.” In Kriegsgeschichtliche Einzelschriften, Hefte
32–35. Berlin, 1903–5.
——. Die Kämpfe der deutschen Truppen in Südwestafrika; Auf Grund amtlichen Materials. Vol. 1:
Der Feldzug gegen die Herero (1906). Vol. 2: Der Hottentottenkrieg (1907). Berlin, 1906–7.
——. Kriegsbrauch im Landkriege. Vol. 31 of Kriegsgeschichtliche Einzelschriften. Berlin, 1902.
——, ed. Moltke’s militärische Korrespondenz: Aus den Dienstschriften des Krieges 1870/71. Berlin,
1896.
Germany. National Constituent Assembly. Official German Documents Relating to the World War. 2
vols. Translated by Division of International Law, Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace. New York, 1923.
Germany. Parliament. Stenographische Berichte über die öffentlichen Verhandlungen des 15. Untersuchungsausschusses der Verfassungsgebenden Nationalversammlung nebst Beilagen. 2 vols.
Berlin, 1920.
——. Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Reichstages. Berlin, 1904–1907. (Sten.
Ber.)
——. Das Werk des Untersuchungsausschusses der Verfassungsgebenden Deutschen Nationalversammlung und des Deutschen Reichstages 1919–1928, Verhandlungen, Gutachten, Urkunden. Ed. Eugen
Fischer, Berthold Widmann, Walter Bloch, Walter Schücking, Johannes Bell, Georg Gradnauer,
Rudolf Breitscheid, and Albrecht Philipp. Berlin, 1921–1930. Reihe 1, vol. 5 (Deutschland auf den
Haager Friedenskonferenzen); Reihe 3, vols. 1–4 (Das Völkerrecht im Weltkrieg); Reihe 4, vols.
2–3, 6 (Die Ursachen des deutschen Zusammenbruchs im Jahre 1918). (UA)
Germany. Reichsarchiv. Der Weltkrieg 1914 bis 1918. 14 vols. Berlin, 1925–1944.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
——. Kriegsrüstung und Kriegswirtschaft. Vol. 1: Die militärische, wirtschaftliche und ﬁnanzielle Rüs- 343
tung Deutschlands von der Reichsgründung bis zum Ausbruch des Weltkriegs. Berlin, 1930.
Great Britain. Report of the Committee on Alleged German Outrages Appointed by His Britannic
Majesty’s Government and Presided over by the Right Hon. Viscount Bryce. Cd. 7894. London,
1915.
Great Britain. Parliament. Evidence and Documents Laid before the Committee on Alleged German
Outrages. Cd 7895. London, 1915.
——. Papers Relating to German Atrocities and Breaches of the Rules of War in Africa. Presented to
both Houses of Parliament by Command of His Majesty, July 1916. London, 1916.
——. Report of His Majesty’s Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the Military Preparations and
Other Matters Connected with the War in South Africa. Cd. 1789. London, 1903.
——. Report on the Concentration Camps in South Africa by the Committee of Ladies Appointed by
the Secretary of State for War; Containing Reports on the Camps in Natal, the Orange River
Colony, and the Transvaal. Cd. 893. London, 1902.
——. The Treatment of the Armenians in the Ottoman Empire: Documents Presented to Viscount Grey
of Fallodon, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. London, 1916.
Institut für Armenische Fragen. The Armenian Genocide. 3 vols. Munich, 1987.
Kommando der Schutztruppen im Reichs-Kolonialamt. Sanitäts-Bericht über die Kaiserliche
Schutztruppe für Südwestafrika während des Herero- und Hottentottenaufstandes für die Zeit vom
1. Januar 1904 bis 31. März 1907. Berlin, 1909.
Lepsius, Johannes. Bericht über die Lage des armenischen Volkes in der Türkei. Potsdam, 1916.
——. Deutschland und Armenien, 1914–1918. Sammlung Diplomatischer Aktenstücke. Potsdam, 1919.
——. Der Todesgang des armenischen Volkes: Bericht über das Schicksal des armenischen Volkes in der
Türkei während des Weltkrieges. Potsdam, 1930.
Lepsius, Johannes, Albrecht Mendelssohn-Bartholdy, and Friedrich Thimme, eds. Die Grosse Politik
der Europäischen Kabinette 1871–1914; Sammlung der Diplomatischen Akten des Auswärtigen
Amtes; Im Auftrage des Auswärtigen Amtes. Rings um die Erste Haager Friedenskonferenz. Vol. 15.
Berlin, 1924.
Michaelis, Herbert, and Ernst Schraepler, eds. Ursachen und Folgen; Vom deutschen Zusammenbruch
1918 und 1945 bis zur staatlichen Neuordnungen Deutschland in der Gegenwart; Eine Urkundenund Dokumentensammlung zur Kriegsgeschichte. Berlin, 1959.
Munro, Dana C., George C. Sellery, and August C. Krey, eds. German Treatment of Conquered Territory, Being Part II of “German War Practices.” Washington, D.C., 1918.
Munro, Dana C., George C. Sellery, and August C. Krey, eds. German War Practices, Part 1: Treatment of Civilians. Washington, D.C., 1917.
Ohandjanian, Artem. Dokumente über Armenien im Österreichischen Staatsarchiv. 2 vols. Vienna,
1988.
Prussia. War Ministry [Kriegsministerium]. D.V.E. Nr. 53. Grundzüge der Höheren Truppenführung.
Berlin, 1910.
——. Exerzir-Reglement für die Infanterie. Berlin, 1888. [Often spelled “Exerzier”]
——. Exerzir-Reglement für die Infanterie. 2nd ed. Berlin, 1889.
——. Felddienst-Ordnung. Berlin, 1900.
——. Felddienst-Ordnung. Berlin, 1908.
——. Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung (12 March 1914) (D.V.E. Nr. 90). Berlin, 1914. (KEO)
Prussia. War Ministry and Supreme Command [Kriegsministerium and Oberste Heeresleitung].
Die deutsche Kriegführung und das Völkerrecht; Beiträge zur Schuldfrage. Berlin, 1919.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
344 Scott, James Brown, ed. The Hague Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907, Accompanied by
Tables of Signatures, Ratiﬁcation and Adhesions of the Various Powers, and Texts of Reservations.
New York, 1915.
——. The Proceedings of the Hague Peace Conferences; Translation of the Official Texts; The Conference of 1899. New York, 1920.
Stevenson, David, ed. British Documents on Foreign Affairs; The First World War, 1914–1918; The Allied and Neutral Powers: Diplomacy and War Aims, August 1914–July 1915. Pt. 2, ser. H, vol. 1.
General editors Kenneth Bourne and D. C. Watt. Frederick, Md., 1989.
Toynbee, Arnold J. Armenian Atrocities: The Murder of a Nation; with a Speech Delivered by Lord
Bryce in the House of Lords. London, 1915.
Union of South Africa. Report on the Natives of South West Africa and Their Treatment by Germany.
London, 1918.
U.S. Department of State. Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1918. Supplement 1: The World War. 2 vols. Washington, D.C., 1933.
Zimmermann, Alfred, ed. Die deutsche Kolonial-Gesetzgebung; Sammlung der auf die deutschen
Schutzgebiete bezüglichen Gesetze, Verordnungen, Erlasse und internationalen Vereinbarungen,
mit Anmerkungen und Sachregister. Auf Grund amtlicher Quellen und zum dienstlichen Gebrauch herausgegeben. Bd. II. Berlin, 1898.
Memoirs and Diaries
Alverdes, Hermann. Mein Tagebuch aus Südwest: Erinnerungen aus dem Feldzuge gegen die Hottentotten. Oldenburg, 1906.
Auer von Herrenkirchen, Hellmuth. Meine Erlebnisse während des Feldzuges gegen die Hereros und
Witbois nach meinem Tagebuch. Berlin, 1907.
Baden, Prince Max von. Erinnerungen und Dokumente. Stuttgart, 1927.
Bauer, Max. Der grosse Krieg in Feld und Heimat; Erinnerungen und Betrachtungen. Tübingen, 1921.
Bayer, Maximilian. Mit dem Hauptquartier in Südwestafrika. Berlin, 1909.
Bayern, Rupprecht Kronprinz von. Mein Kriegstagebuch. 3 vols. Ed. Eugen von Frauenholz. Munich, 1929.
Belwe, Max. Gegen die Herero 1904–05; Tagebuchaufzeichnungen. Berlin, 1906.
Bernstorff, Johann Heinrich Graf. Erinnerungen und Briefe. Zürich, 1936.
Bethmann Hollweg, Theobald von. Betrachtungen zum Weltkriege, Vol. 2: Während des Krieges.
Berlin, 1922.
Binder-Krieglstein, E. Baron. Die Kämpfe des Deutschen Expeditionskorps in China und ihre militärischen Lehren. Berlin, 1902.
Böhm, Gustav. Adjutant im preussischen Kriegsministerium Juni 1918 bis Oktober 1919; Aufzeichnungen des Hauptmanns Gustav Böhm. Ed. Heinz Hürten and Georg Meyer. Stuttgart, 1977.
Bülow, Bernhard von. Denkwürdigkeiten. 4 vols. Berlin, 1920.
Deimling, Berthold Karl Adolf von. Aus der alten in die neue Zeit; Lebenserinnerungen. Berlin,
1930.
——. Südwestafrika: Land und Leute; Unsere Kämpfe; Wert der Kolonie. Vortrag, gehalten in einer
Anzahl deutscher Städte. Berlin, 1906.
Djemal, Ahmed. Erinnerungen eines Türkischen Staatsmannes. Munich, 1922.
Einem, Karl von. Ein Armeeführer erlebt den Weltkrieg; Persönliche Aufzeichnungen. Ed. Junius Alter.
Leipzig, 1938.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Eisenhart-Rothe, Ernst. Im Banne der Persönlichkeit: Aus den Lebenserinnerungen des Generals der 345
Infanterie a.D. Berlin, 1931.
Ernst, Carl. Der grosse Krieg in Belgien; Beobachtungen seinen ehemaligen hannoverschen Landsleuten
gewidmet. Gembloux, Belgium, 1930.
Estorff, Ludwig von. “Kriegserlebnisse in Südwestafrika; Vortrag gehalten in der Militärischen
Gesellschaft zu Berlin am 8. Februar 1911.” Beiheft zum Militär-Wochenblatt, Heft 3 (1911):
79–101.
——. Wanderungen und Kämpfe in Südwestafrika, Ostafrika und Südakrifa 1894–1910. Wiesbaden,
1968.
Falkenhayn, Erich von. Die Oberste Heeresleitung 1914–1916 in ihren wichtigsten Entschliessungen.
Berlin, 1920.
Freytag-Loringhoven, Hugo Frhr. von. Heerführung im Weltkriege; Vergleichende Studien. Berlin,
1920.
——. Menschen und Dinge, wie ich sie in meinem Leben sah. Berlin, 1923.
Friedrich III. Das Tagebuch des Kronprinzen; Aussprüche, Briefe und andere Kundgebungen 1831–1886.
Berlin, 1886.
Gallwitz, Max von. Erleben im Westen. Berlin, 1934.
——. Meine Führertätigkeit im Weltkriege 1914–1916: Belgien—Osten—Balkan. Berlin, 1929.
Giehrl, Rudolf. China-Fahrt; Erlebnisse und Eindrücke von der Expedition 1900–1901. Munich, 1903.
Goltz, Colmar von der. Denkwürdigkeiten. Ed. Friedrich von der Goltz and Wolfgang Foerster.
Berlin, 1929.
Götzen, Gustav Adolf Graf von. Deutsch-Ostafrika im Aufstand, 1905–06. Berlin, 1909.
Groener, Wilhelm. Lebenserinnerungen; Jugend, Generalstab, Weltkrieg. Ed. Friedrich Frhr. Hiller
von Gaertringen. Göttingen, 1957.
Gündell, Erich von. Aus seinen Tagebüchern: Deutsche Expedition nach China 1900–1901, 2. Haager
Friedenskonferenz 1907; Weltkrieg 1914–1918 und Zwischenzeiten. Ed. Walter Obkircher. Hamburg, 1939.
Guse, Felix. Die Kaukasusfront im Weltkrieg bis zum Frieden von Brest. Leipzig, 1940.
Hindenburg, Paul von. Aus meinem Leben. Leipzig, 1920.
Hoffmann, Max. Die Aufzeichnungen des Generalmajors Max Hoffmann. 2 vols. Ed. Karl-Friedrich
Nowak. Berlin, 1929.
Hürten, Hans, and Georg Meyer. Adjutant im preussischen Kriegsministerium Juni 1918–Oktober
1919; Aufzeichnungen des Hauptmanns Gustav Böhm. Stuttgart, 1977.
Jäckh, Ernst. Der goldene Pﬂug, Lebensernte eines Weltbürgers. Stuttgart, 1954.
Kress von Kressenstein, Friedrich. Mit den Türken zum Suezkanal. Berlin, 1938.
Kühlmann, Richard von. Erinnerungen. Heidelberg, 1948.
Lettow-Vorbeck, Paul von. Meine Erinnerungen aus Ostafrika. Leipzig, 1920.
——. Mein Leben. Biberach an der Riss, 1957.
Leutwein, Paul. “Meine Erlebnisse im Kampf gegen die Hereros.” In Mit der Schutztruppe durch
Deutsch-Afrika, ed. “Simplex Africanus.” Berlin, 1909.
——. Afrikanerschicksal; Gouverneur Leutwein und seine Zeit. Stuttgart, 1929.
Leutwein, Theodor. “Der Aufstand in Deutsch-Südwestafrika.” Deutsche Revue (1907).
——. Elf Jahre Gouverneur in Deutsch-Südwestafrika. Berlin, 1906.
Liman von Sanders, Otto. Fünf Jahre Türkei. Berlin, 1919.
Lossberg, Fritz von. Meine Tätigkeit im Weltkriege 1914–1918. Berlin, 1939.
Ludendorff, Erich. Kriegführung und Politik. Berlin, 1922.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
346 ——. My War Memories 1914–1918. 2 vols. London, 1922.
——. The Nation at War. Trans. A. S. Rappoport. London, n.d.
——. Der totale Krieg. Munich, 1935.
——. Urkunden der Obersten Heeresleitung über ihre Tätigkeit 1916–18. 2nd ed. Berlin, 1921.
Moltke, Helmuth von. Erinnerungen, Briefe, Dokumente 1877–1916. Ed. Eliza v. Moltke. Stuttgart,
1922.
——. Gesammelte Schriften und Denkwürdigkeiten. 5 vols. Berlin, 1892–93.
Payer, Friedrich von. Von Bethmann Hollweg bis Ebert: Erinnerungen und Bilder. Frankfurt, 1923.
Preussen, Kronprinz Wilhelm von. Erinnerungen des Kronprinzen Wilhelm; Aus den Aufzeichnungen, Dokumenten, Tagebüchern und Gesprächen. Ed. Karl Rosner. Stuttgart, 1922.
——. Meine Erinnerungen aus Deutschlands Heldenkampf. Berlin, 1923.
Rohrbach, Paul. Aus Südwestafrikas schweren Tagen: Blätter von Arbeit und Abschied. Berlin, 1909.
Rust, Conrad. Krieg und Frieden im Hererolande; Aufzeichungen aus dem Kriegsjahre 1904. Leipzig,
1905.
Salzmann, Erich von. Im Kampfe gegen die Herero. 2nd ed. Berlin, 1905.
Scheibert, Justus. Der Krieg in China 1900–1901 nebst Beschreibung des Landes, seiner Sitten und Gebräuche. Berlin, 1909.
Schmidt, Max [Div.-Pfarrer]. Aus unserem Kriegsleben in Südwestafrika. Erlebnisse und Erfahrungen.
Berlin, 1907.
Schumann (Mission Superintendent). “Die Schreckenstage auf der Missionsstation Jakobi.” Missionsberichte der Gesellschaft zur Beförderung der Evangelischen Missionen unter den Heiden zu
Berlin für das Jahr 1906, February 1906, 62–76.
Schwabe, Kurd. Der Krieg in Deutsch-Südwestafrika, 1904–1906. Berlin, 1907.
——. Mit Schwert und Pﬂug in Deutsch-Südwestafrika. Berlin, 1904.
Seeckt, Hans von. Aus meinem Leben 1866–1917; Unter Verwendung des schriftlichen Nachlasses im
Auftrage von Frau Dorothee von Seeckts. Ed. Friedrich von Rabenau. Leipzig, 1938.
Sonnenberg, Else. Wie es am Waterberg zuging; Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte des Hereroaufstandes.
Berlin, 1905.
Stülpnagel, C.. Heisse Tage; Meine Erlebnisse im Kampf gegen die Hereros. Berlin, 1905.
Stürghk, Josef Graf. Im deutschen Grossen Hauptquartier. Leipzig, 1921.
Stürmer, Harry. Zwei Kriegsjahre in Konstantinopel; Skizzen deutsch-jungtürkischer Moral und Politik. Lausanne, 1917.
Thaer, Albrecht von. Generalstabsdienst an der Front und in der OHL. Abhandlungen der Akademie
der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, philologisch-historische Klasse, Dritte Folge, Nr. 40. Ed.
Siegfried Kaehler. Göttingen, 1958.
Tirpitz, Alfred von. Erinnerungen. Leipzig, 1919.
——. Politische Dokumente: Deutsche Ohnmachtspolitik im Weltkriege. Hamburg, 1926.
Treutler, Karl Georg von. Die graue Exzellenz; Zwischen Staatsräson und Vasallentreue; Aus den Papieren des kaiserlichen Gesandten Karl Georg von Treutler. Ed. Karl-Heinz Janssen. Frankfurt,
1971.
Trotha, Lothar von. Meine Bereisung von Deutsch-Ostafrika; Vortrag des Oberst von Trotha gehalten
in der Sitzung der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde am 12. Juni 1897. Berlin, 1897.
Valentini, Rudolf von. Kaiser und Kabinettschef; Nach eigenen Aufzeichnungen und dem Briefwechsel
des Wirklichen Geheimen Rats Rudolf von Valentini Dargestellt von Bernhard Schwertfeger. Ed.
Bernhard Schwertfeger. Oldenburg, 1931.
Wandt, Heinrich. Etappe Gent. Vienna, 1926.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Wegner, Armin. Die Verbrechen der Stunde, die Verbrechen der Ewigkeit. Hamburg, 1982.
347
Westarp, Kuno von. Konservative Politik im letzten Jahrzehnt des Kaiserreiches. 2 vols. Berlin, 1935.
Wild von Hohenborn, Adolf. Briefe und Tagebuchaufzeichnungen des preussischen Generals als
Kriegsminister und Truppenführer im Ersten Weltkrieg. Ed. Helmut Reichold and Gerhard
Granier. Boppard am Rhein, 1986.
Wrisberg, Ernst von. Heer und Heimat, 1914–1918. Leipzig, 1921.
SECONDARY SOURCES
Adas, Michael. Machines as the Measure of Men: Science, Technology, and Ideologies of Western Dominance. Ithaca, N.Y., 1989.
Afflerbach, Holger. “ ‘Bis zum letzten Mann und letzten Groschen?’ Die Wehrpﬂicht im Deutschen
Reich und ihre Auswirkungen auf das militärische Führungsdenken im Ersten Weltkrieg.” In
Die Wehrpﬂicht: Entstehung, Erscheinungsformen und Politisch-Militärische Wirkung, Beiträge
zur Militärgeschichte, vol. 43. Ed. Roland G. Foerster, 71–90. Munich, 1994.
——. Falkenhayn: Politisches Denken und Handeln im Kaiserreich. Munich, 1994.
Ahmad, Feroz. The Young Turks: The Committee of Union and Progress in Turkish Politics, 1908–1914.
Oxford, 1969.
Akçam, Taner. Armenien und der Völkermord; Die Istanbuler Prozesse und die türkische Nationalbewegung. Hamburg, 1996.
Albertini, Luigi. The Origins of the War of 1914. Edited and translated by Isabella Massey. 3 vols. Oxford, 1952–57.
Amery, L. S., ed. The Times History of the War in South Africa. 7 vols. London, 1900–1909.
Anderson, Eugene Newton. The Social and Political Conﬂict in Prussia, 1858–1864. Lincoln, Neb.,
1954.
Andreopoulos, George J. Genocide: Conceptual and Historical Dimensions. Philadelphia, 1994.
Angress, Werner T. “Das deutsche Militär und die Juden im Ersten Weltkrieg.” Militärgeschichtliche
Mitteilungen, no. 1 (1976): 77–88.
Anonymous. “Aus den Denkwürdigkeiten und militärischen Werken des General-Feldmarschalls
Grafen v. Moltke.” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und Heereskunde 7 (1910): 337–61.
——. “Das türkisch-russische Grenzgebiet in Armenien.” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und
Heereskunde 10, no. 3 (1913): 512–22.
——. “Der Train in den Verhandlungen der Kommission für den Reichshaushaltsetat.” MilitärWochenblatt 98, no. 72 (1913): cols. 1643–45.
——. “Informal Social Organization in the Army.” American Journal of Sociology 51, no. 5 (March
1946): 365–70.
——. “Kriegsgefangenentransporte.” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und Heereskunde 9, no. 3
(1912): 505–27.
——. “Patrouillenritte in Südwestafrika (August bis Oktober 1904).” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und Heereskunde 2, no. 3 (1905): 452–95.
——. “Was sagen wir zum Herero-Aufstand?” Barmer Missionsblatt (Barmen) (March 1904), 19.
Anonymous [“M”]. “Etwas über Verpﬂegung.” Militär-Wochenblatt 97, no. 132 (1912): 3032–34.
Appens, Wilhelm. Charleville: Dunkle Punkte aus dem Etappenleben. Dortmund, 1919.
Arendt, Hannah. Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. New York, 1962.
——. On Violence. New York, 1970.
——. The Origins of Totalitarianism. New York, 1951.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
348 Argyris, Chris, and Donald A. Schön. Organizational Learning 2: Theory, Method, Practice. New
York, 1996.
Armeson, Robert B. Total Warfare and Compulsory Labor: A Study of the Military-Industrial Complex in Germany during World War I. The Hague, 1964.
Avant, Deborah D. Political Institutions and Military Change: Lessons from Peripheral Wars. Ithaca,
N.Y., 1994.
Axenfeld, Karl. “Zur Steuer der Wahrheit über die Deportation des armenischen Volkes.” Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift 46, no. 3 (March 1919): 57–64.
——. “Der ostafrikanische Aufstand.” Missionsbericht der Gesellschaft zur Beförderung der evangelischen Missionen unter den Heiden zu Berlin (April 1906), 215–17.
Baba, Marietta L. “Organizational Culture.” In Encyclopedia of Cultural Anthropology, vol. 3, ed.
David Levinson and Melvin Ember, 891–95. New York, 1996.
Baedeker, Diedrich. “Kolonialstatistik und Bemerkungen.” Jahrbuch über die Deutschen Kolonien 4
(1911): 218–37.
Bahrdt, Hans Paul. Die Gesellschaft und ihre Soldaten; Zur Soziologie des Militärs. Munich, 1987.
Bailes, Howard. “Military Aspects of the War.” In The South African War; The Anglo-Boer War
1899–1902, ed. Peter Warwick and S. B. Spies, 65–102. London, 1980.
Balck, Major. “Die Entwicklung der taktischen Anschauungen in der englischen Armee nach dem
Burenkrieg.” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und Heereskunde 3, no. 3 (1906): 449–89.
Bald, Detlef. “Afrikanischer Kampf gegen koloniale Herrschaft; Der Maji-Maji-Aufstand in
Ostafrika.” Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen 19 (1976): 23–50.
——. Der deutsche Generalstab 1859–1939; Reform und Restauration in Ausbildung und Bildung.
Sozialwissenschaftliches Institut der Bundeswehr, Heft 7. Munich, 1977.
Barnett, Correlli. Britain and Her Army, 1509–1970: A Military, Political, and Social Survey. New
York, 1970.
Basler, Werner. Deutschlands Annexionspolitik in Polen und im Baltikum 1914–1918. East Berlin, 1962.
Bauer, Yehuda. Rethinking the Holocaust. New Haven, 2001.
Bauman, Zygmunt. Modernity and the Holocaust. Ithaca, N.Y., 1989.
Becker, Annette. Oubliés de la Grande Guerre. Humanitaire et culture de guerre 1914–1918. Populations occupées, deportés civils, prisonniers de guerre. Paris, 1998.
Belﬁeld, Eversley. The Boer War. London, 1975.
Bentheim, Ferdinand von. Leitfaden zum Unterricht in den Kriegswissenschaften. Für Lehrer und zum
Selbstunterricht. Berlin, 1840.
Berger, Thomas U. “Norms, Identity, and National Security in Germany and Japan.” In The Culture
of National Security: Norms and Identity in World Politics, ed. Peter J. Katzenstein, 317–56. New
York, 1996.
Berghahn, Volker R. Germany and the Approach of War in 1914. 2nd ed. New York, 1993.
——. Militarism: The History of an International Debate, 1861–1979. Leamington Spa, U.K., 1981.
——. “War Preparations and National Identity in Imperial Germany.” In Anticipating Total War:
The German and American Experiences, 1871–1914, ed. Manfred F. Boemeke, Roger Chickering,
and Stig Förster, 307–26. Cambridge, 1999.
——, ed. Militarismus. Cologne, 1975.
Bernard, Viola W., Perry Ottenberg, and Fritz Redl. “Dehumanization.” In Sanctions for Evil: Sources
of Social Destructiveness, ed. Nevitt Sanford and Craig Comstock, 102–24. San Francisco, 1971.
Bernhardi, Friedrich von. “Clausewitz über Angriff und Verteidigung; Versuch einer Widerlegung.”
Beiheft zum Militär-Wochenblatt, no. 12 (1911): 399–412.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
——. Deutschland und der nächste Krieg. Stuttgart, 1912.
349
Best, Geoffrey. “How Right Is Might? Some Aspects of the International Debate about How to Fight
Wars and How to Win Them, 1870–1918.” In War Economy and the Military Mind, ed. Geoffrey
Best and Andrew Wheatcroft, 120–35. London, 1976.
——. Humanity in Warfare: The Modern History of the International Law of Armed Conﬂicts. London, 1980.
Blair, Susan K. “Excuses for Inhumanity: The Official German Response to the 1915 Armenian
Genocide.” Armenian Review 37, no. 4/148 (winter 1984): 14–30.
Blell, Hauptmann Wolfgang. “Das Völkerrecht im Landkriege.” Militär-Wochenblatt 86, no. 70–71
(1901): 1841–47, 1870–75.
Bley, Helmut. South-West Africa under German Rule, 1894–1914. Evanston, Ill., 1971.
Bloxham, Donald. “The Beginning of the Armenian Catastrophe: Comparative and Contextual
Considerations.” In Der Völkermord an den Armeniern und die Shoah, ed. Hans-Lukas Kieser
and Dominik J. Schaller, 101–28. Zurich, 2002.
——. “Power Politics, Prejudice, Protest, and Propaganda: A Reassessment of the German Role in
the Armenian Genocide of World War I.” In Der Völkermord an den Armeniern und die Shoah,
ed. Hans-Lukas Kieser and Dominik J. Schaller, 213–44. Zürich, 2002.
Boemeke, Manfred F., Roger Chickering, and Stig Förster, ed. Anticipating Total War: The German
and American Experiences, 1871–1914. Washington, D.C., 1999.
Boguslawski, Albrecht v. Der kleine Krieg und seine Bedeutung für die Gegenwart; Nach zwei Vorträgen, gehalten in der Militärischen Gesellschaft. Berlin, 1881.
——. “Guerrilla War—A Prussian View.” In The Guerrilla Reader: A Historical Anthology, ed. Walter Laqueur, 106–9. New York, 1977.
Bond, Brian, ed. Victorian Military Campaigns. London, 1967.
Bonn, M. J. “Die wissenschaftliche Begründung der Trotha’schen Eingeborenenpolitik.” Frankfurter
Zeitung, no. 45 (14 September 1909).
Bredow, Wilfried von. “Erkundungsziel Militärwelt; Vorüberlegungen zu einer ethnomethodologischen Erweiterung der Militärsoziologie.” In Militär als Lebenswelt; Streitkräfte im Wandel der
Gesellschaft, ed. Wolfgang R. Vogt, 171–79. Opladen, 1988.
Breit, Gotthard. Das Staats- und Gesellschaftsbild deutscher Generale beider Weltkriege im Spiegel
ihrer Memoiren. Boppard am Rhein, 1973.
Bridgman, Jon. The Revolt of the Herero. Berkeley, 1981.
——, ed. German Africa: A Select Annotated Bibliography. Stanford, 1965.
Brunsson, Nils. “The Irrationality of Action and Action Rationality: Decisions, Ideologies, and Organizational Actions.” Journal of Management Studies 19, no. 1 (1982): 29–44.
Bucholz, Arden. Moltke, Schlieffen, and Prussian War Planning. New York, 1991.
——. Moltke and the German Wars, 1864–1871. New York, 2001.
Bumm, Franz. Deutschlands Gesundheitsverhältnisse unter dem Einﬂuss des Weltkrieges. Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace. Berlin, 1928.
Burchardt, Lothar. Friedenswirtschaft und Kriegsvorsorge: Deutschlands wirschaftliche Rüstungsbestrebungen vor 1914. Boppard am Rhein, 1968.
Büttner, Kurt, and Heinrich Loth, eds. Philosophie der Eroberer und koloniale Wirklichkeit; Ostafrika
1884–1918. Berlin, 1981.
Callwell, Charles Edward. Small Wars: Their Principles and Practices. 3rd ed.; orig. 1906. London, 1976.
Cecil, Hugh, and Peter Liddle, eds. Facing Armageddon: The First World War Experienced. London,
1996.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
350 Chalk, Frank, and Kurt Jonassohn. “The Conceptual Framework.” In The History and Sociology of
Genocide: Analyses and Case Studies, ed. Frank Chalk and Kurt Jonassohn, 3–43. New Haven,
1990.
——. “The History and Sociology of Genocidal Killings.” In Genocide: A Critical Bibliographic Review, ed. Israel W. Charny, 39–59. London, 1988.
——, eds. The History and Sociology of Genocide: Analyses and Case Studies. New Haven, 1990.
Charny, Israel W. “Toward a Generic Deﬁnition of Genocide.” In Genocide: Conceptual and Historical Dimensions, ed. George J. Andreopoulos, 65–94. Philadelphia, 1992.
——, ed. Genocide: A Critical Bibliographical Review. London, 1988.
——, ed. Toward the Understanding and Prevention of Genocide. Boulder, Colo., 1984.
Chickering, Roger. “Der ‘Deutsche Wehrverein’ und die Reform der Deutschen Armee 1912–1914.”
Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen 25 (1979): 7–35.
——. Imperial Germany and the Great War, 1914–1918. Cambridge, 1998.
——. We Men Who Feel Most German: A Cultural Study of the Pan-German League, 1886–1914.
Boston, 1984.
——. “World War I and the Theory of Total War: Reﬂections on the British and German Cases,
1914–1915.” In Great War, Total War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918,
ed. Roger Chickering and Stig Förster, 35–53. Cambridge, 2000.
Chickering, Roger, and Stig Förster, eds. Great War, Total War: Combat and Mobilization on the
Western Front, 1914–1918. Cambridge, 2000.
Class, Heinrich. Wenn ich der Kaiser wär—Politische Wahrheiten und Notwendigkeiten. Leipzig, 1912.
Clayton, Anthony. France, Soldiers, and Africa. London, 1988.
Coetzee, Marilyn Shevin. The German Army League: Popular Nationalism in Wilhelmine Germany.
Oxford, 1990.
Cohen, Paul A. History in Three Keys: The Boxers as Event, Experience, and Myth. New York, 1997.
Conrad, Joseph. Heart of Darkness. London, 1902.
Craig, Gordon. The Politics of the Prussian Army, 1640–1945. Oxford, 1955.
Crothers, George Dunlap. The German Elections of 1907. New York, 1941.
Dabringhaus, Sabine. “Anticipating Total War? The United States and Germany, 1871–1914.” Paper
presented at the conference “Anticipating Total War? The United States and Germany,
1871–1914,” Augsburg, 27–29 July 1994.
——. “An Army on Vacation? The German War in China, 1900–1901.” In Anticipating Total War:
The German and American Experiences, 1871–1914, ed. Manfred F. Boemeke, Roger Chickering,
and Stig Förster, 459–76. Cambridge, 1999.
Dadrian, Vahakn N. “Genocide as a Problem of National and International Law: The World War I
Armenian Case and Its Contemporary Legal Ramiﬁcations.” Yale Journal of International Law
14, no. 2 (summer 1989): 221–334.
——. German Responsibility in the Armenian Genocide: A Review of the Historical Evidence of German Complicity. Watertown, Mass., 1996.
——. The History of the Armenian Genocide: Ethnic Conﬂict from the Balkans to Anatolia to the Caucasus. Providence, R.I., 1995.
——. “The Naim-Andonian Documents on the World War I Destruction of the Ottoman Armenians: The Anatomy of Genocide.” International Journal of Middle East Studies 18, no. 3 (1986):
311–60.
——. “A Textual Analysis of the Key Indictment of the Turkish Military Tribunal Investigating the
Armenian Genocide.” Armenian Review 44, no. 1/173 (spring 1991): 1–36.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
——. “A Typology of Genocide.” International Review of Modern Sociology 5 (fall 1975): 201–12.
351
Dahlmann, Dittmar. “Die Deportationen der deutschen Bevölkerungsgruppe in Russland und in
der Sowjetunion 1915 und 1941; Ein Vergleich.” In Ausweisung und Deportation: Formen der
Zwangsmigration in der Geschichte, ed. Andreas Gestrich, 103–14. Stuttgart, 1995.
Dahn, Felix. “Der deutsch-französische Krieg und das Völkerrecht.” In Bausteine; Gesammelte
kleine Schriften (Berlin, 1884), 122–224.
——. Das Kriegsrecht; Kurze, volksthümliche Darstellung für Jedermann zumal für den deutschen Soldaten. Würzburg, 1870.
Deák, István. Beyond Nationalism: A Social and Political History of the Habsburg Officer Corps,
1848–1918. Oxford, 1990.
Dedering Tilman. “The German-Herero War of 1904: Revisionism of Genocide or Imaginary Historiography.” Journal of Southern African Studies 19, no. 1 (March 1993): 80–88.
Dehio, Ludwig. “Um den deutschen Militarismus.” Historische Zeitschrift 180 (1955): 43–64.
Deist, Wilhelm. “Armee in Staat und Gesellschaft, 1890–1914.” In his Militär, Staat, und Gesellschaft,
19–42. Munich, 1991.
——. “The German Army, the Authoritarian Nation-State, and Total War.” In State, Society, and
Mobilization in Europe during the First World War, ed. John Horne, 160–72. Cambridge, 1997.
——. “Der militärische Zusammenbruch des Kaiserreichs; Zur Realität der ‘Dolchstosslegende.’ ”
In his Militär, Staat, und Gesellschaft, 211–33. Munich, 1991.
——. Militär und Innenpolitik im Weltkrieg, 1914–1918. 2 vols. Quellen zur Geschichte des Parlamentarismus und der Politischen Parteien. Düsseldorf, 1970.
——. “Remarks on the Precondition to Waging War in Prussia-Germany, 1866–1871.” In On the
Road to Total War: The American Civil War and the German Wars of Uniﬁcation, 1861–1871, ed.
Stig Förster and Jörg Nagler, 311–25. New York, 1997.
——. “The Road to Ideological War: Germany, 1918–1945.” In The Making of Strategy: Rulers, States,
and War, ed. Williamson Murray, MacGregor Knox, and Alvin Bernstein, 358–65. Cambridge,
1984.
——. “Strategy and Unlimited Warfare in Germany: Moltke, Falkenhayn, and Ludendorff.” In
Great War, Total War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918, ed. Roger
Chickering and Stig Förster, 265–79. Cambridge, 2000.
——. “Voraussetzungen innenpolitischen Handelns des Militärs im Ersten Weltkrieg.” In his Militär, Staat, und Gesellschaft; Studien zur preussisch-deutschen Militärgeschichte, 103–52. Munich,
1991.
——. “Zur Institution des Militärbefehlshabers und Obermilitärbefehlshabers im Ersten
Weltkrieg.” Jahrbuch der Geschichte Mittel- und Osteuropas 13–14 (1965): 222–40.
Demeter, Karl. Das deutsche Offizierkorps in Gesellschaft und Staat, 1650–1945. 2nd ed. Frankfurt,
1962.
Dessauer, Lothar. Der Militärbefehlshaber und seine Verordnungsgewalt in der Praxis der Weltkrieges.
Berlin, 1918.
de Vries, Johannes Lucas. Namibia—Mission und Politik (1880–1918). Der Einﬂuss der deutschen
Kolonialismus auf die Missionsarbeit der Rheinischen Missionsgesellschaft im früheren DeutschSüdwestafrika. Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1980.
Dinkel, Christoph. “German Officers and the Armenian Genocide.” Armenian Review 44, no. 1/173
(spring 1991).
Dobrowski, Michael N., and Isidor Wallimann, eds. Genocide in Our Time: An Annotated Bibliography with Analytical Introductions. Ann Arbor, 1994.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
352 Dove, Karl. Deutsch-Südwestafrika. 2nd ed. Berlin, 1913.
Dower, John W. War without Mercy: Race and Power in the Paciﬁc. New York, 1986.
Drechsler, Horst. Aufstände in Südwestafrika; Der Kampf der Herero und Nama 1904 bis 1907 gegen
die deutsche Kolonialherrschaft. Berlin, 1984.
——. “Let Us Die Fighting”: The Struggle of the Herero and the Nama against German Imperialism,
1884–1915. Trans. Bernd Zollner; orig. 1966. London, 1980.
——. Südwestafrika unter deutscher Kolonialherrschaft. Berlin, 1966.
du Preez, Peter. Genocide: The Psychology of Mass Murder. London, 1994.
Dülffer, Jost. Regeln gegen den Krieg? Die Haager Friedenskonferenzen 1899 und 1907 in der Internationalen Politik. Berlin, 1981.
Duppler, Jörg, and Gerhard P. Gross, eds. Kriegsende 1918: Ereignis, Wirkung, Nachwirkung. Munich, 1999.
Dupuy, Colonel Trevor Nevitt. A Genius for War: The German Army and the General Staff,
1807–1945. Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1977.
Duster, Troy. “Conditions for Guilt-Free Massacre.” In Sanctions for Evil: Sources of Social Destructiveness, ed. Nevitt Sanford and Craig Comstock, 25–36. San Francisco, 1971.
Eley, Geoff. Reshaping the German Right: Radical Nationalism and Political Change after Bismarck.
New Haven, 1983.
Elsner, Lothar. “Ausländerbeschäftigung und Zwangsarbeitspolitik in Deutschland während des Ersten Weltkrieges.” In Auswanderer-Wanderarbeiter-Gastarbeiter; Bevölkerung, Arbeitsmarkt und
Wanderung in Deutschland seit der Mitte des 19. Jahrhunderts, ed. Klaus J. Bade, 527–57. Ostﬁldern, 1984.
——. “Der Übergang zur Zwangsarbeit für ausländische Arbeiter in der deutschen Landwirtschaft
zu Beginn des 1. Weltkriegs.” Wissenschaftliche Zeitschift der Wilhelm-Pieck-Universität Rostock,
Gesellschafts- und Sprachwissenschaftliche Reihe 26, no. 3 (1977): 291–98.
Endres, Franz. “Militarismus als Geistesverfassung des Nichtmilitärs.” In Militarismus, ed. Volker R.
Berghahn, 99–101. Cologne, 1979.
Epkenhans, Michael. “Neuere Forschungen zur Geschichte des Ersten Weltkrieges.” Archiv für
Sozialgeschichte 38 (1998): 458–87.
——. “Die Politik der militärischen Führung 1918: ‘Kontinuität der Illusionen und das Dilemma
der Wahrheit’.” In Kriegsende 1918: Ereignis, Wirkung, Nachwirkung, ed. Jörg Duppler and Gerhard P. Gross, 217–33. Munich, 1999.
Epstein, Klaus. “Erzberger and the German Colonial Scandals, 1905–1910.” English Historical Review
74 (1959): 637–63.
Erdmann, Karl-Dietrich. Der Erste Weltkrieg. 5th ed. Munich, 1985.
Erickson, Edward J. Ordered to Die: A History of the Ottoman Army in the First World War. Westport, Conn., 2001.
Esherick, Joseph W. The Origins of the Boxer Uprising. Berkeley, 1987.
Evans, R.J.W., and Hartmut Pogge von Strandmann, eds. The Coming of the First World War. Oxford, 1989.
Farrar, Lancelot L. Arrogance and Anxiety: The Ambivalence of German Power, 1848–1914. Iowa City,
1981.
——. The Short-War Illusion: German Policy, Strategy, and Domestic Affairs, August–December 1914.
Santa Barbara, 1973.
Featherstone, Donald. Colonial Small Wars, 1837–1901. Newton Abbot, U.K., 1973.
Fein, Helen. “Genocide, Terror, Life Integrity, and War Crimes: The Case for Discrimination.” In

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Genocide: Conceptual and Historical Dimensions, ed. George J. Andreopoulous, 95–107. 353
Philadelphia, 1992.
——. Imperial Crime and Punishment: The Massacre at Jallianwala Bagh and British Judgment,
1919–1920. Honolulu, 1977.
Felber, Roland, and Horst Rostek. Der “Hunnenkrieg” Kaiser Wilhelms II. Imperialistische Intervention in China 1900–01. Illustrierte Historische Hefte Nr. 45. Berlin, 1987.
Feld, Maury. The Structure of Violence: Armed Forces and Social Systems. Beverly Hills, Calif., 1977.
Feldman, Gerald. Army, Industry, and Labor in Germany, 1914–1918. Princeton, 1966.
——. Hugo Stinnes; Biographie eines Industriellen, 1870–1921. Munich, 1998.
——. “Hugo Stinnes and the Prospect of War before 1914.” In Anticipating Total War: The German
and American Experiences, 1871–1914, ed. Manfred F. Boemeke, Roger Chickering, and Stig
Förster, 77–95. Cambridge, 1999.
——. “War Aims, State Intervention, and Business Leadership in Germany: The Case of Hugo
Stinnes.” In Great War, Total War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918, ed.
Roger Chickering and Stig Förster. Cambridge, 2000.
Ferguson, Niall. The Pity of War: Explaining World War I. New York, 1998.
Finnemore, Martha. “Constructing Norms of Humanitarian Intervention.” In The Culture of National Security: Norms and Identity in World Politics, ed. Peter J. Katzenstein, 153–85. New York,
1996.
Fischer, Fritz. Germany’s Aims in the First World War. New York, 1967.
——. Weltmacht oder Niedergang; Deutschland im Ersten Weltkrieg. Frankfurt, 1965.
——. World Power or Decline: The Controversy over Germany’s Aims in the First World War. New
York, 1974.
Foerster, Wolfgang. Der Feldherr Ludendorff im Unglück: Eine Studie über seine seelische Haltung in
der Endphase des ersten Weltkrieges. Wiesbaden, 1952.
Foley, Robert T. “Schlieffen’s Last Kriegsspiel.” War Studies Journal 3 (1998): 117–33; 4: 97–115.
——. “The Origins of the Schlieffen Plan.” War in History 10, no. 2 (April 2003): 222–32.
Förster, Stig. “Der deutsche Generalstab und die Illusion des kurzen Krieges, 1871–1914: Metakritik
eines Mythos.” In Lange und kurze Wege in den Ersten Weltkrieg, ed. Johannes Burkhardt et al.,
115–58. Munich, 1996.
——. Der doppelte Militarismus; Die deutsche Heeresrüstungspolitik zwischen Status-Quo-Sicherung
und Aggression, 1890–1913. Stuttgart, 1985.
——. “Der Sinn des Krieges; Die Deutsche Offizierselite zwischen Religion und Sozialdarwinsimus,
1870–1914.” In “Gott mit Uns”; Nation, Religion und Gewalt im 19. und frühen 20. Jahrhundert.
Ed. Gerd Krumeich, 193–211. Göttingen, 2000.
——. “Dreams and Nightmares: German Military Leadership and the Images of Future Warfare,
1871–1914.” In Anticipating Total War: The German and American Experiences, 1871–1914, ed.
Manfred F. Boemeke, Roger Chickering, and Stig Förster, 343–76. Cambridge, 1999.
——. “Militär und staatsbürgerliche Partizipation; Die allgemeine Wehrpﬂicht im Deutschen
Kaiserreich 1871–1914.” In Die Wehrpﬂicht: Entstehung, Erscheinungsformen und Politisch-militärische Wirkung, Beiträge zur Militärgeschichte, vol. 43, ed. Roland G. Foerster, 55–70. Munich, 1994.
——. “Optionen der Kriegführung im Zeitalter des ‘Volkskrieges’—Zu Helmuth von Moltkes militärisch-politischen Überlegungen nach den Erfahrungen der Einigungskriege.” In Militärische
Verantwortung in Staat und Gesellschaft; 175 Jahre Generalstabsausbildung in Deutschland, ed.
Detlev Bald, 83–108. Koblenz, 1986.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
354 ——. “The Prussian Triangle of Leadership in the Face of the People’s War: A Reassessment of the
Conﬂict between Bismarck and Moltke, 1870–71.” In On the Road to Total War: The American
Civil War and the German Wars of Uniﬁcation, 1861–1871, ed. Stig Förster. New York, 1997.
Förster, Stig, and Jörg Nagler, eds. On the Road to Total War: The American Civil War and the German Wars of Uniﬁcation, 1861–1871. New York, 1997.
Fourniau, C. “Colonial Wars before 1914: The Case of France in Indochina.” In Imperialism and
War: Essays on Colonial Wars in Asia and Africa, ed. J. A. de Moor and H. L. Wesseling, 72–86.
Leiden, 1989.
François, Hermann von. Der Hottentotten-Aufstand; Studie über die Vorgänge im Namalande vom
Januar 1904 bis zum Januar 1905 und die Aussichten der Niederwerfung des Aufstandes. Berlin,
1905.
François, Curt v. Kriegführung in Süd-Afrika. Berlin, 1900.
François, Major-General v. “Der Herero-Aufstand.” Militär-Wochenblatt 89:1–2 (1904), Hefte 18, 19,
21, 33, 34, 40, 49, 61, 69, and 76.
François, Major v. Lehren aus dem Südafrikanischen Kriege für das Deutsche Heer. Berlin, 1900.
French, David. “The Strategy of Unlimited Warfare? Kitchener, Robertson, and Haig.” In Great
War, Total War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918, ed. Roger Chickering
and Stig Förster, 281–95. Cambridge, 2000.
Frey, Marc. “Bullying the Neutrals: The Case of the Netherlands.” In Great War, Total War: Combat
and Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918, ed. Roger Chickering and Stig Förster, 227–44.
Cambridge, 2000.
Frevert, Ute. Die kasernierte Nation: Militärdienst und Zivilgesellschaft in Deutschland. Munich,
2001.
——. “Der Militär als ‘Schule der Männlichkeit’: Erwartungen, Angebote, Erfahrungen im 19.
Jahrhundert.” In Militär und Gesellschaft im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert, 145–73. Stuttgart, 1997.
——, ed. Militär und Gesellschaft im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert. Stuttgart, 1997.
Freytag-Loringhoven, Hugo v. “Die Exerzier-Reglements für die Infanterie von 1812, 1847, 1888, und
1906; Ein Jahrhundert taktischer Entwicklung; Vortrag gehalten in der Militärischen
Gesellschaft zu Berlin am 14. November 1906.” Berlin, 1906.
Friedrichsmeyer, Sara, Sara Lennox, and Susanne Zantop, eds. The Imperialist Imagination: German
Colonialism and Its Legacy. Ann Arbor, 1998.
Gasman, Daniel. The Scientiﬁc Origins of National Socialism: Social Darwinism in Ernst Haeckel and
the German Monist League. London, 1971.
Gatzke, Hans W. Germany’s Drive to the West. Baltimore, 1966.
Geinitz, Christian. “The First Air War against Noncombatants: Strategic Bombing of German Cities
in World War I.” In Great War, Total War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front,
1914–1918, ed. Roger Chickering and Stig Förster, 207–25. Cambridge, 2000.
Geiss, Imanuel. “The Civilian Dimension of the War.” In Facing Armageddon: The First World War
Experienced, ed. Hugh Cecil and Peter Liddle, 16–24. London, 1996.
——. July 1914: The Outbreak of the First World War: Selected Documents. New York, 1968.
——. Der polnische Grenzstreifen, 1914–1918. Hamburg, 1960.
Genocide: Crime against Humanity. Special issue of the Armenian Review 37, no. 1 (1984).
George, Alexander. “The Causal Nexus between Cognitive Beliefs and Decision-Making Behavior:
The ‘Operational Code’ Belief System.” In Psychological Models in International Politics, ed.
Laurence S. Falkowski, 95–124. Boulder, Colo., 1979.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
——. “The ‘Operational Code’: A Neglected Approach to the Study of Political Leaders and Deci- 355
sion-Making.” International Studies Quarterly 13 (June 1969): 190–222.
Gestrich, Andreas, ed. Ausweisung und Deportation: Formen der Zwangsmigration in der Geschichte.
Stuttgart, 1995.
Gewald, Jan-Bart. Herero Heroes: A Socio-Political History of the Herero of Namibia, 1890–1923. Oxford, 1999.
——. Towards Redemption: A Socio-Political History of the Herero of Namibia between 1890 and 1923.
Leiden, 1996.
Geyer, Michael. “German Strategy in the Age of Machine Warfare, 1914–45.” In Makers of Modern
Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret, 527–97. Princeton, 1986.
——. “Die Geschichte des deutschen Militärs von 1860 bis 1945; Ein Bericht über die
Forschungslage (1945–1975).” In Die moderne deutsche Geschichte in der internationalen
Forschung 1945–1975, ed. Hans-Ulrich Wehler, 256–86. Göttingen, 1978.
——. “Insurrectionary Warfare: The German Debate about a Levée en Masse in October 1918.” Journal of Modern History 73 (September 2001): 459–527.
——. “Militarismus.” In Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe; Historisches Lexikon zur politische-sozialen
Sprache in Deutschland, vol. 4, ed. Otto Brunner, Werner Conze, and Reinhart Koselleck, 1–48.
Stuttgart, 1978.
——. “The Past as Future: The German Officer Corps as Profession.” In German Professions,
1800–1950, ed. Geoffrey Cocks and Konrad H. Jarausch, 183–212. Oxford, 1990.
——. “The Place of the Second World War in German Memory and History.” New German Critique, no. 71 (spring–summer 1997): 5–40.
Goerlitz, Walter. Kleine Geschichte des deutschen Generalstabes. Berlin, 1967.
Goltz, Colmar von der. “Stärke und Schwäche des Türkischen Reichs.” Deutsche Rundschau 93, no.
1 (December 1897): 46–70.
Goodenough, Ward H. “Culture.” In Encyclopedia of Cultural Anthropology, vol. 1, ed. David Levinson and Melvin Ember, 291–99. New York, 1996.
Gromaire, Georges. L’occupation allemande en France, 1914–1918. Paris, 1925.
Gross, Gerhard P. “Eine Frage der Ehre? Die Marineführung und der letzte Flottenvorstoss 1918.” In
Kriegsende 1918: Ereignis, Wirkung, Nachwirkung, ed. Jörg Duppler and Gerhard P. Gross,
349–65. Munich, 1999.
Gründer, Horst. Geschichte der deutschen Kolonien. 3rd ed. Paderborn, 1995.
Gumz, Jonathan. “Streams of Violence in the Land of Milk and Honey”: Habsburg Serbia in the Era
of Total War, 1915–1918.” Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, 2003. Accessed 4 July 2003 at
cas.uchicago.edu/workshops/meurhist/paper.pdf.
Guse, Felix. “Der Armenieraufstand 1915 und seine Folgen.” Wissen und Wehr 10 (1925): 609–21.
Haeften, v. [Hauptmann]. “Eine deutsche Kolonialarmee.” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung
und Heereskunde 2, no. 4 (1905): 609–31.
Hagenlücke, Heinz. Deutsche Vaterlandspartei; Die nationale Rechte am Ende des Kaiserreichs. Düsseldorf, 1997.
Hairapetian, Armen. “ ‘Race Problems’ and the Armenian Genocide: The State Department File.”
Armenian Review 37 (spring 1984): 41–59.
Harff, Barbara. “The Etiology of Genocides.” In Genocide and the Modern Age: Etiology and Case
Studies of Mass Death, ed. Isidor Wallimann and Michael Dobrowski. New York, 1987.
Harff, Barbara, and Ted Robert Gurr. “Toward Empirical Theory of Genocides and Politicides:

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
356

Identiﬁcation and Measurement of Cases since 1945.” International Studies Quarterly 32 (1988):
359–71.
Hartmann, Julius von. “Militärische Nothwendigkeit und Humanität; ein kritischer Versuch.”
Deutsche Rundschau 13–14 (1877–78): vol. 13: 111–28 and 450–71; vol. 14: 71–91.
Hatke, Brigitte. Hugo Stinnes und die drei deutsch-belgischen Gesellschaften von 1916. Stuttgart, 1990.
Heinemann, Ulrich. Die verdrängte Niederlage; Politische Öffentlichkeit und Kriegsschuldfrage in der
Weimarer Republik. Göttingen, 1983.
Herbert, Aubrey. “Talat Pasha.” Blackwood’s Magazine 208, no. 1290 (April 1923): 425–40.
Herbert, Ulrich. Geschichte der Ausländerbeschäftigung in Deutchland 1880 bis 1980; Saisonarbeiter,
Zwangsarbeiter, Gastarbeiter. Berlin, 1986.
——. “Zwangsarbeit als Lernprozess; Zur Beschäftigung ausländischer Arbeiter in der westdeutschen Industrie im Ersten Weltkrieg.” Archiv für Sozialgeschichte 24 (1984): 285–304.
Herrmann, David G. The Arming of Europe and the Making of the First World War. Princeton, 1996.
Herwig, Holger. The First World War: Germany and Austria-Hungary, 1914–1918. London, 1997.
——. “Luxury Fleet”: The Imperial German Navy, 1888–1918. London, 1980.
——. “Total Rhetoric, Limited War: Germany’s U-Boat Campaign, 1917–1918.” In Great War, Total
War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918, ed. Roger Chickering and Stig
Förster, 189–206. Cambridge, 2000.
Hiller von Gaertringen, Friedrich Frhr. “ ‘Dolchstoss-Diskussion’ und ‘Dolchstoss-Legende’ im
Wandel von vier Jahrzehnten.” In Geschichte und Gegenwartsbewusstsein. Festschrift für Hans
Rothfels zum 70. Geburtstag, 122–60. Göttingen, 1963.
Hirschfeld, Gerhard, Gerd Krumeich, Dieter Langewiesche, and Hans-Peter Ullmann, eds. Kriegserfahrungen; Studien zur Sozial- und Mentalitätsgeschichte des Ersten Weltkrieges. Stuttgart, 1997.
Hobhouse, Emily. The Brunt of War and Where It Fell. London, 1902.
——. War without Glamour. London, 1924.
Hobson, John A. Imperialism: A Study. 2nd ed., 1902. Ann Arbor, 1967.
Hoffman, Conrad. In the Prison Camps of Germany: A Narrative of the “Y” Service among Prisoners
of War. New York, 1920.
Hofmann, Hanns Hubert, ed. Das deutsche Offizierkorps, 1860–1960. Boppard am Rhein, 1980.
Holmes, Terence M. “The Reluctant March on Paris: A Reply to Terence Zuber’s ‘The Schlieffen
Plan Reconsidered’.” War in History 8, no. 2 (April 2001): 208–32.
——. “The Real Thing: A Reply to Terence Zuber’s ‘Terence Holmes Reinvents the Schlieffen
Plan’.” War in History 9, no. 1 (January 2002): 111–20.
Holquist, Peter. “To Count, to Extract, to Exterminate: Population Statistics and Populaton Politics
in Late Imperial and Soviet Russia.” In A State of Nations: Empire and Nation-Making in the Age
of Lenin and Stalin, ed. Terry Martin and Ronald Suny, 111–44. Oxford, 2001.
Hoover, Herbert. An American Epic, vol. 1: Introduction: The Relief of Belgium and Northern France,
1914–1930. Chicago, 1959.
Horne, John. “Introduction: Mobilizing for ‘Total War,’ 1914–1918.” In State, Society, and Mobilization in Europe during the First World War, ed. John Horne, 1–18. Cambridge, 1997.
Horne, John, and Alan Kramer. German Atrocities, 1914: A History of Denial. New Haven, 2001.
——. “German ‘Atrocities’ and Franco-German Opinion, 1914: The Evidence of German Soldiers’
Diaries.” Journal of Modern History 66, no. 1 (March 1994): 1–33.
——. “War beween Soldiers and Enemy Civilians, 1914–1915.” In Great War, Total War: Combat and
Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918, ed. Roger Chickering and Stig Förster, 153–68.
Cambridge, 2000.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Horowitz, Irving Louis. Taking Lives: Genocide and State Power. New Brunswick, N.J., 1980.
357
Housepian, Marjorie. The Smyrna Affair. New York, 1966.
Hovannisian, Armen K. “The United States Inquiry and the Armenian Question, 1917–1919.” Armenian Review 37 (spring 1984): 146–63.
Hovannisian, Richard G. “The Armenians in Turkey.” In The History and Sociology of Genocide, ed.
Frank Chalk and Kurt Jonassohn, 249–66. New Haven, 1990.
Howard, Michael. “Colonial Wars and European Wars.” In Imperialism and War: Essays on Colonial
Wars in Asia and Africa, ed. J. A. de Moor and H. L. Wesseling, 218–23. Leiden, 1989.
——. The Franco-Prussian War: The German Invasion of France, 1870–1871. New York, 1961.
Hughes, Daniel J. “Schlichting, Schlieffen, and the Prussian Theory of War in 1914.” Journal of Military History 59 (April 1995): 257–78.
Hull, Isabel V. The Entourage of Kaiser Wilhelm II, 1888–1918. Cambridge, 1982.
——. “Military Culture, Wilhelm II, and the End of the Monarchy in the First World War.” In The
Kaiser, ed. Wilhelm Deist and Annika Mombauer, 235–58. Cambridge, 2003.
Huntington, Samuel P. The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of Civil-Military Relations.
Cambridge, 1957.
Iliffe, John. A Modern History of Tanganyika. Cambridge, 1979.
——. Tanganyika under German Rule, 1905–1912. Cambridge, 1969.
Immanuel. “Der offensive Geist in unserer neuen Felddienst-Ordnung.” Militär-Wochenblatt 93,
no. 71 (1908): cols. 1664–67.
International Council on Archives. Quellen zur Geschichte Afrikas südlich der Sahara in den Archiven
der Bundesrepublik Deutschland. Zug, 1970.
Irle, J. Was soll aus den Herero werden? Gütersloh, 1906.
Jackson, Robert. The Prisoners, 1914–1918. New York, 1989.
Jahr, Christoph. “Zivilisten als Kriegsgefangene; Die Internierung von ‘Feindstaaten-Ausländern’ in
Deutschland während des Ersten Weltkrieges am Beispiel des ‘Engländerlagers’ in Ruhleben.”
In In der Hand des Feindes; Kriegsgefangenschaft von der Antike bis zum Zweiten Weltkrieg, ed.
Rüdiger Overmans, 297–322. Cologne, 1999.
Janis, I. L. “Groupthink among Policy Makers.” In Sanctions for Evil: Sources of Social Destructiveness, ed. N. Sanford and C. Comstock. San Francisco, 1971.
Janowitz, Morris. “The Ineffective Soldier: A Review Article.” Administrative Science Quarterly 5, no.
2 (September 1960): 296–303.
——. Military Conﬂict: Essays in the Institutional Analysis of War and Peace. Beverly Hills, Calif.,
1975.
——. The Professional Soldier: A Social and Political Portrait. New York, 1971.
Janssen, Karl-Heinz. Der Kanzler und der General; Die Führungskrise um Bethmann Hollweg und
Falkenhayn, 1914–1916. Göttingen, 1967.
Jochmann, Werner. “Die Ausbreitung des Antisemitismus.” In Deutsches Judentum in Krieg und
Revolution, 1916–1923, ed. Werner E. Mosse, 409–510. Tübingen, 1971.
Jonassohn, Kurt, and Frank Chalk. “A Typology of Genocide and Some Implications for the Human
Rights Agenda,” In Genocide and the Modern Age: Etiology and Case Studies of Mass Death, ed.
Isidor Wallimann and Michael N. Dobrowski, 3–20. New York, 1987.
Kaehler, Siegfried A. “Vier quellenkritische Untersuchungen zum Kriegsende 1918.” Nachrichten der
Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen I. Philologisch-Historische Klasse, No. 8, 423–81.
Göttingen, 1960.
Kaiser, Hilmar. “The Baghdad Railways and the Armenian Genocide, 1915–1916: A Case Study in

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
358

German Resistance and Complicity.” In Remembrance and Denial: The Case of the Armenian
Genocide, ed. Richard Hovannisian, 67–122. Detroit, 1999.
Kalshoven, Frits. Belligerent Reprisals. Leyden, 1971.
Kaminski, Andrzej J. Konzenstrationslager 1896 bis Heute; Geschichte, Funktion, Typologie. Orig.
1982. Munich, 1990.
Kanya-Forster, A. S. The Conquest of the Western Sudan: A Study of French Military Imperialism.
Cambridge, 1969.
——. “The French Marines and the Conquest of the Western Sudan, 1880–1899.” In Imperialism and
War: Essays on Colonial Wars in Asia and Africa, ed. J. A. de Moor and H. L. Wesseling, 121–45.
Leiden, 1989.
Katzenstein, Peter J., ed. The Culture of National Security: Norms and Identity in World Politics. New
York, 1996.
Kehr, Eckart. “Zur Genesis des Königlich Preussischen Reserveoffiziers.” In Primat der Innenpolitik,
ed. Hans-Ulrich Wehler, 53–63. Berlin, 1965.
Keiger, John F. V. “Poincaré, Clemenceau, and the Quest for Total Victory.” In Great War, Total
War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918, ed. Roger Chickering and Stig
Förster, 247–63. Cambridge, 2000.
Kelman, Herbert C. “Violence without Moral Restraint: Reﬂections on the Dehumanization of Victims and Victimizers.” Journal of Social Issues 29, no. 4 (1973): 25–61.
Kerchnawe, Hugo, et al. Die Militärverwaltung in den von österreich-ungarischen Truppen besetzten
Gebieten. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. New Haven, 1928.
Ketchum, J. Davidson. Ruhleben: A Prison Camp Society. Toronto, 1965.
Kielmansegg, Peter Graf. Deutschland und der Erste Weltkrieg. Frankfurt am Main, 1968.
Kier, Elizabeth. “Culture and French Military Doctrine before World War II.” In The Culture of National Security: Norms and Identity in World Politics, ed. Peter J. Katzenstein, 186–215. New York,
1996.
——. Imagining War: French and British Military Doctrine between the Wars. Princeton, 1997.
Killingray, David. “Colonial Warfare in West Africa, 1870–1914.” In Imperialism and War: Essays on
Colonial Wars in Asia and Africa, ed. J. A. de Moor and H. L. Wesseling, 146–67. Leiden, 1989.
Killingray, David, and David Omissi, eds. Guardians of Empire: The Armed Forces of the Colonial
Powers c. 1700–1964. Manchester, 2000.
Kilmann, Ralph H., Mary J. Saxton, and Roy Serpa, eds. Gaining Control of Corporate Culture. San
Francisco, 1985.
Kitchen, Martin. The German Offensives of 1918. Charleston, S.C., 2001.
——. The German Officer Corps, 1890–1914. Oxford, 1973.
——. The Silent Dictatorship: The Politics of the German High Command under Hindenburg and Ludendorff, 1916–1918. New York, 1976.
Klein, Fritz, ed. Deutschland im Ersten Weltkrieg. 3 vols. Berlin, 1968–69.
Klein, Paul, and Ekkehard Lippert, eds. Militär und Gesellschaft; Bibliographie zur Militärsoziologie.
Munich, 1979.
Kluckhohn, Clyde. “The Concept of Culture.” In Culture and Behavior, ed. Richard Kluckhohn,
19–73. New York, 1962.
Koch, H. W. “Social Darwinism as a Factor in the ‘New Imperialism.’ ” In The Origins of the First
World War, ed. H. W. Koch, 319–42. London, 1984.
——, ed. The Origins of the First World War: Great Power Rivalry and German War Aims. 2nd ed.
London, 1984.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Köhler, Ludwig. Die Staatsverwaltung der besetzten Gebiete. Vol.: Belgien. Carnegie Foundation for 359
International Peace. New Haven, 1927.
Kramer, Alan. “ ‘Greueltaten.’ Zum Problem der deutschen Kriegsverbrechen in Belgien und
Frankreich 1914.” In “Keiner fühlt sich hier mehr als Mensch . . .”: Erlebnis und Wirkung des Ersten Weltkriegs, ed. Gerhard Hirschfeld and Gerd Krumeich, 83–112. Essen, 1993.
Krause, Andreas. Scapa Flow; Die Selbstversenkung der Wilhelminischen Flotte. Berlin, 1999.
Krüger, Friederike, and Michael Salewski. “Die Verantwortung der militärischen Führung
deutscher Streitkräfte in den Jahren 1918 und 1945.” In Kriegsende 1918: Ereignis, Wirkung, Nachwirkung, ed. Jörg Duppler and Gerhard P. Gross, 377–98. Munich, 1999.
Krüger, Gesine. Kriegsbewältigung und Geschichtsbewusstsein; Realität, Deutung und Verarbeitung
des deutschen Kolonialkriegs in Namibia 1904 bis 1907. Göttingen, 1999.
Kuhl, Hermann von. Der Weltkrieg 1914–1918; Dem deutschen Volke dargestellt. 2 vols. Berlin, 1929.
Kuhn, Ph. (Stabsarzt). “Die Gesundheitsverhältnisse in unseren Kolonien.” Jahrbuch über die
deutschen Kolonien 1 (1908): 42–61; 2 (1909): 79–96.
Kundhardt von Schmidt, General-Major. “Betrachtungen über die Verluste der deutschen Heere im
Kriege gegen Frankreich 1870–71.” Militär-Wochenblatt 95, no. 43 (1910): 1040–45.
Kutz, Martin. Realitätsﬂucht und Aggression im deutschen Militär. Baden-Baden, 1990.
Langdon, John W. July 1914: The Long Debate, 1918–1990. New York, 1991.
Langewiesche, Dieter. “Die Rolle des Militärs in den Europäischen Revolutionen von 1848/49.” In
Ungarn-Deutschland, ed. W. Bachofer and H. Fischer, 273–88. Munich, 1983.
Laqueur, Walter. Guerrilla: A Historical and Critical Study. London, 1977.
Lasson, Adolf. Princip und Zukunft des Völkerrechts. Berlin, 1871.
Lau, Brigitte. “Uncertain Certainties: The Herero-German War of 1904.” Mibagus 2 (April 1989):
4–5, 8.
Legro, Jeffrey W. Cooperation under Fire: Anglo-German Restraint during World War II. Ithaca, N.Y.,
1995.
——. “Military Culture and Inadvertent Escalation in World War II.” International Security 18, no.
4 (spring 1994): 108–42.
LeJuge, Lt. Col. “Eine amerikanische Stimme über ‘German Militarism.’ ” Militär-Wochenblatt 99,
no. 167–68 (1914): 3604–8.
Lemkin, Raphael. Axis Rule in Occupied Europe: Laws of Occupation, Analysis of Government, Proposals for Redress. Washington, D.C., 1944.
Lerman, Katherine. The Chancellor as Courtier: Bernhard von Bülow and the Governance of Germany, 1900–1909. Cambridge, 1990.
Leutwein, Theodor. “Die Kämpfe der Kaiserlichen Schutztruppe in Deutsch-Südwestafrika in den
Jahren 1894–1896, sowie die sich hieraus für uns ergebenden Lehren.” Vortrag, gehalten in der
Militärischen Gesellschaft zu Berlin am 19. Februar 1898. Beiheft zum Militär-Wochenblatt, no. 1
(1899): 1–30.
——. “Die Rassengegensätze als eine der Ursachen des südwestafrikanischen Aufstandes.” Deutsche
Revue, October 1911.
Leverkuehn, Paul. Posten auf ewiger Wache; Aus dem abenteuerreichen Leben des Max von ScheubnerRichter. Essen, 1938.
Levitt, Barbara, and James G. March. “Organizational Learning.” Annual Review of Sociology 14
(1988): 319–40.
Lewis, Bernard. The Emergence of Modern Turkey. Oxford, 1961.
Libaridian, Gerard J. “The Ultimate Repression: The Genocide of the Armenians, 1915–1917.” In

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
360

Genocide and the Modern Age: Etiology and Case Studies of Mass Death, ed. Isidor Wallimann
and Michael N. Dobrowski, 203–36. New York, 1987.
Lindeiner gen. von Wildau, Major. “Gefangenenfürsorge.” Militär-Wochenblatt 98, no. 126 (1913):
2855–58.
Lindqvist, Sven. ‘Exterminate All the Brutes’: One Man’s Odyssey into the Heart of Darkness and the
Origins of European Genocide. Trans. Joan Tate. New York, 1996.
Liulevicius, Vejas Gabriel. War Land on the Eastern Front: Culture, National Identity, and German
Occupation in World War I. Cambridge, 2000.
Lohr, Eric. “Enemy Alien Politics within the Russian Empire during World War I.” Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1999, revised ms.
——. “The Russian Army and the Jews: Mass Deportation, Hostages, and Violence during World
War I.” Russian Review 60, no. 3 (July 2001): 404–19.
Looff, Max. Tufani; Sturm über Deutsch-Ostafrika. 3rd ed. Berlin, 1941.
Lueder, C. “Krieg und Kriegsrecht im Allgemeinen.” In Handbuch des Völkerrechts, ed. Franz von
Holtzendorff, 169–367. Hamburg, 1889.
——. “Das Landkriegsrecht im Besonderen.” In Handbuch des Völkerrechts, vol. 4, ed. Franz von
Holtendorff, 369–544. Hamburg, 1899.
Lupfer, Timothy. The Dynamics of Doctrine: The Changes in German Tactical Doctrine during the
First World War. Fort Leavenworth, Kans., 1981.
MacIntyre, Alisdair. “Rationality and the Explanation of Action.” In Against the Self-Images of the
Age: Essays on Ideology and Philosophy, by Alisdair MacIntyre, 244–59. New York, 1971.
Maercker, Major. “Die militärische Lage in Süd-Westafrika.” Jahrbuch über die deutschen Kolonien 1
(1908): 39–41.
——. Unsere Kriegführung in Deutsch-Südwestafrika. Vortrag. Berlin, 1907.
Maltzahn, Capt. Frhr. v. “Der Abschluss des Burenkrieges.” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung
und Heereskunde 6, no. 3 (1909): 435–67.
Mann, Heinrich. Man of Straw. New York, 1984.
March, James G. “Decision Making Perspectives: Decision in Organizations and Theories of
Choice.” In Perspective on Organization Design and Behavior, ed. Andrew H. Van de Ven and
William F. Joyce, 205–44. New York, 1981.
March, James G., and Roger Weissinger-Baylon, eds. Ambiguity and Command: Organization Perspective on Military Decision Making. Marchﬁeld, Mass., 1986.
Markusen, Eric. “Genocide and Warfare.” In Genocide, War, and Human Survival, ed. Charles B
Strozier and Michael Flynn, 75–86. Totowa, N.J., 1996.
Matthias, Erich, and Rudolf Morsey, eds. Die Regierung des Prinzen Max von Baden. Vol. 2 of
Quellen zur Geschichte des Parlamentarismus und der politischen Parteien, Erste Reihe. Düsseldorf, 1962.
Maurice, J. F., and M. H. Grant, eds. History of the War in South Africa, 1899–1902. 8 vols. London,
1906–10.
May, Glenn Anthony. “Was the Philippine-American War a ‘Total War?’ ” In Anticipating Total War:
The German and American Experiences, 1871–1914, ed. Manfred F. Boemeke, Roger Chickering,
and Stig Förster, 437–59. Cambridge, 1999.
McPhail, Helen. The Long Silence: Civilian Life under the German Occupation of Northern France,
1914–1918. New York, 2000.
Meier-Welcker, Hans. “Die deutsche Führung an der Westfront im Frühsommer 1918; Zum Problem der militärischen Lagebeurteilung.” Die Welt als Geschichte 21 (1961): 164–84.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
——. Seeckt. Frankfurt, 1967.
361
Melson, Robert F. “Provocation or Nationalism: A Critical Inquiry into the Armenian Genocide of
1915.” In The History and Sociology of Genocide: Analyses and Case Studies, ed. Frank Chalk and
Kurt Jonassohn, 266–89. New Haven, 1990.
——. Revolution and Genocide: On the Origins of the Armenian Genocide and the Holocaust. Chicago, 1992.
Merker, Hauptmann. “Über die Aufstandbewegung in Deutsch-Ostafrika.” Militär-Wochenblatt 91
(1906): cols. 1021–30, 1085–92, 1119–26, 1530–38.
Messerschmidt, Manfred. “Die Armee in Staat und Gesellschaft—Die Bismarckzeit.” In Das kaiserliche
Deutschland; Politik und Gesellschaft 1870–1918, ed. Michael Stürmer, 89–118. Düsseldorf, 1970.
——. Militär und Politik in der Bismarckzeit und im wilhelminischen Deutschland. Darmstadt, 1975.
——. “The Military Elites in Germany since 1870: Comparisons and Contrasts with the French Ofﬁcer Corps.” In The Military, Politics, and Society in France and Germany in the Twentieth Century, ed. Klaus-Jürgen Müller. Oxford, 1995.
——. “The Prussian Army from Reform to War.” In On the Road to Total War: The American Civil
War and The German Wars of Uniﬁcation, 1861–1871, ed. Stig Förster and Jörg Nagler, 263–82.
New York, 1997.
——. “Völkerrecht und ‘Kriegsnotwendigkeit’ in der deutschen militärischen Tradition.” In Was
damals Recht war . . . NS-Militär- und Strafjustiz im Vernichtungskrieg, by Manfred Messerschmidt, 191–230. Essen, 1996.
Meurer, Christian. Die Haager Friedenskonferenz; Vol. 2: Das Kriegsrecht der Haager Konferenz. 2
vols. Munich, 1907.
Meyer, Hans, ed. Das Deutsche Kolonialreich; Eine Länderkunde der deutschen Schutzgebiete, Vol. 1:
Ostafrika & Kamerun. Leipzig, 1909.
Miles, Robert. Racism. New York, 1989.
Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt. Operatives Denken und Handeln in deutschen Streitkräften im
19. und 20. Jahrhundert. Vol. 9 of Vorträge zur Militärgeschichte. Bonn, 1988.
Mitrany, David. The Effect of the War on Southeastern Europe. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. New Haven, 1936.
Mombauer, Annika. Helmuth von Moltke and the Origins of the First World War. Cambridge, 2001.
——. “Wilhelm, Waldersee, and the Boxer Rebellion.” In The Kaiser, ed. Wilhelm Deist and Annika
Mombauer, 91–118. Cambridge, 2003.
Mommsen, Hans. “National Socialism: Continuity and Change.” In From Weimar to Auschwitz,
trans. Philip O’Connor, 141–62. Princeton, 1991.
——. “The Realization of the Unthinkable: The ‘Final Solution of the Jewish Question’ in the Third
Reich.” In From Weimar to Auschwitz, trans. Philip O’Connor, 224–53. Princeton, 1991.
——. “Militär und Zivile Militärisierung in Deutschland 1914 bis 1938.” In Militär und Gesellschaft
im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert, ed. Ute Frevert, 265–76. Stuttgart, 1997.
Moor, J. A. de, and H. L. Wesseling, eds. Imperialism and War: Essays on Colonial Wars in Asia and
Africa. Leiden, 1989.
Morgenthau, Henry. Ambassador Morgenthau’s Story. New York, 1918.
——. Secrets of the Bosphorus, 1913–1916. London, 1918.
——. The Tragedy of Armenia. London, 1918.
Mosse, George L. Fallen Soldiers: Reshaping the Memory of the World Wars. Oxford, 1989.
Mossolow, Nicolai. Waterberg: Beitrag zur Geschichte der Missionsstation Otjozomdjupa, des Kambazembi-Stammes und des Hererolandes. Windhuk, [1976].

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
362 Mühlmann, Carl. Deutschland und die Türkei, 1913–1914; Die Berufung der deutschen Militärmission
nach der Türkei 1913, das deutsch-türkische Bündnis 1914 und der Eintritt der Türkei in den
Weltkrieg. Politische Wissenschaft, vol. 7. Berlin, 1929.
——. Das Deutsch-Türkische Waffenbündnis im Weltkriege. Leipzig, 1940.
Müller, Georg Alexander von. Regierte der Kaiser? Kriegstagebücher, Aufzeichnungen, und Briefe des
Chefs des Marine-Kabinetts, 1914–1918. Ed. Walter Görlitz. Göttingen, 1959.
Müller, Klaus-Jürgen. The Military and Politics and Society in France and Germany in the Twentieth
Century. Oxford, 1995.
Müller, Rolf-Dieter. “Total War as the Result of New Weapons? The Use of Chemical Agents in
World War I.” In Great War, Total War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front,
1914–1918, ed. Roger Chickering and Stig Förster, 95–111. Cambridge, 2000.
Naimark, Norman. Fires of Hatred: Ethnic Cleansing in Twentieth-Century Europe. Cambridge,
Mass., 2001.
Nash, George H. The Life of Herbert Hoover. 4 vols. New York, 1988.
Niemann, Alfred. Kaiser und Heer; Das Wesen der Kommandogewalt und ihre Ausübung durch Kaiser
Wilhelm II. Berlin, 1929.
——. Kaiser und Revolution; Die entscheidenden Ereignisse im Grossen Hauptquartier. Berlin, 1922.
——. Revolution von oben, Umsturz von unten; Entwicklung und Verlauf der Staatsumwälzung in
Deutschland 1914–1918. Berlin, 1927.
Nigmann, Ernst. Geschichte der Kaiserlichen Schutztruppe für Deutsch-Ostafrika. Berlin, 1911.
——. Die Wahehe; Ihre Geschichte, Kult-, Rechts-, Kriegs- und Jagdgebräuche. Berlin, 1908.
Noske, Gustav. Kolonialpolitik und Sozialdemokratie. Stuttgart, 1914.
Nuhn, Walter. Flammen über Deutschost; Der Maji-Maji-Aufstand in Deutsch-Ostafrika 1905–1906,
die erste gemeinsame Erhebung schwarzafrikanischer Völker gegen weisse Kolonialherrschaft. Wilhelmshaven, 1991.
Öke, Mim Kemâl. The Armenian Question, 1914–1923. Nicosia, Cyprus, 1988.
Opton, Edward M., Jr. “It Never Happened and Besides They Deserved It.” In Sanctions for Evil:
Sources of Social Destructiveness, ed. Nevitt Sanford and Craig Comstock, 49–70. San Francisco,
1971.
Ott, J. Steven. The Organizational Culture Perspective. Chicago, 1989.
Otto, Helmut. Schlieffen und der Generalstab; Der preussisch-deutsche Generalstab unter Leitung des
Generals von Schlieffen, 1891–1905. East Berlin, 1966.
Pakenham, Thomas. The Boer War. London, 1979.
Palmer, Alison. Colonial Genocide. Adelaide, 2000.
Pettigrew, Andrew M. “On Studying Organizational Cultures.” Administrative Science Quarterly 24,
no. 4 (1979): 570–81.
Petzold, Joachim. Die Dolschstosslegende; Eine Geschichtsfälschung im Dienst des deutschen Imperialismus und Militarismus. Berlin, 1963.
Pick, Daniel. War Machine: The Rationalization of Slaughter in the Modern Age. New Haven, 1993.
Poewe, Karla. The Namibian Herero: A History of Their Psychosocial Disintegration and Survival.
Lewiston, N.Y., 1985.
Polonsky, Antony. “The German Occupation of Poland during the First and Second World Wars: A
Comparison.” In Armies of Occupation, ed. Roy A. Prete and A. Hamish Ion, 97–142. Waterloo,
Ont., 1982.
Pomiankowski, Joseph. Der Zusammenbruch des Ottomanischen Reiches. Graz, 1969.
Pool, Gerhardus. Samuel Maherero. Windhuk, 1991.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Porch, Douglas. “Bugeaud, Galliéni, Lyautey: The Development of French Colonial Warfare.” In 363
Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret, 376–407.
Princeton, 1986.
Posen, Barry R. The Sources of Military Doctrine: France, Britain, and Germany between the World
Wars. Ithaca, N.Y., 1984.
Power, Samantha. “A Problem from Hell”: America and the Age of Genocide. New York, 2003.
Prager, Oberlt. “Ein französisches Reglement für die Kriegführung in Afrika.” Vierteljahrshefte für
Truppenführung und Heereskunde 6, no. 3 (1909): 475–92.
Prein, Philipp. “Guns and Top Hats: African Resistance in German South West Africa, 1907–1915.”
Journal of Southern African Studies 20, no. 1 (1994): 99–121.
Prete, Roy A., and A. Hamish Ion, eds. Armies of Occupation. Waterloo, Ontario, 1982.
Rachamimov, Alon. POWs and the Great War: Captivity on the Eastern Front. Oxford, 2002.
Reid, James J. “Militarism, Partisan War, and Destructive Inclinations in Ottoman Military History:
1854–1918.” Armenian Review 39, no. 3/155 (autumn 1986): 1–21.
Renner, Major. “Wechselwirkung zwischen Heereszucht und Verpﬂegung im Kriege.” Vierteljahrshefte für Truppenführung und Heereskunde, 6, no. 3 (1909): 413–20.
Richter, Julius. “Die deutschen evangelischen Missionskreise und das armenische Volk.” Allgemeine
Missions-Zeitschrift 46, no. 2 (February 1919): 33–45.
Riezler, Kurt. Die Erforderlichkeit des Unmöglichen; Prolegomena zu einer Theorie der Politik und zu
anderen Theorien. Munich, 1913.
Ritter, Gerhard. Der Schlieffenplan; Kritik eines Mythos. Munich, 1956.
——. The Sword and the Scepter: The Problem of Militarism in Germany. 3 vols. Trans. Heinz Norden. Coral Gables, Fla., 1969–73.
Roghmann, Klaus, and Rolf Ziegler. “Militärsoziologie.” In Handbuch der empirischen Sozialforschung, ed. René König, vol. 2:514–66. Stuttgart, 1977.
Rohkrämer, Thomas. Der Militarismus der “kleinen Leute”; Die Kriegervereine im Deutschen Kaiserreich, 1871–1914. Beiträge zur Militärgeschichte. Munich, 1990.
Rohrbach, Paul. Deutsche Kolonialwirtschaft. 2 vols. Vol. 1: Südwest-Afrika. Berlin, 1907.
Ropp, Theodore. War in the Modern World. Durham, N.C., 1959.
Roshwald, Aviel. Ethnic Nationalism and the Fall of Empires: Central Europe, Russia, and the Middle
East, 1914–1923. New York, 2001.
Rossi, Ino. “The Development of Theories of Culture.” In People in Culture: A Survey of Cultural
Anthropology, ed. Ino Rossi, 31–78. New York, 1980.
Rothenberg, Gunther. “Moltke, Schlieffen, and the Doctrine of Strategic Envelopment.” In Makers of
Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age, ed. Peter Paret, 296–325. Princeton, 1986.
Sackmann, Sonja A. “Culture and Subcultures: An Analysis of Organizational Knowledge.” Administrative Science Quarterly 37, no. 1 (1991): 140–61.
——. “Uncovering Culture in Organizations.” Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 27, no. 3 (1991):
295–317.
Sander, L. Zur Lage in Südwestafrika. Vortrag am 8. Feb. 1904 in Abteilung Berlin der Deutschen
Kolonial Gesellschaft. Berlin, 1904.
Sanford, Nevitt, and Craig Comstock, eds. Sanctions for Evil: Sources of Social Destructiveness. San
Francisco, 1971.
Sapienza, Alice M. “Believing Is Seeing: How Organizational Culture Inﬂuences the Decisions Top
Managers Make.” In Gaining Control of the Corporate Culture, ed. Ralph H. Kilmann, Mary J.
Saxton, and Roy Serpa, 66–83. San Franciso, 1985.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
364 Schein, Edgar. H. Organizational Culture and Leadership. San Francisco, 1985.
——. “How Culture Forms, Develops, and Changes.” In Gaining Control of Corporate Culture, ed.
Ralph H. Kilmann, Mary J. Saxton, and Roy Serpa, 17–43. San Francisco, 1985.
Schlieffen, Alfred von. “Der Krieg in der Gegenwart.” Deutsche Revue 34, no. 1 (January–March
1909): 13–24.
Schmid, Michael. Der “Eiserne Kanzler” und die Generäle: Deutsche Rüstungspolitik in der Ära Bismarck, 1871–1890. Paderborn, 2003.
Schmidt-Bückeburg, Rudolf. Das Militärkabinett der preussischen Könige und deutschen Kaiser;
Seine geschichtliche Entwicklung und staatsrechtliche Stellung, 1787–1918. Berlin, 1933.
Schmidt-Richberg, Wiegand. Die Generalstäbe in Deutschland 1871–1945; Aufgaben in der Armee und
Stellung im Staate. Beiträge zur Militär- und Kriegsgeschichte, vol. 3. Ed. Militärgeschichtliches
Forschungsamt, 11–120. Stuttgart, 1962.
Schulte, Bernd F. Die deutsche Armee, 1900–1914: Zwischen Beharren und Verändern. Düsseldorf, 1977.
——. Europäische Krise und Erster Weltkrieg; Beiträge zur Militärpolitik des Kaiserreichs, 1871–1914.
Frankfurt am Main, 1983.
Schütz, Rüdiger. “Einführende Bemerkungen.” In Kriegsende 1918: Ereignis, Wirkung, Nachwirkung,
ed. Jörg Duppler and Gerhard P. Gross, 41–47. Munich, 1999.
Schwabe, Max [Hauptmann]. “Einige Lehren aus dem Kriege in Südwestafrika.” Vierteljahrshefte
für Truppenführung und Heereskunde 1, no. 3 (1904): 461–79.
Seeberg, Karl-Martin. Der Maji-Maji-Krieg gegen die deutsche Kolonialherrschaft. Berlin, 1989.
Seifert, Ruth. Individualisierungsprozesse, Gechlechterverhältnisse und die soziale Konstruktion des
Soldaten; Eine theoretische und empirische Studie zur soldatischen Subjektivität und zu ihrer
Wechselwirkung mit der Gesellschaft. Sozialwissenschaftliches Institut der Bundeswehr, Heft 61.
Munich, 1993.
——. “Krieg und Vergewaltigung; Ansätze zu einer Analyse.” In Massenvergewaltigung; Der Krieg
gegen die Frauen, ed. Alexandra Stiglmayer, 87–112. Freiburg, 1993.
——. “Militär und Ordnung der Geschlechter; Vier Thesen zur Konstruktion von Männlichkeit.”
In Ordnung zwischen Gewaltproduktion und Friedensstiftung, ed. Klaus Dieter Wolf, 213–29.
Baden-Baden, 1993.
Semmel, Bernard. Imperialism and Social Reform: English Social-Imperial Thought, 1895–1914. Cambridge, Mass., 1960.
Senghaas, Dieter. Rüstung und Militarismus. Frankfurt, 1972.
Shaw, Stanford J., and Ezel Kural Shaw. History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey, vol. 2:
Reform, Revolution, and Republic: The Rise of Modern Turkey, 1808–1975. Cambridge, 1977.
Showalter, Dennis. “From Deterrence to Doomsday Machine: The German War of War, 1890–1914.”
Journal of Military History 64 (July 2000): 679–710.
——. “German Grand Strategy: A Contradiction in Terms?” Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen 48,
no. 2 (1990): 65–102.
——. “Mass Warfare and the Impact of Technology.” In Great War, Total War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918, ed. Roger Chickering and Stig Förster, 73–93. Cambridge, 2000.
Siemann, Wolfram. Gesellschaft im Aufbruch; Deutschland 1849–1871. Frankfurt, 1990.
Smelser, Neil J. “Some Determinants of Destructive Behavior.” In Sanctions for Evil: Sources of Social Destructiveness, ed. Nevitt Sanford and Craig Comstock, 15–24. San Francisco, 1971.
Smith, Helmut Walser. “The Talk of Genocide, the Rhetoric of Miscegenation: Notes on Debates in
the German Reichstag concerning Southwest Africa, 1904–1914.” In The Imperialist Imagina-

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
tion: German Colonialism and Its Legacy, ed. Sara Friedrichsmeyer, Sara Lennox, and Susanne 365
Zantop, 107–23. Ann Arbor, 1998.
Smith, Leonard V., Stéphane Audoin-Rouzeau, and Annette Becker. France and the Great War,
1914–1918. Cambridge, 2002.
Smith, Roger. “Human Destructiveness and Politics: The Twentieth Century as an Age of Genocide.” In Genocide and the Modern Age: Etiology and Case Studies of Mass Death, ed. Isidor Wallimann and Michael Dobkowski. Westport, Conn., 1987.
Snook, Scott A. Friendly Fire: The Accidental Shootdown of U.S. Black Hawks over Northern Iraq.
Princeton, 2000.
Snyder, Jack. “Civil-Military Relations and the Cult of the Offensive, 1914 and 1984.” International
Security 9, no. 1 (summer 1984): 108–46.
——. The Ideology of the Offensive: Military Decision Making and the Disasters of 1914. Ithaca, N.Y.,
1984.
Sösemann, Bernd. “Die sogenannte ‘Hunnenrede’ Wilhelms II; Textkritische und interpretatorische
Bemerkungen zur Ansprache des Kaisers vom 27 Juli 1900 in Bremerhaven.” Historische
Zeitschrift 222, no. 2 (1976): 342–58.
——. “ ‘Die Erforderlichkeit des Möglichen’: Kritische Bemerkungen zu der Edition Kurt Riezler,
Tagebücher, Aufsätze, Dokumente.” Blätter für Deutsche Landesgeschichte 110 (1974): 261–75.
Speier, Hans. “Ludendorff: The German Concept of Total War.” In Makers of Modern Strategy: Military Thought from Machiavelli to Hitler, ed. Edward Mead Earle, 306–21. Princeton, 1943.
Sperber, Jonathan. The Kaiser’s Voters: Electors and Elections in Imperial Germany. Cambridge, 1997.
Spies, S. Burridge. Methods of Barbarism? Roberts and Kitchener and Civilians in the Boer Republics,
January 1900–May 1902. Cape Town, 1977.
——. “Women and the War.” In The South African War: The Anglo-Boer War 1899–1902, ed. Peter
Warwick and S. B. Spies, 161–85. London, 1980.
Spraul, Gunter. “Der ‘Völkermord’ an den Herero; Untersuchungen zu einer neuen Kontinuitätsthese.” Geschichte in Wissenschaft und Unterricht 39, no. 12 (1988): 713–39.
Stadelmann, Rudolf. Moltke und der Staat. Krefeld, 1950.
Stargardt, Nicholas. The German Idea of Militarism; Radical and Socialist Critics, 1866–1914. Cambridge, 1994.
Staub, Ervin. The Roots of Evil: The Origins of Genocide and Other Group Violence. Cambridge, 1989.
Stavenhagen, Hptm. v. “Aus der Geschichte des Militär-Versorgungswesens.” Militär-Wochenblatt
95, nos. 24, 25, 26 (1910).
Stegemann, Bernd. Die deutsche Marinepolitik, 1916–1918. Berlin, 1970.
Stenzel, Ernst. Die Kriegführung des deutschen Imperialismus und das Völkerrecht; Zur Planung und
Vorbereitung des deutschen Imperialismus auf die barbarische Kriegführung im ersten und zweiten
Weltkrieg, dargestellt an den vorherrschenden Ansichten zu den Gesetzen und Gebräuchen des
Landkrieges, 1900–1945. Berlin, 1973.
Stevenson, David. The First World War and International Politics. Oxford, 1988.
——. “French Strategy on the Western Front, 1914–1918.” In Great War, Total War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918, ed. Roger Chickering and Stig Förster, 297–326. Cambridge, 2000.
Stone, Jay, and Erwin Schmidl. The Boer War and Military Reforms. Lanham, Md., 1988.
Stoneman, Mark R. “The Bavarian Army and French Civilians in the War of 1870–1871: A Cultural
Interpretation.” War in History 8, no. 3 (July 2001): 271–93.
Storz, Dieter. “ ‘Aber was hätte anders geschehen sollen?’ Die deutschen Offensiven an der West-

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
366

front 1918.” In Kriegsende 1918: Ereignis, Wirkung, Nachwirkung, ed. Jörg Duppler and Gerhard
P. Gross, 51–95. Munich, 1999.
——. Kriegsbild und Rüstung vor 1914: Europäische Landstreitkräfte vor dem Ersten Weltkrieg. Herford, Germany, 1992.
Strachan, Hew. “From Cabinet War to Total War: The Perspective of Military Doctrine, 1861–1918.”
In Great War, Total War: Combat and Mobilization on the Western Front, 1914–1918, ed. Roger
Chickering and Stig Förster, 19–31. Cambridge, 2000.
——. The First World War. Vol. 1. Oxford, 2001.
Strazhas, Aba. Deutsche Ostpolitik im Ersten Weltkrieg; Der Fall Ober-Ost, 1915–1917. Wiesbaden, 1993.
Strozier, Charles B., and Michael Flynn. Genocide, War, and Human Survival. Lanham, Md., 1996.
Sudholt, Gert. Die deutsche Eingeborenenpolitik in Südwestafrika; Von den Anfängen bis 1904.
Hildesheim, 1975.
Ternon, Yves. Les Arméniens: Histoire d’un génocide. Paris, 1977.
Thoss, Bruno. “Militärische Entscheidung und politisch-gesellschaftlicher Umbruch; Das Jahr 1918
in der neueren Weltkriegsforschung.” In Kriegsende 1918: Ereignis, Wirkung, Nachwirkung, ed.
Jörg Duppler and Gerhard P. Gross, 17–37. Munich, 1999.
——. “Nationale Rechte, militärische Führung und Diktaturfrage in Deutschland 1913–1923.” Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen 42 (1987): 27–76.
Travers, Tim. The Killing Ground: The British Army, the Western Front, and the Emergence of Modern
Warfare, 1900–1918. London, 1993.
Trotha, Trutz von. “ ‘The Fellows Can Just Starve’: On Wars of “Paciﬁcation” in the African
Colonies of Imperial Germany and the Concept of “Total War.” In Anticipating Total War: The
German and American Experiences, 1871–1914, ed. Manfred F. Boemeke, Roger Chickering, and
Stig Förster, 415–35. Cambridge, 1999.
——. Koloniale Herrschaft; Zur Soziologischen Theorie der Staatsentstehung am Beispiel des
“Schutzgebietes Togo.” Tübingen, 1994.
Trumpener, Ulrich. Germany and the Ottoman Empire, 1914–1918. Princeton, 1968.
Turner, Barry A. “The Organizational and Interorganizational Development of Disasters.” Administrative Science Quarterly 21, no. 3 (1976): 378–97.
Vagts, Alfred. A History of Militarism, Civilian and Military. Rev. ed. London, 1959.
——. “A Memoir of Military Occupation.” Military Affairs 7, no. 1 (spring 1943): 16–24.
van Crefeld, Martin. Command in War. Cambridge, Mass., 1985.
——. Supplying War: Logistics from Wallerstein to Patton. Cambridge, 1977.
van Evera, Stephen. “The Cult of the Offensive and the Origins of the First World War.” International Security 9, no. 1 (summer 1984): 58–107.
Vassilian, Hamo B. Armenian Genocide: A Comprehensive Bibliography and Library Resource Guide.
Glendale, Calif., 1992.
Vaughan, Diane. The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA.
Chicago, 1996.
Vincent, C. Paul. The Politics of Hunger: The Allied Blockade of Germany, 1915–1919. Athens, Ohio, 1985.
Vogt, Wolfgang R., ed. Militär als Gegenkultur; Streitkräfte im Wandel der Gesellschaft (I). Opladen,
1986.
Voigt, Johannes H. “Die Deportation—Ein Thema der deutschen Rechtswissenschaft und Politik
im 19. und frühen 20. Jahrhundert.” In Ausweisung und Deportation; Formen der Zwangsmigration in der Geschichte, ed. Andreas Gestrich, 83–101. Stuttgart, 1995.

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Wallach, Jehuda L. Anatomie einer Militärhilfe; Die preussisch-deutschen Militärmissionen in der 367
Türkei, 1835–1919. Düsseldorf, 1976.
——. Das Dogma der Vernichtungsschlacht; Die Lehren von Clausewitz und Schlieffen und ihre
Wirkungen in zwei Weltkriegen. Frankfurt, 1967.
Wallimann, Isidor, and Michael N. Dobrowski, eds. Genocide and the Modern Age. New York, 1987.
Walter, Dierk. Preussische Heeresreformen 1807–1870: Militärische Innovationen und der Mythen der
‘Roonschen Reform’. Paderborn, 2003.
Warwick, Peter. “Black People and the War.” In The South African War: The Anglo-Boer War,
1899–1902, ed. Peter Warwick and S. B. Spies, 186–209. London, 1980.
Warwick, Peter, and S. B. Spies, eds. The South African War: The Anglo-Boer War, 1899–1902. London, 1980.
Weber, Max. On Charisma and Institution Building: Selected Papers. Trans. S. N. Eisenstadt. Chicago, 1968.
Wehler, Hans-Ulrich. The German Empire, 1870–1918. Leamington Spa, U.K., 1985.
——. “Polenpolitik im Deutschen Kaiserreich.” In Krisenherde des Kaiserreichs 1871–1918; Studien
zur deutschen Sozial- und Verfassungsgeschichte, 2nd ed., ed. Hans-Ulrich Wehler, 184–202. Göttingen, 1979.
Wende, Frank. Die belgische Frage in der deutschen Politik des Ersten Weltkrieges. Hamburg, 1969.
Wernecke, Klaus. Der Wille zur Weltgeltung; Aussenpolitik und Öffentlichkeit im Kaiserreich am Vorabend des Ersten Weltkrieges. Düsseldorf, 1970.
Westlake, John. International Law, part 2: War. Cambridge, 1907.
Wieland, Lothar. Belgien, 1914: Die Frage des belgischen ‘Franktireurkrieges’ und die deutsche öffentliche Meinung von 1914 bis 1936. Frankfurt, 1984.
Willeke, Hptm. “Die Ausbildung der kaiserlichen Schutztruppe für Südwest Afrika.” MilitärWochenblatt 97, no. 69 (1912): 1586–89.
Willems, Emilio. Der preussisch-deutsche Militarismus; Ein Kulturkomplex im sozialen Wandel.
Cologne, 1984.
Winzen, Peter. Bülows Weltmachtkonzept; Untersuchungen zur Frühphase seiner Aussenpolitik,
1897–1901. Boppard am Rhein, 1977.
Young, George. Nationalism and War in the Near East (by a Diplomatist). Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace. Oxford, 1915.
Zantop, Susanne. Colonial Fantasies: Conquest, Family, and Nation in Precolonial Germany,
1770–1870. Durham, N.C., 1997.
Zechlin, Egmont. “Friedensbestrebungen und Revolutionierungsversuche im Ersten Weltkrieg.”
Aus Politik und Zeitgeschichte; Beilage zur Wochenzeitung Das Parlament, B20/1961, B24/1961,
B25/1961, B20/1963, B22/1963 (1961–63).
——. Krieg und Kriegsrisiko; Zur deutschen Politik im Ersten Weltkrieg; Aufsätze. Düsseldorf, 1979.
Zeller, Joachim. “ ‘Wie Vieh wurden hunderte zu Tode getrieben und wie Vieh begraben’; Fotodokumente aus dem deutschen Konzentrationslager in Swakopmund/Namibia 1904–1908.”
Zeitschrift für Geschichtswissenschaft 49, no. 3 (2001): 226–43.
Zilch, Reinhold. Okkupation und Währung im Ersten Weltkrieg; Die deutsche Besatzungspolitik in
Belgien und Russisch-Polen 1914–1918. Goldbach, 1994.
Zimmerer, Jürgen. Deutsche Herrschaft über Afrikaner; Staatlicher Machtanspruch und Wirklichkeit
im kolonialen Namibia. Hamburg, 2001.
——. “Kriegsgefangene im Kolonialkrieg: Der Krieg gegen die Herero und Nama in Deutsch Süd-

bibliography
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
368

westafrika, 1904–1907.” In In der Hand des Feindes; Kriegsgefangenschaft von der Antike bis zum
Zweiten Weltkrieg, ed. Rüdiger Overmans, 277–94. Cologne, 1999.
Zirkel, Kirsten. “Military Power in German Colonial Policy: The Schutztruppen and Their Leaders
in East and South-West Africa, 1888–1918.” In Guardians of Empire: The Armed Forces of the
Colonial Powers, 1700–1964, ed. David Killingray and David Omissi, 91–113. New York, 1999.
Zmarzlik, Hans-Günter. “Social Darwinism in Germany: An Example of the Socio-Political Abuse
of Scientiﬁc Knowledge.” In The Human Creature, ed. Günther Altner, 346–77. Garden City,
N.Y., 1974.
Zorn, Albert. Das Kriegsrecht zu Lande in seiner neuesten Gestaltung. Berlin, 1906.
Zorn, Philipp. Die beiden Haager Friedenskonferenzen von 1899 und 1907. In Handbuch des Völkerrechts. Vol. 5, pt. 1. Ed. Fritz Stier-Somlo. Stuttgart, 1915.
Zuber, Terence. Inventing the Schlieffen Plan: German War Planning, 1871–1914. Oxford, 2002.
——. “The Schlieffen Plan Reconsidered.” War in History 6, no. 3 (1999): 262–305.
——. “Terence Holmes Reinvents the Schlieffen Plan.” War in History 8, no. 4 (2001): 468–76.
——“Terence Holmes Reinvents the Schlieffen Plan—Again.” War in History 10, no. 1 (2003):
92–101.
Zunkel, Friedrich. “Die ausländischen Arbeiter in der deutschen Kriegswirtschaftspolitik des 1.
Weltkriegs.” In Entstehung und Wandel der modernen Gesellschaft; Festschrift für Hans Rosenberg
zum 65. Geburtstag, ed. Gerhard A. Ritter, 280–311. Berlin, 1970.
Zürcher, Erik J. Turkey: A Modern History. London, 1997.
Zwehl, Hans von. Falkenhayn. Berlin, 1926.

Index

References to illustrations are in bold type.
Action. See Practices
Actionism, 2–3, 167, 170, 207, 213, 301, 325–26
and mission tactics, 116, 117
Action rationality, 97
Agitation groups, 105–6, 108, 191–92
Agriculture, in occupied France, 252, 255–56
Annexation
as means to victory, 200–201
as war aim, 230, 325
Annihilation
denial of, 54–55
as goal of war (Vernichtungskrieg), 2, 27–28, 59–60,
160–61, 166–67, 293, 306
of the Nama, 85–88, 89, 90
public opinion regarding, 191
Trotha’s policy of, 28–33, 50–51, 59–60, 195 (see also
Extermination proclamation)
See also Destruction; Victory, as annihiliation
Annihilation, battle of, 42, 67, 110, 117, 159–61, 319
against Great Britain, 299
naval, 172–73, 319
and Schlieffen Plan, 163, 165
Trotha’s expectation of, 41–43
and Verdun, 220
See also Concentric battles
“Arch-occupier” position, 129
Ardagh, Sir John, 129
Arendt, Hannah, 1, 181, 324, 327, 330, 332
Armed males, Trotha’s order to shoot, 49–52, 54
Armenian genocide, 4, 263–66
German consuls’ resistance to, 281–82, 284
and German deportation recommendations, 275–
78
German diplomatic response to, 279–85
and German military mission, 269–71
German officers’ resistance to, 285–90
German participation in, 265–66, 278–80
and German-Turkish alliance, 266–69
impetus for, 274–75
preparations for, 271–73
Army League, 105
Army-navy relations, 204–5
Artifacts, 95
Assumptions. See Basic assumptions

Atrocities
as accepted behavior, 149–52
alleged Herero, 10–11
in Belgium, 209–11, 231
during Herero pursuit, 46–49, 51–52, 54, 54 n
under Leutwein, 13–15
See also Armenian genocide; Executions
Attrition, war of, 220, 293
Auftragstaktik. See Mission tactics
Austria, 161, 200, 221, 318, 321–22
Balkan Wars of 1912–13, 273
Banishment. See Deportation
Bartenwerffer, Paul von, 304, 308
Basic assumptions, 2, 94–95, 96–98, 126–30, 159, 172,
207, 235, 266, 271, 285, 294, 296–97
and Armenian genocide, 266
colonial warfare as conﬁrmation of, 173, 333
and fear of weakness, 175–78, 192–93
and ideology contrasted, 329
about international law, 127–30, 192–93
about order, 125–26, 178–81
and organizational blindness, 96, 115, 323
of qualitative superiority, 134–37, 170, 208, 214, 221,
223-24, 296–97, 307, 314–15, 331
short war illusion, 134, 167–68
of superiority of offensive, 160–65, 167, 195–96,
293–94, 306, 307–8
about treatment of civilians, 124, 125–27, 255–
56
about unlimited nature of war, 124, 126
See also Standard practices; Victory
Batocki, Adolf, 234–35
Battles, as chief level of planning, 114–15
See also Annihilation, battle of; Concentric battles;
and speciﬁc battles
Bauer, Major, 75–76
Bauer, Max von, 308
Baumgart, Dr., 14, 16
Bayer, Captain, 143
Beatings, during Ober-Ost occupation, 245
Bebel, August, 10, 13–14, 29, 65, 188
Beesten, First Lieutenant von, 61–62
Behavior. See Practices

369

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
370

Belgium, 200, 230–33
atrocities in, 209–11, 231
deportations from, 211–12, 219, 235–42
destruction of (1918), 315–16
neutrality of, 166
resistance in, 208
Beliefs and values vs. practices, 95–96, 151, 330, 333
Benkesser (prison overseer), 78
Berner, Karl Heinrich, 190
Bernhardi, Friedrich von, 165
Bernstorff, Count Johann Heinrich von, 268, 285
Beseler, Hans von, 230
Best, Geoffrey, 129
Bethmann Hollweg, Theobald von, 174, 218, 219, 228,
260
and Armenian genocide, 267, 283, 284
and Battle of the Marne, 212–13
and civilian deference to military, 107, 166, 202–3, 323
and deportations, 211, 233, 237–38, 241
and Hindenburg program, 294–95
and submarine warfare, 223, 224, 296, 298
war aims of, 200–202
Binder-Krieglstein, Baron, 147
Bismarck, Otto von, 2, 103, 107, 119, 327
Bissing, Moritz von, 219, 230, 232, 242, 323
and deportations, 235–38
Bley, Helmut, 28, 58
Blume, Wilhelm von, 162
Boehn, Hans von, 202
Boer War, 129, 137, 152–53, 183–87
and Herero Revolt compared, 183, 187–91
investigations of, 187, 193–94
Bolshevik Revolution, 299
Böttrich, 276, 279–80
Bounties, 26, 56, 64–65, 147
Boxer Uprising, 3, 13, 27, 29, 132, 135
executions in, 147–48
looting during, 150
surrender terms after, 177
Brest-Litovsk, Treaty of, 285
Bridgman, Jon, 28
Brockdorff, Lieutenant Count von, 71
Brodrick, William St. John, 185–87
Bronsart von Schellendorf, Friedrich, 270, 274, 276,
279, 284, 289
views on genocide, 277–78
Brunsson, Nils, 97
Brussels Conference on Land Warfare of 1874, 122,
123, 127
Brussilov offensive, 221
Bucholz, Arden, 113–14, 329
Buildings, destruction of, 209
See also Destruction
Bülow, Bernhard von, 8–10, 24, 28, 29, 31, 188–89
and double militarism, 106
on end of Herero Revolt, 82

and extermination proclamation, 64–66, 178
and German East Africa, 138
and German war aims in Herero Revolt, 180
and “Hun speech,” 135–36
and Schlieffen Plan, 166
and treatment of Herero prisoners, 17, 18, 70–71
and Weltpolitik, 174
Burning of farms and villages
in Africa, 26, 60–61, 66–67, 183–84, 185
in Europe, 118, 210, 260
See also Destruction
Bussche-Ippenburg, Baron Erich von der, 305, 312
Callwell, Charles, 175
Cameroons, German, deportation to, 81, 189–90
Campbell, Hendrik, 52
Campbell-Bannerman, Henry, 187
Capitulations, Turkish, 266
Caucasus
Armenian genocide in, 284–85
Turkish retreat from, 274–75
Cemal Pasha, 266, 287
Central Powers, Falkenhayn’s proposed union of,
219–20
Chaining of prisoners, 43, 70–71, 72–73
Chales de Beaulieu, Martin, 41, 50
Chamberlain, Joseph, 129, 185–86, 187, 194
Chickering, Roger, 205, 329
China. See Boxer Uprising
Civilian oversight
German lack of, 2, 12, 92, 103–4, 188, 193, 323, 325
in Great Britain, 184–86, 193–94
Civilians, enemy. See Enemy civilians; Occupation
Civilians, German
deaths caused by Allied blockade, 320
World War I rations for, 240n
Civil-military relations
in Boer War, 184–87
and cancellation of extermination proclamation,
63–66
civilian deference in, 107, 166, 202–3, 237–38, 266,
292, 323, 327
in diplomacy concerning Turkey, 266, 268–69,
279–84
and Endkampf, 310, 318
and Falkenhayn’s all-or-nothing dilemma, 224–25
lack of coordination in, 107, 166, 174, 202–3, 218, 325
and lies about military situation, 307
and March offensive of 1918, 301
and military discipline, 100–101
and occupation, 228, 235–36,248
and prison administration in Southwest Africa, 71–
72, 80–81,83–85
and Schlieffen Plan, 166, 174
and submarine warfare, 223–24, 296, 297–98
and Trotha’s appointment, 24–25

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
in World War I, 199–203, 211, 223–24, 228, 235–36,
241, 294–95, 297, 300–301
in World War I combatants compared, 322–23
and World War I strategic vacuum, 199–203
See also Constitution, German; Foreign policy; Political culture; Public opinion
Class, Heinrich, 233
Clausewitz, Carl von, 110, 161, 167, 169, 179
Cloete, Jan, 49
Collection camps, 73–74, 82–84
See also Internment camps; Prisoners, African
Collective ﬁnes and punishment, 118–19, 184, 226, 231,
245
and international law, 122, 123
Colonialism. See Imperialism
Colonial warfare, 3, 102
atrocities as accepted behavior in, 149–51
as conﬁrmation of basic assumptions, 173, 333
and European warfare compared, 131–34, 206–7
expectations of, 134–37
extremism in, 13–14, 91, 157–58
and fear of weakness, 45, 176–78
of Germany and other European powers compared, 137, 182
and hunger war, 26, 155–57, 184, 185
and international law, 128, 129
internment camps as standard practice in, 152–55
investigation of, 187, 193–96
logistical planning for, 137–38, 142–43
punitive expeditions, 13–14, 25–26, 101, 132, 148
retreat in, 22
shooting of prisoners as standard practice in, 145–
48
and technical superiority, 102
and World War I compared, 206–7
See also Boer War; Boxer Uprising; Herero Revolt;
Maji-Maji Revolt
Colonists, 7–8, 10–11, 14, 68, 84
Committee for the Relief of Belgium (CRB), 230, 251,
253, 315–16
Committee of Union and Progress (CUP), 269, 270,
274, 276, 288
goals of, 263, 266–67, 271–73, 284, 285
See also Armenian genocide
Concentration camps. See Collection camps; Internment camps
Concentric battles, 27, 33–34, 39, 42, 45, 55–56
and Schlieffen Plan, 164, 168–69
and Southwest Africa investigation, 195
in World War I, 213,216, 302
See also Annihilation, battle of; Waterberg, Battle
of
Conﬁscation of property, 185–86
See also Expropriations; Requisitions
Conscription, 109, 219, 310, 311
See also Forced labor

Constitution, German, 2, 182, 325
funding power under, 104, 109
lack of coordination under, 107–8, 202
military command power under, 92, 103–4, 107
reform of, 310
Courts-martial, 118, 147, 210
of Herero prisoners, 18–19, 26–27, 49–50
Cramer, Lieutenant, 71
CRB. See Committee for the Relief of Belgium
Criticism of German military culture. See Civilian
oversight; Public opinion; Self-criticism
Culture
deﬁned, 94–95
levels of analysis of, 95
See also German military culture; Military culture;
Organizational culture; Political culture
CUP. See Committee of Union and Progress
Customary international law, 49, 127
Dabringhaus, Sabine, 152
Dadrian, Vahakn N., 265
Dahn, Felix, 179
Dame, Colonel von, 69, 72, 77
Dannert, Eduard, 71
Dannhauer, Otto, 31, 33, 50
Deaths. See Mortality rates
Decisive battle. See Annihilation, battle of
Default programs. See Practices; Standard practices
Defeat
deﬁnitions of, 22, 201, 218–19, 311, 314, 318
denial of, 4, 207, 213, 221, 307, 313–15
lying about, 221, 307
at Marne, 212–13
recognition of, 304–9
Defensive warfare, 216–217
in colonial wars, 195
extreme methods of (Autumn 1918), 309–10, 315–
16
and March offensive of 1918, 299–300, 302–3
Moltke’s acceptance of, 161–62
in 1917, 256, 258–60, 291, 292–94
Deimling, Berthold von, 36, 39, 39–41, 42, 133
and the Nama, 67, 69, 85–87
on pursuit, 45
Deist, Wilhelm, 206
Deportation, 4, 233–35
from Belgium, 211–12, 219, 230, 235–42
during Boer War, 184, 185–86
of Greeks, 273, 286
of Jews, 239n
from northern France, 211–12, 249, 253–57, 259–60
of Ober-Ost laborers, 247
from Southwest Africa, 79–81, 85–86, 189–90, 190 n
See also Armenian genocide
Dernburg, Bernhard von, 86–87
Design, deﬁned, 94

371

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
372

Destruction
of African farms and villages, 26, 60–61, 66–67,
155–57, 183–84, 185
of Belgian and French villages, 209, 210, 262, 315–16
of civilian property, 121, 123, 124
and Endkampf proposals, 315–19
idea of (Vernichtungsgedanke), 166, 293
of northern France, 256–62, 315–16
self-, 3–4, 218–19, 316–19
See also Annihilation
Details, emphasis on, 169, 221–22, 224, 307, 329
Discipline, military, 99, 100–101, 149–50, 261–62
and Herero revolt, 47–48, 49, 57
Disease
among African prisoners, 72–73, 76, 79–80, 81
at Battle of Waterberg, 34, 41
among German troops in Africa, 22, 41, 64, 142–43
venereal, 151
Doctrinalism, 159–60
Doctrine, military, 45, 99, 110, 159–60, 206
and fear of weakness, 175–78
and victory as establishment of order, 178–81
See also Schlieffen Plan; Strategy
Double militarism, 105–7, 108–9, 328
Drechsler, Horst, 28, 37, 62
Duisburg, Carl, 236
Dülffer, Jost, 192
Economic exploitation, 227, 228, 231–33
See also Expropriations; Requisitions
Economic unrealism, 140–42
Einem, Karl von, 213, 217, 242, 298, 306, 318
Eisenhart-Rothe, Ernst von, 312
Elgin, Victor Alexander Earl of, 194
Elgin Report, 194
Emmich, Otto von, 208
Endkampf, 309–13
and denial of defeat, 313–15
and destruction of occupied territory, 315–16
evolution from practices and assumptions, 309
motivations for, 310–11, 316–17
and self-destruction, 316–19
Enemy
humiliation of, 156, 177
underestimation of, 170, 208, 214, 221, 223–24, 296–
97
Enemy civilians
during Boer War, 152–53, 183–87
deference demanded of, 244, 249–51
destruction of farms and settlements of
in Africa, 26, 60–61, 66–67, 155–57, 183–85
in Europe, 118–19, 210, 256–62
food warfare against, 26, 155–57, 184, 185
in Franco-Prussian War, 117–19, 184
Herero treatment of, 10–11

identiﬁcation of (labeling clothing), 72–73, 239,
244, 249
instrumentalization of, 4, 83, 126–27, 248, 249, 256,
294
and international law, 119–23, 128–29, 219, 226, 235–
37
and military necessity, 123–26, 237–38, 241–42
plunder of, 150, 261–62
rape of, 150–51
shooting of, 21, 47–49, 51–52, 210, 231
standard practices in treatment of, 117–19, 121, 149–
57
World War I policy toward, 226–30
See also Occupation; Prisoners, African
Entente, the, 174, 200
See also France; Great Britain; Russia; World War I
Enver Pasha, 270, 272–73, 285, 286, 287
and deportation orders, 274–75, 276–77
and German military mission, 269, 270, 271
and German-Turkish alliance, 266–67, 268, 269
and supposed Armenian revolt, 275, 281
Erickson, Edward, 275
Erzberger, Matthias, 188
Esher, Reginald Baliol Viscount, 194
Esher Report, 194
Estorff, Ludwig von, 20, 22, 39, 89, 195
and closing of Shark Island, 86–87
and extermination proclamation, 60–61
at the Waterberg, 27–28, 36, 37, 39
European warfare
and colonial warfare compared, 131–34, 206–7
norms of, 136
See also Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71; World
War I
Excesses. See Atrocities; Extremism
Executions
of francs-tireurs, 118, 119
of Herero prisoners, 15, 17–20, 26–27, 52, 71, 145–48
of noncombatants in Belgium and France, 209–10,
231
during Ober-Ost occupation, 245
as standard practice, 145–48
Exemplary punishment, 18–20, 26–27, 145–48, 245
Expropriations, 232, 245–46, 251–52
Extermination proclamation (Herero Revolt), 47, 55–
57, 178, 180
cancellation of, 63–66
context of, 57–58
effect of, 58–62
knowledge of, 62–63
Extremism
in colonial warfare, 13–14, 91, 131, 146, 157–58, 183–
85
constraints on, 182–87, 219–20, 225, 259, 323, 325
deﬁned, 1–2

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
drift toward, in occupation, 121, 235–38, 239, 248
and Endkampf, 311
and Falkenhayn’s all-or-nothing dilemma, 218–19,
224–25
and imperialism, 105–6, 191–92, 332–33
as inherent in military culture, 211, 324
mission tactics encourage, 116–17
in Moltke’s thinking, 161
and officers’ virtues, 143–45
as result of Schlieffen Plan, 174–75, 213–14, 217
as result of standard practices, 53–54, 121–22, 131,
143, 145–49, 152–58, 206–7, 211, 224, 292
role of ideology in, 326, 329–32
role of technology in, 328–29
at start of World War I, 207–8
unintentional preparation for, 209–10
and wonder weapons and techniques, 214, 222-24
See also Violence
Fakri Pasha, 279
Falkenhayn, Erich von, 200, 203, 204, 205, 210
all-or-nothing dilemma of, 218–19, 224–25
and Armenian genocide, 268, 270, 280
and Battle of Verdun, 220–22, 224, 330
career of, 218
and forced labor, 219, 294
and Hindenburg and Ludendorff compared, 217–
18, 224, 292, 307
on honor, 317–18
moderation of, 215–17
and proposed union of Central Powers, 219–20
repetition of Schlieffen Plan by, 212–14
and submarine warfare, 222–24, 295
Farms, burning of, 183–84, 185
See also Destruction
Fawcett, Millicent, 187
Fawcett Commission, 187, 193
Feld, Maury, 178
Felddienst-Ordnung, 120, 128, 142, 150
Feldman, Gerald, 295
Feldmann, Otto von, 275–76, 278
Fenchel (missionary), 86
Flanking attacks. See Concentric battles
Food aid. See Committee for the Relief of Belgium
Food in exchange for work, 255 n, 256, 295
Food war, 26, 155–57, 184, 185, 251 n, 315–16
Force. See Violence
Forced labor, 4, 147
Belgian, 219, 235–42
of foreign workers, 228–30
French, 249, 252–57
of German civilians, 294–95
during Ober-Ost occupation, 246–47
in Southwest Africa, 74–75, 81–82, 83–84
“volunteer,” 235–36, 238–40, 247

Foreign policy
and fear of weakness, 192–93
German-Turkish alliance, 266–69
Kaiser’s control over, 103, 107
military-cultural consistency with, 174, 327–28
military policy independence from, 107, 166, 200,
218
Weltpolitik, 174, 191–92, 200, 327–28
and World War I war aims, 199–202, 325
Foreign workers, detention of, 228–30
Förster, Stig, 105, 162, 206
France
Belgian forced labor in, 240
colonial wars of, 137, 182
deportations from, 211–12, 249, 253–57, 259–60
German war planning against, 161-65 (see also
Schlieffen Plan)
and March offensive of 1918, 302, 303–4
military culture of, 320
Moltke’s realism about, 161–62
as threat, 164–65, 174
World War I military practices of, 320–23
See also Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71; Northern
France
François, Major von, 195
Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71, 102, 110, 115, 161,
179
treatment of civilians in, 117–19, 184
Francs-tireurs, 117–19, 209, 210–11
Franke, Viktor, 17, 20, 41, 43, 47–48
at Omaruru, 11, 144
resignation of, 51
Frederick the Great, 110
Freytag-Loringhoven, Hugo von, 254
Friederich, Rudolf von, 120–21
Friedrichs, Lieutenant, 71
Fuchs, Dr., 76–77
Gallwitz, Max von, 293, 308, 315, 316, 318
Gas warfare, 214
Gender
and military culture, 101
and targeting of males, 49–52, 54
See also Women; Women and children
General Staff, 12–13, 22, 29, 107–8, 204
ascendancy of, 111–15
control of World War I by, 200, 208, 322
Geneva Conventions, 120, 122, 127, 128, 321
Genocide, 2, 4
and extermination proclamation, 57 n
Nazi, 326
See also Armenian genocide
German Colonial Society, 233
German East Africa, 25–26
See also Maji-Maji Revolt

373

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
374

German military culture, 93–98
characteristics of, 2–3, 160–71
constraints on, 182, 225, 323, 325 (see also Civilian
oversight; International law; Public opinion;
Self-criticism)
external supports of, 327–28
institutionalization of
based on practices during Franco-Prussian War,
117–19
in mission tactics, 115–17
via General Staff, 111–14, 162
irrationality produced by, 92, 95–97, 108, 172, 206,
207, 308 n, 317–18
legacy of, 333
operation of in World War I, 199–200, 206, 207,
213, 215, 224, 296–97, 299–300, 304–8, 317–18
and other European powers compared, 98–103, 129,
182, 193–96, 320, 326–27
Prussian origins of, 110
and self-criticism, 142, 196, 306
See also Basic assumptions; Civil-military relations; Doctrine; Planning; Practices; Schlieffen Plan; Standard practices; Strategy; Victor
German military mission, in Turkey, 269–71
German Southwest Africa (SWA), 8, 106, 132
deportations from, 79–81, 85–86, 189–90
investigation of war conduct in, 194–96
lack of logistical planning in, 142–43
Nama War in, 57–58, 67–69, 79–81, 85–88, 89–90,
189–90
See also Herero Revolt; Prisoners, African
German-Turkish alliance, 266–69
See also Armenian genocide
Germany
potential destruction of, 316–19
strategic disadvantages of, 161–62, 164–65, 206
uniﬁcation of, 103, 110 (see also Civil-military relations; Constitution, German; Political culture)
Geyer, Michael, 305, 314
Gibson, Hugh, 230
Gökalp, Ziya, 272
Goltz, Colmar von der, 162, 265, 270–71, 273
and German response to Armenian genocide, 277,
278–79, 286–87
Götzen, Count Gustav Adolf von, 132, 133, 138, 146,
177
on colonial policy, 332
public relations by, 157
Great Britain
and Belgian neutrality, 166
German underestimation of, 296
and international law, 129
and March offensive of 1918, 299, 302
political culture of, 184–88, 193–94
and submarine warfare, 223–24, 296–97

as threat, 174
World War I military practices of, 320–23
See also Boer War
Greeks, Turkish deportation of, 273, 286
Groener, Wilhelm, 169, 170, 217, 314
Gudewill, Captain, 8, 10, 11, 18
Guerrilla warfare
in Boer War, 183
in China, 148
and Franco-Prussian War, 117–19, 125
and international law, 124
in Southwest Africa, 52, 55, 64, 67
in World War I (Eastern occupied zone), 247–48
Guides, civilians as, 119, 121, 122, 123, 147
Gündell, Erich von, 194
Guse, Felix, 274, 276, 278
Haber, Fritz, 214
Haeften, Colonel von, 312
Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, 120, 122, 128–29,
192–93
occupation rules under, 124–25, 226, 231
Haig, Douglas, 322
Halil Bey (Pasha), 268, 269, 287
Hamakari, 37, 39–41
Harbou, Bodo von, 305
Hartmann, Julius von, 123–24, 125, 126, 127, 179, 332
Hassan bin Omar, Sultan, 25, 26, 27
Haste, as result of German military culture, 163, 173,
214, 256, 295, 296
Haussleiter, Gottlob, 71, 76, 86
Helfferich, Karl, 223
Hellmich, Lieutenant, 84
Herero, population estimates of, 7–8 n
Herero Revolt, 3, 7–10, 91
Battle of Waterberg, 39–42
plan of attack at, 27–28, 33–34, 42–43
troop disposition at, 34–39
Trotha’s goals at, 27–33
and Boer War compared, 183, 187–91
causes of, 8
conclusion of, 66–67, 82
conduct under Leutwein, 13–14, 20–21
execution of prisoners, 17–20
failure to take prisoners, 14–16
death toll of, 76, 78, 81, 82–83, 88–90
extermination proclamation during, 47, 55–58, 178,
180
cancellation of, 63–66
effect of, 58–62
knowledge of, 62–63
German rejection of negotiations during, 29, 31,
44–45, 52, 58–60, 61–62, 65
and fear of weakness, 176, 178
German war aims in, 10, 27–33, 52–53, 179–81
Herero war practices in, 10–11

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
investigation of, 194–96
Leutwein’s attempted negotiations during, 12–13
pursuit during, 41–42, 45–50, 59–61, 66–67, 144–45,
176, 195
Captain Klein’s mythic expedition during, 144–
45
and mass death in the desert, 52–55
and order to shoot armed males, 49–52, 54
and racism, 30, 53, 136, 330–31
replacement of Leutwein during, 21–25, 167
See also German Southwest Africa; Prisoners,
African
Hertling, Georg von, 203, 301
Herwig, Holger, 296
Heyde, Colonel von der, 36, 37, 39–41
Heydebreck, Joachim von, 22, 61
Heye, Wilhelm, 308, 316
Hidden assumptions. See Basic assumptions
Hindenburg, Paul von, 4, 203, 217, 224, 285
annexationism of, 200–201
denial of defeat by, 305
and deportation, 236
eastern campaign of, 216
and Endkampf, 310, 313, 315, 317
and March offensive of 1918, 303
and strategic retreat, 258, 291, 292–94
and submarine warfare, 295–96
Hindenburg program, 246, 294–95
Hintrager, Oskar, 87–88, 189
Hintze, Paul von, 307, 310, 312
Hobhouse, Emily, 186–87
Hoesch (Legation Secretary), 290
Hoffmann, Max, 216, 258, 298, 317
Hohenlohe-Ingelﬁngen, Prince Kraft zu, 162
Hohenlohe-Langenburg, Prince Ernst zu, 85–86, 283,
284
Holstein, Friedrich von, 193
Holtzendorff, Henning von, 223, 224, 296–97
Homes, burning of, 26, 60–61, 66–67, 118, 183–84, 185,
210, 260
Honor, 87, 317–18
Hoover, Herbert, 230, 253, 257, 262
Horne, John, 209
Hostages, 118–19, 121, 122, 123, 210, 226, 315–16
during Boer War, 184
Hottentots. See Nama; Nama War
Housing, prison, 75, 78
Howard, Michael, 119
Hülsen-Häseler, Dietrich von, 24–25, 27, 65, 180
Humanitarianism, 10, v13, 30, 64, 87, 173, 190
and diplomacy, 13, 284
“false,” 33, 71, 176
and French deportations, 254–55
and international law, 14, 17, 122, 127
and resistance to Armenian genocide, 281, 287–88,
290

severity as “true,” 186 n
and Trotha’s policies, 64, 71
Humann, Hans von, 271, 277, 278, 279
Human shields, 209–10
Humiliation of enemy, 156, 177
Hunger war, 26, 155–57, 184, 185
“Hun speech,” 29, 135–36, 143–44
Hunter, Sir Archibald, 184
Hutier, Oskar von, 302
Identiﬁcation badges and passes
for civilians during World War I, 239, 244, 249
for Herero prisoners, 72–73
Ideology, as cause of extremism, 2, 248, 324, 326, 329–
32
See also Imperialism; National Socialism; Racism;
Social Darwinism
Imperialism
criticism of, 183
and deportation, 79, 233
and extremism, 105–6, 191–92, 332–33
and technology, 328–29
as war, 332
See also Colonial warfare; Herero Revolt
Imprisonment. See Internment camps; Prison camps;
Prisoners, African; Prisoners of war
Industry
Belgian, 232
forced labor in, 219, 235–36, 239–40
French, 251–52
Instrumentalization of civilians, 4, 83, 126–27, 248,
249, 256
International law, 119–23, 226, 323
basic assumptions about, 127–30, 192–93
comparative interpretations of, 129–30, 320–21
customary, 49, 127
and forced labor deportations, 219, 235–38, 241–
42
and gas warfare, 214
and German military practices, 119–22
limits warfare, 127
and military necessity, 123–26, 214, 237–38, 241–42,
320–21
and reciprocity, 127–28
and submarine warfare, 222
and taking of prisoners, 14–15
International opinion, 64, 241, 323
Internment camps, 73–74, 82–84, 152–55, 178
during Boer War, 152–53, 184–85, 186–87
during World War I, 211–12, 238–39, 240, 246–47,
253
See also Prison camps; Prisoners, African
Investigatory commissions, 187, 193–96
Irrationality, organizational, 92, 95–97
See also Basic assumptions
Izaak, Samuel, 87

375

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
376

Jäckh, Ernst, 233
Jagow, Gottlieb von, 208, 268, 280, 283, 284
Jews, World War I deportation of, 239 n
Junkers, 102
Kaiser, military command power of, 92, 103–4, 107
Kâmil, Mahmut, 274
Keim, August, 231
KEO. See Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung
Ketteler, Baron Wilhelm Emmanuel von, 27, 135
Keudel (local administrator), 146
Kier, Elizabeth, 98, 160
Kitchener, Horatio Herbert, 73, 140, 183–84, 185–87
Klein, Captain, mythic expedition of, 144–45
Klein, Fritz, 314
Kleist, Captain, 146
Kluckhohn, Clyde, 94
Koch, Reinhard, 223
Köhler, Ludwig, 228, 238, 242
Königgrätz, Battle of, 111, 161
Kramer, Alan, 209
Kress von Kressenstein, Friedrich, 285, 287–88
Kriegsbrauch im Landkrieg, 120–21
Kriegs-Etappen-Ordnung (KEO), 119, 226–27, 256–57
Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach, Gustav, 219
Kubas, Jan, 49
Kuhl, Hermann von, 300, 301–2, 306, 307–8, 317
and destruction of northern France, 258, 261
Kuhlmann, August, 20–21, 53, 71, 78, 83
Kühlmann, Richard von, 284, 285
Kuhn, Lieutenant, 20, 71
Labor
colonial need for, 74, 82–84
World War I shortage of, 219, 231, 235, 261, 294–95
See also Forced labor
Labor camps. See Forced labor
Ladies’ Commission (Fawcett Commission), 187,
193
Lansdowne, Lord Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice 5th Marquess of, 129, 185
Lansing, Robert, 284 n
“Laying waste”
during Boer War, 183–84, 185
in northern France, 256–62
See also Destruction; Food war
Leadership style, replication of, 70–71
Ledebour, Georg, 188
Lepsius, Johannes, 283
Lequis, Arnold, 55, 72, 140, 141, 142, 173
Lettow-Vorbeck, Paul von, 37, 40, 62, 132–33, 150
on executions, 147–48
Leutwein, Paul, 20, 30–33, 37
Leutwein, Theodor, 7, 32, 73, 79, 89
and negotiations, 12–13, 44
replacement of, 21–25, 167

and taking of prisoners, 14–16
and treatment of prisoners, 16–19, 43
and Trotha’s extermination policy, 50–51, 63–64
and Waterberg plans, 27–28, 31–33, 37
Lille, France, 251
Liman von Sanders, Otto, 269–70, 274–75, 276, 278,
286
Lindequist, Friedrich von, 82–86
Lloyd George, David, 187
Logistical planning, 115, 133, 137–43, 161
and Belgian deportations, 238–40
and French deportations, 255
for prisoners, 71–73, 84–85, 139, 321
and Schlieffen Plan, 140, 169–70, 208 n, 210
for troops in Southwest Africa, 22, 34, 41–42, 53, 67,
137–38, 142–43, 153–54
Looting, 150, 261–62
Lossberg, Fritz von, 216, 304, 308
Ludendorff, Erich, 4, 164, 171, 203, 224
admission of defeat by, 308–9
annexationism of, 200
criticism of subordinates by, 305
denial of defeat by, 306–8, 313–15
and deportations, 234, 236, 240, 257
and destruction of Belgium and northern France,
260, 310, 315–16
eastern campaign of, 216
and Endkampf, 310, 312, 318
and German-Turkish alliance, 268
and Hindenburg program, 294–95
and March offensive of 1918, 299–304, 307–8
and Ober-Ost occupation, 243, 248
personality of, 217–18, 307
and strategic retreat, 258, 291, 292–94, 310
on “total war,” 205, 330
Lueder, C., 125–26, 127
Lüttwitz, General von, 260
MacIntyre, Alisdair, 97
Maercker, Major, 72, 89
Maherero, Samuel, 10, 12–13, 56
Maherero, Wilhelm, 66
Maji-Maji Revolt, 3, 132, 133, 138, 332
executions in, 145–47
hunger war in, 155–57
surrender terms offered in, 177
Males, targeting of, 49–52, 54
Malnutrition. See Food war; Rations
Manpower shortage
in Southwest Africa, 74, 82–84
during World War I, 219, 231, 235, 261, 294–95
See also Forced labor
March offensive of 1918, 299–304, 306, 307–8, 309
Marne, Battle of the, 164, 212–13, 217
Martens Declaration, 122–23
Marwitz, Lieutenant von der, 155

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Massacres, 46–49, 51–52
See also Armenian genocide; Atrocities; Executions
Max, Prince von Baden, 298, 303, 325
and Endkampf proposals, 310, 316, 317
Meier, Fritz, 151
Merker, Captain, 146
Mertz von Quirnheim, Herman Ritter, 307
Michaelis, Captain, 222, 319
“Michael” offensive, 299–304, 306, 307–8, 309
Militarism, 2, 93
double, 105–7, 108–9, 328
Military, German
bureaucratic organization of, 99–100
civilian deference to, 107, 166, 202–3, 237–38, 323,
327
constitutional power of command of, 92, 103–4,
107
disorganization of, 107–8, 137, 203–5, 239–40, 270
Endkampf motivations of, 310–11, 316–17
inadequate numbers in, 243
priorities of, 71–73, 78–79, 84–85, 115, 138–39
as “strong” organization, 97, 115, 328
symbolic importance of, 104–5, 108–9
See also Civil-military relations; German military
culture; Self-criticism
Military Cabinet, 104, 107
Military culture
and action rationality, 97
British, 129, 184–87, 193–94, 320
and bureaucratic organization, 99–100, 107–8
and doctrine, 159
factors in determining, 98
of Germany and other European powers compared, 98–103, 129, 182, 193–96, 320, 326–27
and organizational culture theory, 92, 93–98
See also German military culture
Military mission, to Turkey, 269–71
See also Armenian genocide
Military necessity, 4, 123–24, 179, 211, 226, 280, 284 n
and Belgian deportations, 237–38, 241–42
and gas warfare, 214
and international law, 123–26, 214, 222, 237–38, 241–
42, 320–21
as justiﬁcation of Armenian genocide, 266, 271,
274–78
German diplomatic response to, 279–85
German officers’ resistance to, 285–90
and occupation of northern France, 249, 260
and World War I, 202–3, 214, 222, 227, 237–38, 241–
42, 296
Military Penal Code, 125, 128, 150
Milner, Sir Alfred, 185, 187, 188
Mines, destruction of, 257, 258, 260–61
Missionaries, 65, 72–73, 76–78, 83, 188–90
Mission tactics, 115–17, 133, 161, 227, 244, 259, 291
vs. detailed planning, 169

Moltke, Helmuth von (the elder), 12, 111, 114, 115,
308 n, 328
military doctrines of, 110, 160–62, 165
on mission tactics, 116–17
and treatment of civilians, 118
Moltke, Helmuth von (the younger), 162, 163, 164,
165, 170–71
and Belgium, 208, 209, 211, 231
and failure of Schlieffen Plan, 212
and German-Turkish alliance, 267
Mommsen, Hans, 326
Mortality rates
in Armenian genocide, 263
in German East Africa, 157
in Southwest Africa, 76, 78, 81, 82–83, 88–90, 189n
Mtau, Sultan, 26
Mudra, Bruno von, 316, 318
Mueller, Lieutenant Colonel, 39
Mühlenfels, 85, 153
Müller, Representative, 10
Nadji, Omer, 289
Nama, 8
Nama War, 57–58, 67–69, 79–81, 85–88, 89–90, 189–90
See also Herero Revolt
Namibia. See German Southwest Africa; Herero Revolt
Nationalism, 105–6, 191–92
National security, 207
and double militarism, 106
and Herero Revolt, 12, 179–80, 190
National Socialism, 248, 277, 289, 326, 333
National sovereignty, 179–80, 326–27
Naumann, Friedrich, 289
Navy, 172–73, 200, 204–5, 318
and submarine warfare, 222–24, 295–98, 319
Navy League, 105
Necessities of war. See Military necessity
“Necessity of the Impossible,” 219, 303
Negotiations
authority for, 63, 195–96
consideration of, in World War I, 201, 215–16, 224,
304, 308, 309–10
and Endkampf proposals, 309–10, 313
and fear of weakness, 176–78
during Herero Revolt, 12–13, 82
German rejection of, 29, 31, 44–45, 52, 58–60, 61–
62, 65, 67,176, 178
Moltke rejects, in Franco-Prussian War, 118
in Nama War, 67–68, 69
rejection of, in World War I, 199, 201, 224, 291, 296,
299, 301, 307, 308, 311
with Russia, 215–16, 218–19
and submarine warfare, 298
and World War I war aims, 201
Neurath, Constantin von, 280

377

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
378

Newspapers, 191
Niemann, Alfred, 309
Noncombatants. See Enemy civilians; Prisoners,
African; Prisoners of war
Norms, vs. practices, 95–96, 151, 330, 333
Northern France, 248–53
deportations from, 211–12, 249, 253–57, 259–60
destruction of, 256–62, 309–10, 313–15
Obedience
by civilians, 125–26
to orders, 100–101
Ober-Ost, occupation under, 243–48
Occupation, 4, 124–27
and “arch-occupier” position, 129
of Belgium, 209–11, 230–33
and deportations, 211–12, 219, 235–42
and Endkampf, 315–16
institutional forms of, 204, 227–28
of northern France, 248–53
and deportations, 211–12, 249, 253–57, 259–60
and destruction, 256–62
under Ober-Ost, 243–48
policy for, 71–72, 226–30
and racism, 331
by World War I combatants compared, 321–22
See also Enemy civilians; Requisitions
Offensive warfare, 213
advantages of, 160
German historical preference for, 160–65
of March 1918, 299–304, 306, 307–8, 309
1917 planned return to, 293–94, 299–300
as response to defeat, 306
and Southwest Africa investigation, 195–96
See also Schlieffen Plan
Officers
African experience of, 71
honor of, 87, 317–18
social class of, 102
staff, 305
training of, 111–12, 116, 120
virtues of, in military culture, 116–17, 143–45, 170–
71
“Old Africans,” 20, 60, 71
Omaheke Desert, 35
Omaruru, 11, 36, 71, 144
Ombakaha, 61–62
Omburo camp, 84
Operations
deﬁned, 159 n
and neglect of strategic planning, 114–15, 161, 215,
302
as priority over logistics, 71–72, 115, 138–39
and role of General Staff, 111, 114–15
Schlieffen Plan focus on, 168–69

tactics as substitute for, 59, 114, 156, 214, 291, 301–2,
325
in World War I strategic vacuum, 217, 224, 325–26
Optimism, enforced, 170–71, 293, 298, 307, 323
Order, 178–79
extreme military conception of, 100, 125–26, 231,
243–44, 249–51
as goal in Belgium, 211, 231, 237
as goal in Herero Revolt, 55
as goal of Ober-Ost occupation, 243–44
and international law, 124, 125–26
and military discipline, 100
victory as establishment of, 178–81
Orders
and mission tactics, 116, 133
obedience to, 100–101
to shoot armed Herero males, 49–52, 54
to Trotha, 28–30, 60
See also Extermination proclamation
Organizational blindness, 96, 115, 323
Organizational culture, 3, 92, 93–98
and basic assumptions, 94–95, 96–98
deﬁned, 95
and military doctrine, 160
in strong organizations, 97
See also German military culture; Military culture
Orlogsende, 144
Otavi Company, 81, 83
Ott, Steven, 95
Ottoman Empire. See Armenian genocide; Turkey
Oviumbo, 22, 25
Owikokorero, 21–22
Paasche, Lieutenant von, 146, 155
Pallavicini, Janós, 267
Pan-German League, 105, 174, 192, 201, 233, 268
Paraquin, Lieutenant Colonel, 288
Patzig, Deputy, 179
Payer, Friedrich von, 243, 317
Peace, as goal of war, 179
Perfect order. See Order
Petzold, Joachim, 314
Planning, 99–100, 196, 329
as defense against anxiety, 175
detailed, 169, 221–22, 224, 307, 329
lack of coordination in, 107–8, 204–5
operational (battle), 111, 114–15, 168–69
and role of General Staff, 111–15
strategic, 203, 206, 212, 215–16
wishful thinking in, 107, 108, 162, 166, 220, 221, 222,
294–95, 296–97, 299, 303, 307, 314–15
See also Logistical planning; Schlieffen Plan; Strategy
Plessen, Hans von, 30
Plunder, 150, 261–62

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
Political culture
British, 184–88, 193–94
and double militarism, 105–7, 108–9, 328
lack of civilian oversight in, 2, 12, 92, 103–4, 188,
193, 323, 325
lack of policy coordination in, 107, 166, 174, 202–3,
218, 325
and military discipline, 100–101
and military symbolism, 104–5, 108–9
weakness of German, 187–93
See also Civil-military relations; Constitution, German; Public opinion
Political parties, 106, 179, 188
Posen, Barry, 159 n, 160
Posseldt, Major General, 281, 288
Power, and violence contrasted, 181, 327, 332
Practices, 2
continuities in, 206
deﬁned, 93–94
inconsistent with values, 95–96, 151, 330, 333
as legacy of German military culture, 333
of World War I combatants compared, 320–23
See also Standard practices
Prager, Lieutenant, 173
Preventive war, 161
Prison camps, 73–74, 82–86, 89–90, 153–55
Shark Island, 78–79, 82–83, 86–88, 90
Swakopmund, 75–78, 83
See also Internment camps; Prisoners, African
Prisoners, African
in Boer War, 152–53, 184–85, 186–87
chaining of, 43, 70–71, 72–73
in collection camps, 73–74, 82–84
deportation of, 79–81, 85–86, 189–90
execution of, 15, 17–20, 26–27, 52, 71, 145–48
failure to take, 11, 14–16, 21, 47
fear of releasing, 178
forced labor of, 74–75, 81–82, 83–84
military administration and deaths of, 84–85
mortality rates of, 76, 78, 81, 82–83, 89–90
and prison camp conditions under Lindequist, 82–
85, 86–88
and prison camp conditions under Trotha, 73–74,
75–79, 82–86, 153
questioning of, 16–17
rations for, 75–78, 83, 85, 153–55, 189
and Trotha’s principles of imprisonment, 70–73
Prisoners of war
during Boer War, 184, 185–86
execution of, 145–48
and international law, 119–22, 127, 128, 321
logistical planning for, 71–73, 84–85, 139, 321
standard practices in treatment of, 121, 145–48
during World War I, 247, 321
See also Prisoners, African

Private employers, of Herero prisoner labor, 74–75,
81
Property, conﬁscation of, 185–86
See also Destruction; Expropriations; Requisitions
Prussia, 110
military of, 103
social class in, 102
See also Franco-Prussian War
Public opinion
and Armenian genocide, 285
and Boer War, 186–87
and expectations of victory, 179–80
extremist, 105–6, 190–92
and Herero Revolt, 13, 64, 65
critics, 188–90
of “Hun speech,” 136
international, 64, 241, 323
and missionaries, 188–90
on unrestricted submarine warfare, 297
Punishment
of civilians during Franco-Prussian War, 118–19
deportation as, 80, 235, 238, 254
exemplary, 18–20, 26–27, 145–48, 245
and expectation of perfect order, 126
as goal of war, 59, 177, 179
military, 101
vs. preservation of workforce, 84
in prisoner-of-war camps, 321
See also Executions; Reprisals
Punitive expeditions, 13–14, 25–26, 101, 132, 148, 152
Pursuit
as doctrine, 168, 176
during Herero Revolt, 41–42, 45–50, 59–61, 66–67,
144–45, 176
investigation of, 195
and mass death in the desert, 52–55
and order to shoot armed males, 49–52, 54
as policy, 168, 176
Puttkamer, Jesco von, 81
Quade, Major, 90
Qualitative superiority, assumption of, 134–37, 170,
208, 214, 221, 223–24, 296–97, 331
Quarter, denial of in Herero Revolt, 11, 14–15, 21, 46–
49
See also Extermination proclamation
Race war, 25, 59, 64, 119, 131, 158, 330
Racism, 30, 50, 136, 180, 248, 330–32
and food rations, 155
and mass death of noncombatants, 53
and Ober-Ost occupation, 248
and retreat, 22
and stereotyping, 134–36
and technical superiority, 102

379

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
380

Railroads, 11, 67, 118–19, 183–84
military importance of, 11, 169, 329
slave labor on, 81, 84
Rape, 150–51
Rathenau, Walter, 236, 310
Rationality, Weberian, 324. See also Irrationality, organizational
Rations
for African prisoners, 75–78,79–80, 83, 85, 153 n,
153–55, 187, 189
for forced laborers during World War I, 240–41,
246–47, 253
for German civilians during World War I, 240n
for German troops, 140, 153–54, 195
Realism, and admission of defeat, 213–4, 304–9
Rechenberg, Baron Albrecht von, 156
Reciprocity, 127–28
Recruitment, military, 109
for colonial wars, 132–33
Redern, Major von, 72
Reform Agreement (Ottoman Empire, 1914), 266
Reichstag, 190
and Armenian genocide, 285
and Herero Revolt, 8–10, 13–14, 65, 106
and Hindenburg program, 246, 295
and military appropriations, 109, 137–38, 157, 164
and unrestricted submarine warfare, 297
weakness of, 104, 188
Repetition of techniques, 45–46, 55–56, 207, 213, 217,
301, 303–4, 306
Reprisals, 123, 126, 210
during Boer War, 184
during Franco-Prussian War, 118–19
Requisitions, 119, 122. 124, 141–42, 208 n, 227
during World War I, 231–32, 245–46, 251
Resistance and revolt
Armenian, 275, 281
Belgian, 208
and character of occupation, 124–26
during Franco-Prussian War, 117–19
Nama War, 57–58, 67–69, 79–81, 85–88, 89–90, 189–
90
against Ober-Ost occupation, 247–48
See also Boxer Uprising; Herero Revolt; Maji-Maji
Revolt
Retaliation. See Punishment; Reprisals
Retreat
in colonial warfare, 22
and destruction of northern France, 256–62
strategic, 167, 256, 258–60, 291, 292–94
See also Endkampf
Revolution as policy in World War I, 219–20
Revolution of 1848–49, 103
Rhenish Missionary Society, 189
Richter, Bezirksamtmann, 146

Richter, District Judge, 7
Risk taking
Falkenhayn tempers, 215–16
and mission tactics, 117
and Schlieffen Plan, 164, 166, 170–71, 175
at Verdun, 216
in World War I, 224, 301, 302–3
Ritter, Gerhard, 241
Ritter von Mann, Ernst, 317
Roberts, Frederick Sleigh Lord, 73, 183
Rohrbach, Paul, 19, 43, 50, 62
and Armenian genocide, 265, 273, 283
on Herero deaths, 89, 90
racism of, 330–31
Roon, Albrecht von, 103
Rössler, Consul, 279, 280
Rothenberg, Gunther, 171
Rupprecht, Crown Prince of Bavaria, 204, 208 n, 293,
298, 304
and Endkampf, 309–10, 318
on enforced optimism, 170
on Falkenhayn, 216, 220
and March offensive of 1918, 299, 300, 302
and occupation of northern France, 211–12, 251,
256, 259, 260
Russia
deportation in, 234–35
German war planning against, 161–65, 174 (see also
Schlieffen Plan)
and international law, 129–30
negotiations with, 215–16, 218–19
occupation practices of, 322
and Turkey, 267, 268, 274–75
World War I withdrawal of, 284, 299
Rust, Conrad, 10
Sabotage, 119, 183–84, 226
Sailors’ revolt, 319
Salisbury, Lord Robert, 185
Sauberzweig, General von, 237
Scheer, Reinhard, 317, 319
Schein, Edgar, 95–96
Scheubner-Richter, Max Erwin von, 281, 288, 289
Scheüch, Heinrich, 311, 317
Schlieffen, Alfred von, 12–13, 61, 68, 114, 162–63
on preparations for prisoners, 139
and Trotha’s appointment, 24, 25, 27
and Trotha’s extermination proclamation, 64–66,
178, 180
Schlieffen Plan, 107, 140, 159–60, 200, 206
characteristics of, 166–71
and drift toward extremes, 174–75
evolution of, 160–65
failure of, 212–13, 215–17
and fear of weakness, 164–65, 175–78

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
implementation of, 207–12
loyalty to, 212–14, 217
and occupation of northern France, 251
reasons for its hegemony inside military, 171–74
reﬂects military culture, 165–66, 171
support for, 171–74
Schnee, Heinrich, 24, 157
Schröder, Ensign, 146
Schulenburg, Count Friedrich von der, 300
Schutztruppe, 7, 25, 85, 88
in German East Africa, 132, 138
and logistical planning, 137, 138, 140
political authority over, 12, 64
reorganization of, 194–95
See also Herero Revolt
Schwabe, Kurd, 42
Schwerin, Friedrich von, 331
Schwertfeger, Bernhard, 261, 307, 314
Scorched earth policy
during Boer War, 183–84, 185
in northern France and Belgium, 256–62, 309–10,
315–16
See also Destruction; Food war
Sedan, battle of, 117, 161
Seeckt, Hans von, 208
Self-criticism, 115, 142, 171–74, 182, 221, 328
within British military, 184
of colonial warfare, 194–96
and mission tactics, 116
and obedience to orders, 100–101
and Southwest Africa investigation, 194–96
during World War I, 205, 216–17, 221, 291, 292–93,
300–301, 304–6, 308, 314 n, 323
Self-destruction, 3–4, 170–71 n, 218–19, 316–19
Settlers. See Colonists
Seymour, Admiral Sir Edward, 148
Shakir, Bahaeddin, 273, 274
Shark Island, 78–79, 82–83, 86–88, 90
Short war illusion, 134, 167–68
Showalter, Dennis, 160
Siegfrieden. See Victory: of pure military force
Siegfried line, 237
retreat to, 256, 258–60, 291, 292–94, 305
Snyder, Jack, 160
Social class, 102, 104–5
Social Darwinism, 97, 105–6, 174, 191, 211, 233, 328,
330
Solf, Wilhelm, 313
Somme, the, 221
Southwest Africa. See German Southwest Africa
Specialization, 113–14
Special Organization, Turkish, 273, 274, 275, 288
Spies, 19–20, 119, 121, 247
Standard practices
atrocities against civilians as, 47–49, 51–52, 149–52

concentric battles and pursuit as, 45, 168–69
in European and colonial wars compared, 131–34
and expectations of colonial warfare, 134–37
extreme results of, 53, 157–58, 224
and failure of logistical planning, 137–43
Franco-Prussian War as model for, 110, 115, 117–19
Herero, 10–11
hunger war as, 155–57
internment of civilians as, 152–55
and loyalty to Schlieffen Plan, 213–14
and officers’ virtues, 143–45
in operation of internment camps, 84–85
as source of doctrine, 159
in Southwest Africa, 26–27, 49
in strategic vacuum, 199–200, 206, 207, 325–26
in treatment of civilians, 49, 117–19, 121, 149–57
in treatment of enemy soldiers, 121, 145–48
in World War I, 206
See also Practices
Stange, August, 288
Starvation. See Food war; Rations
Stein, Hermann von, 311
Stereotyping, 108, 134–36
Stoecker, Adolf, 18
Storz, Christian, 10
Strategy, 159–60
and counterproductive operations in World War I,
214, 224, 301–2
deﬁned, 159 n
German disadvantages in, 161–62, 164–65, 206
historical preference for the offensive in, 160–65
neglect of, 107, 114–15, 161, 199–207, 302, 325–26
See also Doctrine; Schlieffen Plan
“Strong” organizations, 97, 115, 328
Stübel, Oscar W., 14, 24, 25, 76–77, 179
on supposed Herero cruelty, 10, 136
Stülpnagel, Joachim von, 308
Submarine warfare, 222–24, 295–98, 319
Success, measures of, 108–9, 115
See also Victory
Superiority, assumption of, 134–37, 170, 208, 214, 221,
223–24, 296–97, 331
Supplies. See Logistical planning
Surrender
Herero offers of, 44–45, 51, 54, 62, 65
unconditional, 118, 177
See also Negotiations
SWA. See German Southwest Africa
Swakopmund prison camp, 75–78, 83
Symbolism, military, 104–5, 108–9
Tactics
counterproductive, 214, 224, 301–2
deﬁned, 159 n
planning focus on, 114–15

381

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
382

Tactics (continued)
as source of doctrine, 159
as substitute for operations, 59, 156, 302
in World War I policy vacuum, 224, 325–26
See also Mission tactics
Talât, Pasha Mehmet, 274, 276, 278, 282
and German-Turkish alliance, 266–67, 269
Technology
and extremism, 328–29
gas warfare, 214
and imperialism, 102
submarine warfare, 222–24, 295–98, 319
See also Railroads
Tecklenburg, Deputy Governor, 75, 76–77, 80, 155,
180–81
Terrorism, 26–27, 124
Thaer, Albrecht von, 228, 298, 304, 305–6, 312
Third Reich, 326, 329, 333
Timbu, Manuel, 46–47, 49
Tirpitz, Alfred von, 138, 172–73, 222–23, 268, 297
Togo, deportations to, 79–81
“Total combat,” 206, 224
“Total war,” 205–6, 330
Toynbee, Arnold, 273
Training
for colonial wars, 132
on international law, 119–21, 128
of officer corps, 111–12, 116, 120
Traugott, 66
Trauma-learning, 96, 117
Travers, Tim, 320
Trotha, Lothar von, 18, 24, 32, 80
appointment of, 22–25
and cancellation of extermination proclamation,
63–66
career of, 25
and conclusion of Herero Revolt, 66
deportations under, 79–81
forced labor under, 74–75, 81–82
goals of, 27–33, 41–43, 52–53, 59–60
imprisonment principles of, 70–73
issuance of extermination proclamation by, 56–58
and Nama war, 67–68
orders to, 28–30, 60
and order to shoot armed males, 49–52, 54
prison camp conditions under, 73–74, 75–79, 153
and pursuit, 46–47, 52–53, 54–56
racism of, 30, 53, 330
rejection of negotiations by, 31, 44–45, 52, 58–60,
61–62, 65, 176, 195
removal of, 68–69
and troop disposition at the Waterberg, 36–39
Trumpener, Ulrich, 265
Turkey
German alliance with, 266–69

German military mission in, 269–71
strategic importance of, 268
in World War I, 267–68, 269–70
See also Armenian genocide
Turner, Barry, 3, 209
United States
and Armenian genocide, 284 n
entry into World War I by, 299–300
and submarine warfare, 223–24, 296–97
Unrealism
agricultural, 252
and battle of Verdun, 220–22
bureaucratic, 100
economic, 140–42
and French deportations, 255–56
about Germany’s limits, 222
of Schlieffen Plan, 166, 168, 169–70
See also Logistical planning
Unrestricted submarine warfare (USW), 222–24, 295–
98, 319
Urfa, shelling of, 279
USW. See Unrestricted submarine warfare
Vagts, Alfred, 134
Values. See Beliefs and values
Van uprising, 275, 281
Vedder, Heinrich, 75–76, 77
Verdun, battle of, 216, 220–22, 224, 330
Verfolgung. See Pursuit
Vernichtung. See Annihilation; Destruction
Vernichtungsgedanke. See Destruction: idea of
Vernichtungskrieg. See Annihilation; Annihilation,
battle of
Vernichtungspolitik. See Annihilation: Trotha’s policy
of
Vernichtungssieg. See Victory: of pure military force
Victory
as annihilation, 2, 27–28, 58, 59–60, 156, 160–61,
166–67
anti-strategic pursuit of, in World War I, 220–21,
224
as establishment of order, 178–81
extravagant predictions of, 221, 296–97, 302, 303
Falkenhayn’s views of, 215–18, 220–21, 224
imperative of, 108–9, 129–30, 137, 143, 298
as “lasting capitulation” of enemy, 156–57
Ludendorff ’s modiﬁed view of, 293
negotiated surrender as goal of, 27, 215–16
offensive as universal means to, 306
“prescription” for, 165
psychological, 220, 222–23, 297
of pure military force, 29, 44–45, 53, 156, 160–61,
199, 201, 203, 208, 213, 218, 224, 291, 294, 296,
299, 302, 307

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
shifting views of, among officers, 298, 301, 303, 304,
306, 319
and World War I war aims, 200–201
Villages, burning of, 26, 60–61, 66–67, 118, 183–84, 185,
210, 260
Violence
cult of, 333
focus on technical management of, 113–14
hidden dynamism of, 174–75, 239
and lack of logistical planning, 143
as means and end, 1–2, 113, 324
military as designated agent of, 99
mission tactics’ tendency to increase, 116–17
order as justiﬁcation for, 126
overvaluation of, 100
and power contrasted, 181, 327, 332
See also Extremism
Virtues, of officers, 116–17, 133, 143–45, 170 n, 170–71
See also Optimism, enforced
Volunteers
for colonial wars, 132–33
forced laborers designated as, 235–36, 238–40, 247
Wagenführer, Lieutenant, 78
Waldersee, Alfred von, 148, 150, 162
Wangenheim, Hans von, 270, 279, 280–83, 284, 289
and German-Turkish alliance, 266, 267, 269
War
as emergency, 121–22, 123
imperialism as, 332–33
international acceptance of, 326–27
unlimited nature of, 124, 126
War aims in World War I, 200–202, 215–16, 325
War Ministry, and General Staff, 107–8, 204
War treason, 125, 231
Waterberg, Battle of, 39–42
German troop disposition at, 34–39
plan of attack at, 27–28, 33–34, 42–43
Trotha’s goals at, 27–33, 41–43
Waterberg, the, 22
Weakness, fear of, 26, 45, 121
and Belgian deportations, 242
and destruction of northern France, 261
and German foreign policy, 192–93
and German military culture, 175–78
and Schlieffen Plan, 164–65, 175–78
Weber, Max, 99
Welck, Heinrich von, 41
Weltpolitik, 174, 191–92, 200, 327–28
Wernecke, Klaus, 192
Wetzell, Georg, 299, 305
Weyler y Nicolau, Valeriano, 73
Widenmann, Captain, 205
Wild von Hohenborn, Adolf, 214, 305, 318, 331
Wilhelm, Crown Prince, 216, 293, 299, 304, 309

Wilhelm I, Kaiser, 104, 110
Wilhelm II, Kaiser, 8, 12, 194, 236
and German-Turkish alliance, 267, 268
“Hun speech” of, 29, 135–36, 143–44
military symbolism surrounding, 104
and navy, 172, 223–24, 319
passivity of, 202, 204
and Trotha, 25, 29–30, 63, 64–65
Wilson, Woodrow, 260, 298, 313
Wissmann, Hermann von, 26, 27
Witbooi Uprising, 57–58, 79–81, 85–86, 189–90
See also Nama War
Witbooi, Hendrik, 68
Wolff-Metternich, Paul, 283, 284
Wolfskeel von Reichenberg, Eberhard, 279
Wolseley, Lord Garnet, 129
Women
military exclusion of, 101
rape of, 150–51
Women and children
Herero treatment of, 10–11
killing of, 14, 47–49, 56–57, 59–61, 65–66, 210
and occupation of northern France, 251, 252, 255
as prisoners, 17, 86
Wonder weapons
gas, 214
reliance on technical virtuosity, 13, 102, 112–15, 159,
161, 162, 165, 168–69, 173, 175, 196, 206, 291, 293,
299, 301–2, 310
submarines, 222–24, 295–98, 319
World War I, 3–4, 121, 291–92, 328–29
admission of defeat in, 304–9
Battle of Verdun, 216, 220–22, 224, 330
casualties in, 309
and colonial warfare compared, 206–7
combatants’ military practices compared, 320–23
Endkampf proposals in, 309–13
and denial of defeat, 313–15
and destruction of occupied territory, 315–16
and self-destruction, 316–19
Falkenhayn’s all-or-nothing dilemma in, 218–19,
224–25
Falkenhayn’s moderation during, 215–17
gas warfare during, 214
German war aims in, 199–202, 325
implementation of Schlieffen Plan during, 207–12
lack of civilian-military coordination in, 202–3,
218, 325
manpower shortage during, 219, 231, 235, 261, 294–
95
March offensive of 1918, 299–304, 306, 307–8, 309
military disorganization in, 203–5, 270
occupation policy during, 226–30
precedents for deportation during, 233–35
proposed union of Central Powers during, 219–20

383

index
uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu
384

World War I (continued)
repetitive patterns in, 212–14, 217–18, 220–21, 224–
25, 299, 307
and short war illusion, 168
strategic retreat during, 256, 258–60, 291, 292–94
strategic vacuum in, 199–207
submarine warfare during, 222–24, 295–98, 319
as “total war,” 205–6, 330
Turkish participation in, 267–68, 269–70
War Ministry officers killed in, 170 n

See also Armenian genocide; Belgium; Northern
France
Wounded, treatment of, 15, 20–21, 122
Young Turks. See Committee of Union and Progress
Ypres, First Battle of, 213–14, 215, 217
Zimmermann, Arthur, 241, 268–69, 282, 283, 289
Zorn, Philipp, 126, 193
Zülow, Captain von, 87

