The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

The Social
Democrats in
Imperial Germany
A Study in Working-Class Isolation
and National Integration

Guenther Roth

Preface by R e i n h a r d

P

bendix

The Bedminster Press • Totowa, N ew Jersey • 1963

Copyright © 1963 The Bedminster Press,
Vreeland Avenue, Totowa, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 63-13891
Manufactured in the United States of America
by H. Woiß Book Manufacturing Co., Inc.
Readers of this book are invited to send
name and address to The Bedminster Press,
Vreeland Avenue, Totowa, New Jersey, U.S.A.,
to receive announcements and literature about
other books in the social sciences
published by The Bedminster Press.

TO

MY

PARENTS

Acknowledgments

This study originated in research on class relations in industrializing
countries, as part of the Inter-University Project on Labor and Eco­
nomic Development financed by the Ford Foundation. It was con­
ducted under the direction of Professor Reinhard Bendix in the
Institute of Industrial Relations at the University of California,
Berkeley, during the years 1955-58. By 1960 it had become my
Ph.D. dissertation in the Department of Sociology at the University
of California. Since then the study has changed considerably to
assume its present form. At various stages of completion it was fur­
thered financially by the University Research Board of the Univer­
sity of Illinois at Urbana and by the Columbia University Council
for Research in the Social Sciences.
I
wish to thank Professors Lewis Feuer, Seymour Martin Lipset
and Paul Seabury of the University of California, Berkeley, and
Professors Juan Linz and Hans Zetterberg of Columbia University
for their willingness to discuss or read the emergent analysis in part
or as a whole. The critical editorial sense of Professor Daniel Bell
and of Mr. Claus Wittich (both of Columbia University) was very
welcome in the last stage of the work.
My greatest debt is to Reinhard Bendix, his counsel and his
scholarship.

Contents
Preface
I

xiii

Introduction

3

1. Recurrent Problems of Democratization and Industriali­
zation 3
2. Class Conflict and Negative Integration in Imperial Ger­
many 8
3. An Historical Background 15
4. Some Features of German Industrialization 24
II

The Rise of the Independent Class-Conscious
Labor Movement 28
1. Liberalism, Bourgeois Class Consciousness and Equal
Suffrage 28
2. Working-Class Interests and Democratization 38
3. The Self-Isolation of the Labor Movement 49

III

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

59

1. The Incompatibility of Parliamentarism and the Labor
Movement with Bismarck’s Reich 59
2. Bismarck’s Attack Upon Parliamentarism and Social
Democracy 71
IV

Bourgeois and Social Democratic Attitudes Toward
Revolution and Patriotism 85
1. The Issue of Revolution 85
2. The Issue of Patriotism 96
3. The Issue of Idealism versus Materialism

102

V

The Antagonistic Discourse between the Spokesmen of
the Government and the Labor Movement 106
1. High-Ranking Government Officials on the Social Dem­
ocrats and a Social Democratic Rejoinder 107
2. William II’s Private and Public Views and Their Diver­
gence from His Actions 113
3. Chancellor Hohenlohe Answers the Social Democrats
117
4. The Rhetorical Duels between Biilow and Bebel on
Patriotism and Revolution 119
5. The Fight against Second-Class Citizenship in the
Reichstag 127

VI

Counter-Tendencies

136

1. The Academic Social Reformers 136
2. Trends and Counter-Trends in the Liberal Parties
VII

The Role of Marxism in the
Social Democratic Subculture

143

159

1. The Labor Movement as a Subculture 159
2. Radical Theory and Moderate Practice 163
3. The Gradual Adoption of Marxism by the Leaders 171
4. Consequences of the Adoption of Marxism 183
VIII

IX

The Meaning of the Labor Movement to Its Members
1. Leaders and Followers 194
2. The Appeals of Vulgar Marxism 199
3. Solidarity and Collective Action 203

193

The Social Democratic Subculture and the
Dominant Culture 212
1. The Impact of the Socializing Agencies of the Dominant
Culture 212

2. Cultural Activities: Opportunities and Limitations 221
3. Socialist and Nonsocialist Literature in the Working
Class 232
4. The Party Press 243
X

Organizational Strength and Weakness of the
Labor Movement 249
1. Excursus: Robert Michels and Max Weber on Socialist
Party Organization 249
2. Social Composition and Social Base 257
3. Formalization: Increasing Complexity and Control 266
4. Self-Maintenance 275

XI

The Unanticipated Showdown

285

1. The Split of the Labor Movement and the Downfall of
the Empire 285
2. The Government and Max Weber Review the Empire’s
Course 296
XII

Conclusions

305

1. Descriptive Summary 306
2. Negative Integration and Historical Alternatives
3. A Personal Postscript 322

311

Bibliography
1. Protocols 327
2. Autobiographies, Memoirs, Letters and Collected Works
—Biographies and Monographs on Major Participants
327
3. Contemporary Academic and Political Literature 18481918 332

4. Post-1918 Literature on the Labor Movement and So­
cialism 335
5. Background Literature on the Period 1848-1918 338
6. Literature on Industrialization, Bureaucratization and
Democratization 341
Index of Names

345

Preface

A future historian will give more weight than contemporaries usu­
ally do to the impact of events upon the development of ideas. This
applies with special force to modern social science. World War II
and its consequences, the Cold War and the massive involvement of
Americans with events all over the world, have redirected the atten­
tion of many American social scientists. Increasingly, they have be­
come concerned with the complex changes variously designated as
industrialization, democratization, and modernization. The conse­
quent proliferation of studies shows the earmarks of earlier intel­
lectual orientations, especially the dual emphasis on fact-finding
and theorizing at a very general level, which owes much to the still
earlier emphasis on social evolution. These legacies, together per­
haps with an undercurrent of moralism that has characterized
American approaches to other civilizations, have given an opti­
mistic and go-getting slant to much literature on the problems of
the “developing areas,” and this slant is notable also in the posi­
tivism with which some social scientists have approached these
same problems.
It is in this context that the present study by Professor Guenther
Roth makes a genuine contribution and provides a much needed
corrective. Avoiding the fallacy of “retrospective determinism” the
author analyzes in detail the pattern of action and reaction that
represents the cumulative opportunities and liabilities of class-re­
lations in Imperial Germany. He shows that some of the political
problems encountered today in the “developing areas” had to be
met in their own way in the “developing areas of yesterday.” How­

Preface

xiv

ever, he makes clear that at this level there is no easy way of gen­
eralizing from one case of development to another, and that those
who have generalized have also tended to neglect in varying de­
grees the impact of ideologies, institutional legacies, and inter­
national events. Though in this probing and perceptive study
Dr. Roth confines himself to the limitations of a single case, his
approach raises major questions with which studies of industrializ­
ing societies will have to deal in the future.
REINHARD

B ENDIX

Professor of Sociology
University of California, Berkeley

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

I
Introduction

1. Recurrent Problems of Democratization and Industrialization
In recent years public interest in the relationship between political
liberty and material well-being has greatly increased. This interest
has two major sources: The Western and the Communist world com­
pete for the allegiance or benevolent neutrality of many newly inde­
pendent countries which are uncertain about their political choices
but committed to rapid industrialization; and the two worlds com­
pete directly with regard to their own social and economic achieve­
ments. Scholars have responded to this state of affairs by conducting
an increasing number of inquiries into the relationship between eco­
nomic growth, class relations and political change.
One way of exploring recurrent problems of political organiza­
tion, social change and economic growth consists in taking a long
step back into an age when most of Europe was economically under­
developed in comparison with England. Such an extended perspec­
tive makes it possible to overlook a time span in which industrializa­
tion advanced under different forms of government. Theoretically,
a critical starting or contrast point for the examination of the rela­
tionship between political and economic processes has been pro­
vided time and again by Marxism. It has become customary to
point out that with advancing industrialization labor movements do
not typically gain the importance that Marxism and Socialism en­
visaged as inevitable and, correspondingly, that Marxism turns out
to be appealing or successful in the less-developed rather than in

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

4

the more developed countries.1 Left-wing radicalism is seen as de­
clining with successful economic development, which, in turn, ap­
pears positively related to democratic two-party and multiparty
systems.12 The Marxist thesis has therefore been modified to apply
to the early phases of industrialization; labor protest reaches a peak
early and then declines as a revolutionary threat. This view, which
was succinctly formulated by a prominent group of writers in the mid­
fifties, was recently elaborated by them and even further removed
from the original Marxist thesis.3 They now consider labor protest
to be less important in the course of democratization than had been
assumed previously; labor organizations are seen essentially as re­
flections of the societies in which they develop, and instead the
political and industrial elites emerge as crucial forces.4 But this
theory insists that despite the differences in elite strategies, political
structure and historical legacies, there is a “logic of industrialism”
eventually resulting in a “web of rules”—industrial relations sys1 For recent statements of this thesis, see W. W. Rostow, The Stages of Eco­
nomic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto (Cambridge University Press,
1960), esp. “Communism: A Disease of the Transition,” 162 ff; and Adam
Ulam, The Unfinished Revolution (New York: Random House, 1960),
esp. Ch. IV.
2 On the relationship between left-wing radicalism and economic develop­
ment in various European countries, see S. M. Lipset, Political Man (Garden
City: Doubleday, 1960), 61 f. See also Val R. Lorwin, “Working-Class Poli­
tics and Economic Development in Western Europe,” American Historical
Review, LXIII:2, Jan. 1958, 338-51. On the limited validity of the hypothesis
that economic development and political competitiveness are positively cor­
related, see G. Almond and J. S. Coleman, eds., The Politics of the Develop­
ing Areas (Princeton University Press, 1960), 544.
3 See Clark Kerr, Frederick H. Harbison, John T. Dunlop and Charles A.
Myers, “The Labour Problem in Economic Development,” International
Labour Review, LXXL3, March 1955, 1-15; and, by the same authors, In­
dustrialism and Industrial Man (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1960). The authors wrote as directors of the Inter-University Study of Labor
Problems in Economic Development; their joint publications are partly pro­
grammatic, partly based on the accumulated research of the project.
4 The authors distinguish five ideal types of industrial-political elites: dynas­
tic, middle-class, colonial, revolutionary-intellectual and nationalist.

Introduction

5

terns in which bureaucratic skirmishes rather than class conflicts are
the rule and in which the importance of ideologies declines. Thus,
despite the inversion of Marxist theory, industrialization is still con­
ceived to have determinate political consequences. Most social
scientists do not accept Marx’s specific rationale, based as it was on
his concept of alienation and his linkage of political power with pri­
vate property of the means of production. However, quite a few
continue to assume universal political consequences of industriali­
zation.
These widely held views are increasingly challenged and modi­
fied by another view which maintains the relative “neutrality” of
industrialization toward the social and political character of the
early industrial work force.5 Industrialization, according to this view,
tends to facilitate mass emancipation from traditional ways of life,
but sometimes also contributes to their partial preservation by
providing the requisite material means. It creates the social basis
for a labor movement, but it also swells the ranks of the new
middle classes usually hostile to organized labor. In the course of
industrialization the repressive power of the state, the political
ascendancy of big business, the survival chances of the agrarians
and the revolutionary appeals of dissident intellectuals have some­
times been strengthened and sometimes been weakened—thus rais­
ing the issue of intervening variables.
Such political developments can be more readily explained if
they are viewed in the context of democratization: the entry of the
lower classes, on formally equal terms, into the political process
5 In a theoretical statement, Herbert Blumer recently rejected the prevailing
view of industrialization, which is based largely on the English case, Marxist
class analysis, anthropological theory on culture contact, and psychological
theory on frustration and aggression. He argued that the “objective” nature
of the work situation cannot explain protest phenomena; he acknowledged
the frequent occurrence of labor protest during early industrialization and
explained it as a coincidence with situations of intense social change. See
H. Blumer, “Early Industrialization and the Laboring Class,” The Socio­
logical Quarterly, 1:1, Jan. 1960, 5-14.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

6

from which they have been traditionally excluded. Democratiza­
tion has been associated too grossly with industrialization. The
reason for this lack of differentiation has to be sought in an older
perspective shared by Marxists and many non-Marxists. They con­
sider politics an epiphenomenon of social and economic processes.
Industrialization and democratization are consequently seen as more
or less one process. This perspective grows out of the history of West­
ern Europe since the 18th century, where, in a meaningful sense, a
middle-class society came to control the state. There the rising middle
classes induced massive political change in the course of industriali­
zation. But in other areas of the world, during the last decades,
masses of people previously excluded from the political process have
been activated and political revolutions have occurred because of and
in spite of the absence of a strong middle class and before largescale industrialization got under way. Therefore, Reinhard Bendix
has recently proposed that democratization and industrialization
should be recognized as two distinct processes, although they are
sometimes closely interrelated.6
Democratization was initiated ideologically in the 18th century
when liberal and absolutist representatives of the Enlightenment
postulated fundamental rights for all men. This led to a prolonged
debate in Europe about the possibility and desirability of the in­
tegration, through universal citizenship, of the lower classes into
the new political entity of the sovereign nation state.7 In the en6 See Reinhard Bendix, “The Lower Classes in the Age of Democratic Revo­
lution,” Industrial Relations, 1:1, Oct. 1961, 91-116, esp. 105 f. See also id.,
“Social Stratification and the Political Community,” Archives Européennes
de Sociologie, I, 1960, 181-210.
7 The distinctiveness of this historically new political phenomenon is easily
understood if it is compared to “predemocratic” political systems, which were
not national communities but were composed of a plurality of quasi-sovereign
corporate bodies with their own reciprocities of rights and duties. Correspond­
ingly, older forms of lower-class protest were different from the fight for
political equality, which was made possible because of the equalitarian insti­
tution of citizenship in the modern nation state. On these differences and
especially on “predemocratic” types of unrest, see R. Bendix, “The Lower

Introduction

7

suing struggles social classes arose as agents of collective action:
organizational cohesion came to rest on the shared social and eco­
nomic characteristics of large numbers of persons in contiguous
social strata, thus overriding past and contemporary differences.*8*
The first protests of the emergent industrial work force usually took
the form of an endeavor to regain some of the privileges of preindustrial guilds and the benefits of patriarchal relations. Once it
was clear that there was no return to a more or less idealized past,
workers turned toward the attainment of the new political equality.
Under the threat of losing their predominance or of being anni­
hilated altogether, ruling groups had to devise policies that would
deal with the demands of the lower classes. Historically, two ex­
treme developments can be distinguished: the class conflict may be
resolved by a far-reaching integration of the lower classes into the
national community, through a granting of formal political equality
and social recognition, or a class cleavage may develop which, after
an accumulation of aggravating factors, results in a total, revolu­
tionary reorganization of society. England is the most prominent
European example of the success of a dominant system in retaining
the allegiance of the masses. In contrast, Imperial Russia failed in
her insistence on the complete subordination of the masses and in
her efforts to check the rise of independent popular movements.
Thus, democratization may lead to constitutional government and
a pluralist society or to totalitarianism, which also derives its legiti­
macy from the consent, however manipulated, of the masses.0 In
between the extremes are more or less protracted cases of class
cleavage and partial integration extending beyond the early stages
of industrialization.
Classes . . . ,” op. cit., and R. R. Palmer, The Age of Democratic Revolu­
tion (Princeton University Press, 1959).
8 Cf. T. H. Marshall’s definition of class in his essay, “The Nature of Class
Conflict,” in R. Bendix and S. M. Lipset, eds., Class, Status and Power
(Glencoe: Free Press, 1953), 81-87.
• Cf. J. L. Talmon, The Origins of Totalitarian Democracy (New York:
Praeger, 1960), 1-6 and 257-59.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

8

One such intermediate type is characterized by negative integra­
tion: a political system permits a hostile mass movement to exist
legally, but prevents it from gaining access to the centers of power;
this contrasts with the institutionalization of conflict among genu­
inely legitimized interest groups in such countries as England and
the United States. A radical mass movement constitutes at least a po­
tential source of instability, but if it can be legalized without shar­
ing in governmental power it may contribute to the stability of the
dominant system by leaving intact the latter’s basic structure and by
developing vested interests in its own legal status. From the view­
point of the historical participants this phenomenon may primarily
appear as a matter of purposive isolation or of self-containment,
but from the viewpoint of the observer it can be recognized as a
form of integration. The negative integration of radical labor move­
ments has been important in France from the Third to the Fifth
Republic, in Italy before the First World War and after the Second
World War, and in the case with which I shall be concerned, Im­
perial Germany.10

2. Class Conflict and Negative Integration in
Imperial Germany
In Imperial Germany an authoritarian state, rather than a govern­
ing middle-class elite, was confronted with the threat of de­
mocratization under conditions of rapid industrialization, and
the labor movement was isolated as a subculture and negatively
10 On France, see E. Drexel Godfrey, Jr., “The Communist Presence in
France,” American Political Science Review, L:2, 1956, 321-38; on Italy,
see M. E. Neufeld, Italy: School for Awakening Countries: The Italian Labor
Movement in Its Political, Social, and Economic Setting from 1800 to 1960
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1961), Chs. VI-VIII and X.

Introduction

9

integrated into the dominant system.11 Imperial Germany is a com­
plex intermediate case between the parliamentary system of Vic­
torian England and the autocratic system of Imperial Russia, which
was only attenuated after the Russian Revolution of 1905.12 Im­
perial Germany had a large, articulate and self-conscious bour­
geoisie which was committed to nationalism, liberalism or both,
but could not defeat an authoritarian regime maintaining its
strength through a combination of permissive and repressive
policies. This regime was for the most part constitutional, adopted
parliamentary institutions and permitted an independent labor
movement. It also accepted responsibility for promoting the rise
of industry and for improving the lot of the workingman. How­
ever, it successfully kept the liberal bourgeoisie and the labor move­
ment in check by preventing the national parliament (Reichstag)
from gaining control over the government, which was only respon­
sible to the crown; it steadfastly refused the political and social
recognition for which the Social Democratic working class fought.
The net effect of this granting and withholding of substantial con11 Kerr et al., Industrialism . . . treat Imperial Germany illustratively as
one of their major examples of the “dynastic elite.” I prefer the term “au­
thoritarian” because it identifies more clearly the constitutional setting. The
term refers in this analysis mainly to the ideology and practice of a dominant
system in which the government is responsible not to an elected parliament
but to a sovereign ruler. The context will make clear whenever the term
“authoritarian” also refers to individual attitudes and to intra-organizational
practices.
12 This comparative perspective is suggested by Reinhard Bendix’ Work and
Authority (New York: Wiley, 1956), in which Anglo-American and Russian
ideologies of management are analyzed as indices of changing class rela­
tions; the work does not consider Germany, with the exception of using
Communist Germany as a case of Soviet managerial ideology and practice.
I will not deal with managerial ideologies proper, but with political ideologies
and organizational manifestations as indices of class relations. For a com­
parative study of English and German miners, focussing on the different his­
torical legacies and the different ideological setting, see Gaston Rimlinger,
“The Legitimation of Protest: A Comparative Study in Labor History,”
Comparative Studies in Society and History, 11:3, April 1960, 329-43.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

10

cessions was the perpetuation of a deep class cleavage through the
development of a large isolated subculture.
The political preoccupations of the German labor movement
have always been recognized and often been contrasted with the
economic emphasis of the English and American labor movements
of the time. The German case has usually been explained in terms
of economic and political “underdevelopment,” which forced the
labor movement to fight for fundamental political rights. Probably
the one factor which has been most frequently cited is the fail­
ure of the middle-class revolution in Germany in 1848/49. This
failure has been related to the early stage of economic devel­
opment, which had not yet sufficiently strengthened the middle
classes. For the Marxists, Germany was socially backward as long
as she was industrially far behind England; once she had become
an industrial power, they saw her as an advanced capitalist country
and discounted the authoritarian monarchy as a long outdated rem­
nant of a feudal stage. Some Marxists even came to consider her
as historically more advanced than capitalist England because of
her state-socialist tendencies. Westerners considered Germany back­
ward, even after her industrialization was well under way, since she
still remained in the “transitional stage” of monarchic constitutional­
ism; implicitly they assumed a correlation of industrialization and
parliamentary government. The delay appeared to them as some­
thing of a cultural lag.
I intend rather to consider the authoritarian system as a case sui
generis and to look at labor protest in a political rather than an eco­
nomic context. In doing this, I do not overlook the fact that direct
economic interests played a significant part in making journeymen
and factory workers turn to politics. Economic interest representa­
tion was, after all, severely handicapped by the authoritarian state.
However, vocational groups have always tried to advance their ma­
terial interests, and lower-class groups have always been exposed to
deprivations: these interests and frustrations do not determine the
specific form of political protest. The origins of the political aliéna-

Introduction

11

tion of the labor movement will be sought in ideological class
antagonism preceding the period of rapid industrialization, the per­
sistence of this alienation in the clash with an authoritarian state
which endeavored to control and suppress class conflict. The au­
thoritarian monarchy had an old social base in the landed aris­
tocracy and the professional civil servants, but as a power center
the government and its bureaucracy played an important inde­
pendent role vis-à-vis the class relations of the industrializing so­
ciety.
I shall analyze the ideological manifestations and the structural •
and organizational features of the German case. First, I shall deal
with the factors accounting for the emergence of an independent,
class-conscious labor movement and for the attendant cleavage be­
tween the labor movement and the bourgeoisie. Next, I shall turn
to the structure of the authoritarian state and the ideological clash
between government and labor movement, giving particular atten­
tion to the mixture of antagonistic and affirmative elements in the
Social Democratic attitudes toward the dominant system, on the
grassroots level and among party spokesmen. Related to this will
be a discussion of the extent to which the Social Democratic sub­
culture was opposed to and yet part of the dominant culture. Lastly
I shall consider the peacetime stability of the Empire and the labor
movement, their positive integration, crisis and disintegration as a
result of the war, and the vexing problem of historical alternatives.
The ideological aspect will be approached on two levels: (1) the
level of explicitly formulated class ideology as it is articulated by
the spokesmen of the respective groups;13 (2) the level of the
less articulate and more diffuse grassroots attitudes and sentiments
in the middle and lower classes. I shall be concerned with the ideo­
logical dimension, since a group’s ideology reflects the flexibility or
13 Ideology is here understood as any aggregate of ideas in so far as it is
révélant for collective action or group-determined political behavior; on the
ideological level it is irrelevant whether the ideas are systematic or false or
true in an empirical or philosophical sense.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

12

rigidity with which it confronts other groups in the face of a chang­
ing social structure. This approach assumes that ideologies are not
only rationalizations of the present self-interest of a group, but that
they are also shaped by historical legacies.14 If this argument is
accepted it requires an historical as well as a structural approach
to the analysis of societies and their social integration.
The level of formal political theory and social philosophy will be
considered only when it seems necessary to elucidate its impact on
ideologies.15 The latter, which are continuously formulated and re­
formulated by the spokesmen, contain an image of other groups
as well as a collective self-image. These conflicting group images
are one aspect of reciprocal class relations. In the present context
they form the framework for the great national debate about the
social reconstruction necessitated by the advance of industrializa­
tion and democratization.
The social philosophizing of the spokesmen of broad strata fuses,
at the grassroots level, with the less articulate attitudes and senti­
ments of masses of people. This is the most elementary level of
class relations and it is also important for the private behavior
of individuals, especially for direct relations with members of a dif­
ferent class. These grassroots attitudes and perspectives are partly
in harmony and partly in conflict with ideological appeals of the
spokesmen. The latter constantly manipulate the allegiance of their
groups by alternately indoctrinating them with their views and by
14 On the rationale for treating ideologies as an index of social structure and
on the wide-spread tendency of social scientists to search for “hidden forces”
rather than to analyze ideologies on a phenomenological level, see Reinhard
Bendix, “Industrialization, Ideologies, and Social Structure,” American Soci­
ological Review, 24:5, Oct. 1959, 618 f.
15 Cf. H. S. Hughes’ distinction between three levels of studying ideas:
(1) The enunciation and development of ideas, left out by me; (2) the ethicopolitical level, on which ruling minorities and their rival minorities operate;
and (3) the level of “retrospective cultural anthropology,” on which the
diffusion of ideas among the masses takes place and on which they are popu­
larly comprehended. See Hughes, Consciousness and Society (New York:
Knopf, 1958) 9 f.

Introduction

13

adjusting to grassroots opinions as the situation demands. It is here
that intraorganizational factors become relevant which influence
group action in addition to, and sometimes contrary to, ideological
commitments.
The place where the spokesmen of different groups came face to
face with one another was the parliament. Therefore, the protocols
of the Reichstag (1871-1918) and, prior to that, of the North
German diet (1867-70) were used. Here the debates on specific
issues provide an opportunity to identify the images of the opponent
and the collective self-image— images that were an important part
of the antagonistic class relations. The bourgeois grassroots per­
spective of the labor movement and the authoritarian regime was
approximated by analyzing the published views of educated men,
which views, to be sure, were more sophisticated than those of aver­
age educated middle-class men, but which still appeared to be
basically representative of them. The convention protocols of the
Social Democratic party and the Socialist unions were used espe­
cially for the ideological self-clarification of the Social Democratic
spokesmen and for their image of the labor movement and the
dominant system. But these protocols and the party literature in
general are insufficient for the identification of grassroots beliefs
and, in particular, for the identification of the meaning that the
labor movement and the dominant system had for the rank and file.
The leaders either took this meaning for granted or, as far as it was
not easily reconcilable with the official self-image of the move­
ment, they did not verbalize it. The meaning to the rank and file
can be better deduced from autobiographies of former workers and
from a few unusually perceptive and reflective writings of other
participants or close observers.
The data of an historical study are limited to the existing pri­
mary sources and the secondary literature. There is a wealth of
literature on Imperial Germany and the Social Democratic labor
movement, but most of it does not have a sociological orientation.
As primary sources are often nonexistent, inaccessible or too cum­

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

14

bersome to use, much of the secondary literature has had to be
treated as providing the “raw data” of research. Historical mono­
graphs had to be frequently cited in order to reconstruct relevant
historical facts; sometimes double quotations were inevitable.
The concrete subject matter of this study falls into the area of
several academic disciplines and therefore has to contend with their
various orientations. Some sociologists might prefer a more abstract
level of generalization which might be applicable to a larger num­
ber of cases in the same problem area or even in quite different
ones; some historians might want to see more primary data or more
of the “total picture” ; some political scientists might wish for a
more complex institutional analysis; and some labor economists and
students of economic growth might desire a closer analytical rela­
tion to industrialization. It is difficult to serve more than one
master; the one most clearly recognized here is political sociology.
In his review of the state of political sociology in the nineteen fifties,
Seymour Martin Lipset’s most urgent plea was for a more balanced
study of the integrative and nonintegrative aspects of political in­
stitutions, combining the structural-functional emphasis on inte­
gration with the political sociologist’s traditional interest in cleav­
age and conflict.16 My treatment of the German case is intended
to contribute toward the establishment of such a balance.
The level of this sociological analysis was determined by my judg­
ment of an adequate relationship between historical complexity
and generic relevance. A case study cannot really confirm or dis­
prove generalizations about democratization and industrialization,
but it can deal with specific historical resolutions of a generic prob­
lem, thus exploring the range of alternatives in the relationships be16 See S. M. Lipset, “Political Sociology,” in R. Merton et al., eds., Sociology
Today: Problems and Prospects (New York: Basic Books, 1959), 112 ff; see
also L. Coser, The Functions of Social Conflict (Glencoe: Free Press, 1957)
and R. Dahrendorf, Class and Class Conflict in Industrial Society (Stan­
ford University Press, 1959). For the treatment of conflict in the field of in­
dustrial relations, see H. L. Sheppard, “Approaches to Conflict in American
Industrial Sociology,” British Journal of Sociology, V:4, 1954, 324—41.

Introduction

15

tween political and social structure, cultural legacies, elite strategies
and lower-class response.
Studies with an historical subject matter have to reconstruct per­
tinent historical facts for the reader who is not a historian or area
specialist. Historical description and sociological analysis cannot
really be separated fruitfully, but some historical data which are
mainly relevant for general orientation can be dealt with by way of
introduction. The following section is a bare outline of 19th-century
German history, as far as it is relevant for national unification and
industrialization, for those readers who are relatively unfamiliar
with it. Others for whom it is still a meaningful reality are advised
to proceed in médias res.

3. A n Historical Background
When the French Revolution broke out, Germany was composed
of many sovereign principalities along with the two outstanding
political powers of Austria and Prussia. Both of these states had
been under the rule of an enlightened absolutism which stressed
central administration, a large efficient civil service and a strong,
combat-ready army. Austria and Prussia had carried through mili­
tary, legal and administrative reforms under a comprehensive
raison d'état, partly under the direct influence of the Enlighten­
ment.17 Under Joseph II (1765-90), for example, Austria under­
took legal reforms, abolished serfdom, permitted free movement
and freedom of trade, secularized the monasteries and issued an
edict of tolerance. Since these met only very limited success, the
state was not strengthened against the French revolutionary threat.
While the influence of the ideas of the French Revolution was great
17 On the emergence of the bureaucracy and its influence on public policy, see
Hans Rosenberg, Bureaucracy, Aristocracy and Autocracy: The Prussian
Experience: 1660-1816 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1958).

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

16

on the intellectual life of Germany and resulted in the rise of
liberalism as an intellectual pow er18 the actual political (and espe­
cially the military) events had a greater immediate impact on Ger­
many. The advance of the revolutionary troops and later of Na­
poleon’s armies brought about a far-reaching political and social
reconstruction. For 25 years state lines changed rapidly, and re­
publics, duchies, kingdoms, and empires rose and fell. In the proc­
ess, the old Holy Roman Empire was dissolved. This was a social
no less than a political revolution of the first magnitude. More
than a hundred states or estates, including all ecclesiastical princi­
palities, were abolished. Nearly all free cities and the freeholds of
all abbeys and cloisters were mediatized. Hundreds of aristocrats,
who had been “subordinate” only to the emperor and whose prop­
erty had been subject only to imperial constitutional law, fell
under the rule of the remaining territorial princes. This was,
in part, directly the result of French policies; in part, it was
owing to the policies of the stronger states, above all Austria
and Prussia, of finding compensation for the extensive losses of
territory west of the Rhine river. This territory remained French
for nearly a quarter-century with the support of large parts of its
middle and lower classes. Some areas permanently retained the
Code Napoléon, the superior French civil law of 1804. The con­
solidated states on the right side of the Rhine river (among them
the new kingdoms of Württemberg and Bavaria and the new
duchies of Hesse-Darmstadt and Baden) took over many of the
French legal and administrative innovations.
Both Austria and Prussia embarked on new major internal re­
forms after 1805 following several military and diplomatic defeats.
The means chosen were those of the Revolution: the levée en
masse and the appeal to patriotism. The intent was—in contempo18 Cf. Alfred Stem, Der Einfluss der französischen Revolution auf das
deutsche Geistesleben (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1928); also G. P. Gooch, Germany
and the French Revolution (London: Longmans, 1920).

Introduction

17

rary language— “to militarize the nations and to nationalize the
armies.” 19 Thus, patriotism of the Austrian and Prussian variety
was promoted and fused, not without many contradictions, with
the emergent, all-German nationalism furthered by the Romantic
movement. Austria reorganized her standing army along French
lines; in 1808 the Landwehr (second reserve) was created, into
which burghers were recruited. But Austria was defeated decisively
in 1809, two years after Prussia’s position as a major power had
been broken by Napoleon. The Prussian reforms began after the
military catastrophe of 1806/7. The government abolished serf­
dom, introduced an extraordinarily liberal self-administration for
the cities, instituted freedom of trade and reaffirmed religious toler­
ance. The primary and secondary school system was reformed; in
1810 the University of Berlin was founded in order to create a
national intellectual center. In 1812 the Jews were emancipated.
These reforms were carried through by liberal or rationalist aris­
tocrats who were under the influence of the French and English
Enlightenment and of the German idealism of Kant and Fichte.
They took over many accomplishments of the French Revolution,
but did so mostly with a view to uniting the people, who had been
apathetic or even pro-French after Prussia’s defeat, behind a
thoroughly reformed and liberal monarchical system. Most impor­
tant for the rapprochement between the crown and the people was
the military reform at the end of which, in 1814, universal draft
was introduced. The military reform was based on the idea of a
union of nation and army and the concept of the citizen-soldier who
was motivated by his own ethos toward civic and military duties,
who was no longer treated with the traditional brutal discipline of
the absolutist standing armies. The officers’ corps was made less
exclusive, and a Landwehr was created which was officered largely
by middle-class reservists. The military reformers themselves, who
19 Cf. Emil Daniels, “Ein vergessenes Dokument zur Geschichte der Frei­
heitskriege,” Preussische Jahrbücher, Vol. 144, 1911, 260.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

18

were brilliant military organizers and strategists, participated in
elaborating schemes of social and even German national recon­
struction.20
The self-administration of the cities was intended as a first step
by Baron vom Stein, a former Imperial knight with a broad na­
tional vision, who headed the Prussian government after the mili­
tary debacle of Jena in 1806. Self-government as the major instru­
ment of political education was to start at the bottom, culminating
finally in national representation. These plans did not materialize;
even rural self-government was not realized until the seventies.21
However, the urban middle classes had permanent local self-gov­
ernment, and a generation of liberals grew up which was trained in
local self-government or which had at least been exposed to it.
The term “liberal” referred to the sovereignty of the people and
their equality before the law under a constitution. Sovereignty of
the people did not usually imply either extended suffrage or the
denial of legitimacy of the traditional rulers, but rather the regula­
tion of relations between ruler and ruled through a constitution
accepted by both. Despite the fact that many middle-class people
were not liberal and many aristocrats were, liberalism became the
political ideology par excellence of the bourgeoisie, because it
aimed at the political and social recognition of the economically
rising middle classes and at the limitation of the power of the state
in favor of the individual. The dilemma of liberalism was that
many of its reformist intentions were carried through by Napoleon,
20 For two excellent treatments of the political implications of the military
reform and the reasons for its success and failure see Gordon A. Craig, The
Politics of the Prussian Army, 1640-1945 (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1956), pp. 37-81; and Gerhard Ritter, Staatskunst und Kriegshand­
werk: Das Problem des “Militarismus” in Deutschland (Munich: Olden­
bourg, 1954), esp. pp. 99 f. On the downfall of the whole reform movement,
see Walter Simon, The Failure of the Prussian Reform Movement, 18071819 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1955).
21 Cf. H. Heffter, Die deutsche Selbstverwaltung im 19. Jahrhundert (Stutt­
gart: Koehler, 1950).

Introduction

19

a Caesarist conqueror whose power had to be broken before a free
constitutional life became possible. However, his defeat would in­
evitably restore the power of the old authoritarian military states
of Austria, Prussia and Russia. This is exactly what happened in
1814/15. In the hour of all-out mobilization of the people against
Napoleon, constitutions were promised to the German people, but
once these dynastic powers had won the “Wars of Liberation,”
with the decisive help of nationalist and liberal popular support,
they instituted the period of Restoration under the Holy Alliance.
A very loosely connected German Federation of 30 autonomous
states, under Austria’s leadership, was created, which lasted for
about half a century. For the future it was important that Austria
retreated from its former possessions to the right and left of the
Rhine river (Belgium, Breisgau, parts of Bavaria), while Prussia
acquired, through the Congress of Vienna (1815), large and com­
mercially as well as industrially important parts of western Ger­
many. The new Prussian territories had a substantial Catholic and
liberal population which had been thoroughly exposed to French in­
fluences, yet this incorporation greatly strengthened Prussia, not the
militarily powerless liberals. The great liberal reforms had always
been under severe attack by the legitimistic and conservative aristo­
cratic landowners of East Elbia, who still formed the backbone of
the Prussian army and exercised full political and administrative
control over the countryside. The liberal emancipation of the peas­
ants actually resulted in their proletarianization, since their holdings
were added to those of their former lords. Thus the military state
of Prussia, which was still based on the semicolonial German and
Polish provinces of East Elbia, continued in its old ways. In 1819
the rationalist Prussian prime minister, Prince Hardenberg, and
Wilhelm von Humboldt, the great liberal humanist and minister of
education, lost their fight for a Prussian constitution because of
the direct intervention of Metternich, the Austrian chancellor and
diplomatic genius of the Holy Alliance, with the King of Prussia.
Some southern and central German states (Baden, Bavaria,

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

20

Hesse-Kassel and Sachsen-Weimar) adopted limited constitutions,
but this did not change the fact that the trend toward greater par­
ticipation of the bourgeoisie had been arrested effectively. The
majority of the middle classes was satisfied with the return of
“normal” conditions after a quarter-century of turmoil, but there
was also much disillusionment and disappointment about the stand­
still of constitutional advances and the lack of progress toward
national unification. The repression of the press and the universi­
ties, the introduction of universal censorship, the dissolution of
patriotic student clubs and the outlawing of the gymnastics clubs,
which had played a conspicuous role in kindling the national en­
thusiasm of the people, produced much dissatisfaction, which first
broke through in the wake of the French July Revolution of 1830.
Although Saxony adopted a constitution and liberalization took
place in other parts of Germany, oppression soon became prevalent
again. But liberalism grew stronger as an ideological force by the
middle of the century; the decisive showdown occurred in 1848
when industrialization, with a few exceptions, had scarcely begun.
The German revolution, which followed the French Revolution in
February, was aimed at establishing constitutional political life
and national unification. But the unification of the country under a
constitutional government and the liberal reconstruction of the in­
dividual states failed because the legitimist monarchs of Austria and
Prussia could not be forced into accepting them.22 In contrast to
England, the German middle classes were faced with two powerful
22 During the revolution of 1848 a few weak labor organizations emerged
which belonged politically to the left wing of the middle classes and which
were later suppressed with it. The handful of communist intellectuals and
workers, among whom were Marx and Engels, remained without more than
limited local influence or gained some influence only by avoiding public
identification with communism. Too late for consideration came a major
study of the “Universal Brotherhood of Workingmen,” the largest workingmen’s association during the revolutionary period: Frolinde Baiser, SozialDemokratie 1848/49-1863 (Stuttgart: Klett, 1962), 2 vols.; this study is
important because of its emphasis on regional variation and its wealth of
source materials reprinted in vol. II.

Introduction

21

centralized monarchies whose large standing armies were respon­
sible solely to the sovereign.
The counter-revolutionary repression lasted through the fifties,
but the enforced tranquillity on the domestic scene was disturbed
by the very ruling groups which were interested in its preservation.
The governments were unable to maintain the peace which Europe
had enjoyed since Napoleon Bonaparte’s political exit. First there
was the Crimean War of 1854—56; next, the Italian War of 1859 be­
tween France and Austria brought Italian unification under way and
also made the unification of Germany again a public issue. Austria’s
defeat led to some domestic liberalization which also extended to
other German states. The liberalization in Prussia resulted in a
comeback of liberalism and the last major middle-class challenge
to the authoritarian monarchy, during the constitutional conflict
from 1862 until 1866.23 The King of Prussia had imposed a consti­
tution in 1850 which gave parliament general budgetary rights.
Repression was relaxed after Prince William of Prussia became
regent in 1858 because of the mental illness of Frederick William
IV. Though this was the very same man who had crushed the demo­
cratic-republican uprising in southwest Germany in 1849, many
democrats and liberals decided to enter politics again in order to
make the best of the existing constitution. Democrats cooperating
with the liberals avoided, as much as possible, any identification
with the democratic traditions of 1848.
In August 1859, liberals from different German states founded
the Nationalverein (National Association), which was to play a
great role in promoting unification of the country through Prussia.
In 1861 the Progressive party was founded in Prussia by a coali­
tion of democrats and liberals. It insisted on the right of parliament
to detail the military budget and fought the government’s reorgani­
zation of the army along more efficient, but less liberal lines. The
23 On the prehistory of the Constitutional Struggle, see Eugene N. Anderson,
The Social and Political Conflict in Prussia: 1858-1864 (Lincoln: The Uni­
versity of Nebraska, 1954).

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

22

militarily most important part of the bourgeois, and frequently
liberal, Landwehr was incorporated into the troops of the line and
thus was brought under the political control of the army and the
king.
At the beginning of the Constitutional Conflict the liberals held
the absolute majority in the Prussian diet: they received large
majorities in the cities, as well as strong support from Catholic
farmers in the Rhine provinces and Protestant farm areas in East
Elbia.24 William I, King of Prussia since 1861, was at the point of
abdicating when he was prevailed upon by military and conserva­
tive circles to refuse any compromise. In 1862 Bismarck was ap­
pointed prime minister and started a vigorous unconstitutional rule,
disregarding the budgetary rights of parliament. His policies were
aimed primarily at retaining undisputed control for the king over
the army and at reorganizing the army for the wars of the near
future. As in the fifties, civil servants and deputies were persecuted
and the government interfered again in the elections.
The authoritarian monarchy emerged victorious in the Consti­
tutional Conflict when Bismarck embarked on a policy of national
unification from above and the Prussian army succeeded through
spectacular campaigns. With the Prussian and Austrian victory over
Denmark in 1864, the liberals began to lose ground. Austria and
her German allies were crushed in the war of 1866, fought over
the issue of national unification under Prussia without Austria.
Five states were incorporated into Prussia: the kingdom of Han­
over, the principalities of Hesse-Kassel, Nassau, Schleswig-Hol­
stein, and the Free City of Frankfurt. Thus Prussia established not
only a geographical connection with her Rhenish provinces, but
also a very large unified area. The remaining North German prin­
cipalities were linked with Prussia in the North German Federation.
During the war of 1866, the liberals suffered a resounding de24 For a revealing statistical breakdown see Arthur Rosenberg, The Birth of
the German Republic: 1871-1918 (London: Oxford University Press, 1931),
28 f.

Introduction

23

feat because they had demanded, in their electoral program, that
parliament refuse military appropriations as long as Bismarck was
unwilling to respect the budgetary rights of parliament. Afterwards
many liberals accepted Bismarck’s fait accompli of a unified North­
ern Germany, as they gave priority to national unification over
constitutional issues, either for ideological or tactical reasons. A
group of Progressives founded the National Liberal party, which
remained the dominant right-wing liberal party until 1918. The
party was founded in order to create a basis of cooperation with
Bismarck, who needed liberal legislative support since the con­
servatives were still numerically weak and partly disapproving of
his destruction of dynasties. The Prussian National Liberals were
joined or supported by many liberals, often members of the Na­
tionalverein, in the new areas seized by Prussia and in other regions
of Germany. Ever since Napoleon’s intervention in the Italian War
of 1859, realizing the military weakness of Germany, they had been
afraid of a Bonapartist invasion. The South German liberals were
also confronted with new alliances of their state governments with
the Catholic church and orthodox Protestantism. Despite the Con­
stitutional Conflict, many liberals, inside and outside of Prussia,
were more afraid of Austria than of the Prussian king. Prussia ap­
peared as the smaller evil since it was at least a constitutional state.
All over Germany, Bismarck’s successful ruthlessness impressed
many liberals who did not care for another clash with the superior
power of the Prussian monarchy and who did not want to lose the
chance of positively influencing the political, legal, and economic
reconstruction of Germany. The notion of Realpolitik gained wide
currency as they began to take a more pragmatic position.
National unification under Prussian dominance was accomplished
in 1871 after the defeat of Napoleon’s empire by the allied North
and South German states. Prussia constituted about two thirds of
the new Reich. The Prussian kings became hereditary emperors, and
the chancellor of the Reich was usually also the Prussian prime
minister. The rulers of the 25 remaining federated states were repre­

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

24

sented in the Federal Council headed by the chancellor. The Federal
Council proposed legislation to the Reichstag and had the right to
reject the latter’s legislation. The members of the Reichstag were
directly elected by the people on the basis of universal, equal and
secret suffrage; they did not exert parliamentary control over the
government.
The 43 years of peace in Central Europe which followed German
unification were accompanied by relative domestic tranquillity in
Germany, at least compared with the domestic disturbances in many
other European states. The period of general liberal cooperation
with the Prussian and Imperial government ended late in the seven­
ties. From 1878 until 1890 the antisocialist legislation attempted to
destroy the Social Democratic labor movement. At the same time
the liberals were decisively weakened by a conservative restoration,
the so-called “Era Puttkamer.” 25 After the rise of modern interest
groups— industrial, agrarian, petty-bourgeois—in the eighties, a
rapprochement took place in the nineties between the big business
interests of the West and the aristocratic agrarian interests of East
Elbia. This alliance became highly important for the domestic
balance of power which was not changed significantly by the greater
flexibility of party alignments after the turn of the century.

4. Some Features of German Industrialization
German industrialization was shaped by the sometimes antagonistic
and sometimes harmonious cooperation between bourgeoisie, land25 It was so called after the Prussian minister of cultural and religious affairs
(1879-81) and minister of the interior (1881-88), who was entrusted with
the execution of the conservative restoration. Puttkamer was fired during the
99 days rule of the relatively liberal Frederick III, the son of William I
(King of Prussia from 1861 until 1888 and German Emperor from 1871 on)
and the father of William II (King of Prussia and German Emperor from
1888 until 1918).

Introduction

25

owning aristocracy and the authoritarian state.26 They had in com­
mon a “reactive nationalism” which went back to the Napoleonic
wars and which became a major noneconomic motivation for Ger­
many’s economic development. At the least, they shared an interest
in making Germany strong enough to withstand military attacks.
The upheavals of the Napoleonic period retarded economic develop­
ment, but Napoleon’s simplification of the political map of Germany
facilitated economic development in the long run. However, there
were still some 30 sovereign states left after 1815. Eventually
both Austria and Prussia endeavored to create large unified customs
areas. Prussia succeeded by 1834 in establishing a German Customs
Union. After the kingdom of Hanover joined in the early fifties, the
union comprised most of the area of the future German empire.
Austria, the Free City-states of Bremen and Hamburg and some
minor principalities remained outside the union. Its customs poli­
cies were moderate, but highly effective since they increased the
bargaining powers of its members vis-à-vis England and France.
In 1850 the tariff barriers between Austria and Hungary were
abolished, but Prussian resistance defeated an Austrian attempt to
create a vast customs union between all German states and the
Double Monarchy.
Purposive though restrained state intervention and early eco­
nomic concentration were distinct features of German industrializa­
tion. In contrast to England, joint stock credit banks, first emerging
in the fifties, played an extraordinary role in German industrializa­
tion. In contrast to the United States, cartelization met no obstacles.
Cartels emerged during slumps as well as booms. They were first
established in heavy industry during the seventies and then ex­
panded into other industries, often with the help of the banks.
26 For a brief account of German industrialization, see Gustav Stolper, Ger­
man Economy: 1870-1940: Issues and Trends (New York: Reynal & Hitch­
cock, 1940). Most recognized among the older literature is A. Sartorius von
Waltershausen, Deutsche Wirtschaftsgeschichte: 1815-T914 (Jena: Fischer,
1923), 2d ed.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

26

About the turn of the century these habits of entrepreneurial co­
operation facilitated the growth of employers’ associations which
could fight the unions effectively.
After a free trade period, government, agrarians and heavy
industrialists became increasingly protectionist from the late seven­
ties on, but even then many important tariffs remained relatively
moderate. The tariffs hurt the workers as consumers, but the
economy continued to grow rapidly, a development which also
benefited the workers. Despite the tariffs, Germany was second
only to England in world trade by 1914.
In terms of W. W. Rostow’s theory of economic growth, Ger­
many began her take-off period shortly after the economic recovery
from the revolution of 1848.27 The take-off period was completed
in 1873 when the boom which resulted from the Franco-Prussian
War and the establishment of the Empire collapsed. Germany
reached her stage of economic maturity during the last peace years
of the Empire, about 1910. In comparison, England had passed
through her take-off period by 1802 and had reached maturity by
1850; France and the United States began and ended their take-off
periods earlier than Germany, between 1830 and 1860; however,
they reached maturity only at about 1910 and 1900 respectively.
While cotton textiles were the major industrial factor for the take­
off in England, railroad expansion seems to have been the initiating
factor in France, Germany and the United States. Military buildup
and military modernization were also important in Germany, as
later in Russia and Japan. Steel and its varied applications became
27 W. W. Rostow defines the take-off as the stage when economic growth be­
comes a “normal” condition, when investments rise from about five per cent
of the national income to ten per cent or more, and when there is a high
growth rate in at least one large manufacturing industry. This stage is fol­
lowed by the drive to maturity, which is reached when the society has suc­
ceeded in applying advanced technology to most of its resources. The stages
should be considered heuristic distinctions. See W. W. Rostow, op cit., esp.
Chs. IV and V.

Introduction

27

the most significant indicator for the period after the take-off in
Germany, France and the United States.
From an economic viewpoint I am dealing with the German
labor movement from the last years of the take-off period, when it
came into being, until the beginning of the economic stage of
maturity.

II
The Rise o f the Independent ClassConscious Labor Movement

1. Liberalism, Bourgeois Class Consciousness and
Equal Suffrage
Long before labor protest arose as an independent force and largescale industrialization got under way, major conditions for the rise
of a class-conscious labor movement were created by the class
consciousness of the liberal bourgeoisie and by the nature and out­
come of its struggles for a liberal constitution. Liberalism was a
major force of democratization by advocating universal rights of
man, but it did not favor a full-scale political mobilization of the
lower classes. Ideological commitments, material interests and
strategic imperatives made the liberals ambivalent and often hostile
toward extensive democratization. In order to explain these com­
plex interrelationships, I will first deal very briefly with the liberal
struggles, in the context of the historical developments from the
1840’s to the 1860’s.
A revealing index of the bourgeois class consciousness is the
liberal attitude toward universal and equal suffrage. Suffrage, the
major means of mass participation in the political process of
the national community, is an issue important for the analysis of
class consciousness because democratic suffrage demands were
bound to provoke an ambivalent reaction on the part of the liberal
bourgeoisie. On the one hand, equal suffrage was a radical conclu­
sion of the universalist tendencies of liberalism; on the other, it did
not recognize any political prerogatives in the social distinctions of
the bourgeois class. The political and social position of the liberal

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

29

bourgeoisie and aristocracy seemed to be threatened by it, and
the resulting discussions and controversies helped to articulate the
liberal self-image as well as the liberal image of the lower classes.
In Germany, the suffrage issue led to a prolonged national “debate,”
which lasted, with intermissions, for about a century, until the
First World War. This national debate reached a first climax in
the parliamentary suffrage debate of the Constituent Assembly of
1848, which had been elected under universal and equal suffrage
as a result of the revolution.
Although no large industrial work force existed at the time, the
working classes were a prominent subject in the parliamentary dis­
cussions of the suffrage system to be incorporated into the planned
federal constitution. Since industrialization was only incipient, the
speakers usually did not make a clear distinction between industrial
workers and petty-bourgeois craftsmen, but used the term “work­
ing class” in a comprehensive sense. Seventy-five per cent of the
deputies were members of the self-employed and employed intelli­
gentsia, including higher-ranking civil servants; only between three
and four per cent were merchants and manufacturers. Property and
education were the social and ideological base of the middle classes
in all Western countries, but in Germany Bildung (humanist edu­
cation) had a particularly high prestige. Historically, the high esti­
mation for educational and administrative pursuits was largely due
to the origin of a significant part of the middle classes in the civil
service of the principalities and to the link between the middle
classes and the universities. In 1848 the educated liberals could
still speak for many businessmen who shared their emphasis on
Bildung.1
1 On the social composition of the Frankfurt parliament, see Karl Demeter,
“Die soziale Schichtung des Deutschen Parlamentes seit 1848,” Vierteljahrschrift für Sozial-und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, Vol. 39:1, 1952, 1-29. On
the social and regional composition of the factions in the Frankfurt parlia­
ment and for comparative statistics of the Frankfurt and the Prussian Na­
tional Assembly of 1848, see Gerhard Schilfert, Sieg und Niederlage des
demokratischen Wahlrechts in der deutschen Revolution 1848/49 (Berlin:

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

30

In the Constituent Assembly, there was a wide range of opin­
ions from outright restorative to ultra-leftist.*2 However, there were
trends of opinion shared by the majority of educated and propertied
bourgeois; this majority was convinced that the bourgeoisie was
morally justified, because of its education and property, in being
politically autonomous and in taking a position of leadership. Inter­
ests in the acquisition of property and in the intergenerational wel­
fare of one’s own family were seen as prerequisites for the ability to
carry political responsibilities. Since the masses did not seem to have
Riitten, 1952), 401-8. On the prevalence of intellectual values militating
against business careers see the contemporary account by Wilhelm Riehl,
Die bürgerliche Gesellschaft (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1930). The book was written
between 1847 and 1851. It was mainly after the rise of heavy industry,
decades later, that a business mentality became articulate which was con­
temptuous of Bildung. For example, Alfred Krupp made this forthright state­
ment shortly before his death in 1887: “I have no need to ask Goethe or
anyone else in the world what is right. I know the answer myself and I don’t
consider anyone entitled to know better. I don’t care how great a philosopher
Goethe may have been nor how many other people dispose of overwhelming
amounts of worldly wisdom and respect for society and the dominant masses.
It does not make the slightest difference to me. Those who deliberately re­
flect and judge like fools, no matter how highly placed they may be, make
guttersnipes of themselves and that is how I regard them. I pay no attention
to anyone when I am acting on my own behalf. I always go my own way and
never ask anybody what is right.” Quoted in Gert von Klass, Krupps, the
Story of an Industrial Empire (London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1954), 178.
It should be added, however, that this mentality was even then balanced by
the pride in Bildung on the part of the higher civil servants and the profes­
sions and by the popular reverence for higher education.
2 The protocols of the Constituent Assembly of 1848 were not available to
me, but recent monographs on the central suffrage issue made it possible to
reconstruct the class-conscious liberal image of the lower and middle classes.
See Schilfert, op. cit., and Walter Gagel, Die Wahlrechtsfrage in der
Geschichte der deutschen liberalen Parteien, 1848-1918 (Düsseldorf:
Droste, 1958). On the suffrage issue before 1849, see also Heinz Boberach,
Wahlrechtsfragen im Vormärz: Die Wahlrechtsanschauung im Rheinland
1815-1849 und die Entstehung des Dreiklassenwahlrechts (Düsseldorf:
Droste, 1959); see also Hans Dietzel, Die preussischen Wahlreformbestre­
bungen von der Oktroyierung des Dreiklassenwahlrechts bis zum Beginn des
Weltkriegs (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Cologne, 1934).

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

31

these interests, their desires and appetites were often feared more
than the power of the old dynastic and feudal upper classes. More­
over, many liberals were still influenced by the idealist philosophy
of the state, and not yet strongly by laissez-faire doctrines, and there­
fore assigned the dominant role in solving social problems to the
state. A vociferous democratic minority of middle-class deputies
fought for the point of view, which gradually won out in England,
that equal suffrage for all would preserve social peace or at least
prevent a full-scale lower-class revolutionary threat.3
Despite the liberal ideological inclinations and conservative op­
position, universal and equal suffrage was finally adopted in the
Constituent Assembly because situational pressures proved stronger
than ideological propensities. The opponents were divided as to the
kind of suffrage that should be adopted. Their most important
handicap was the popularity of universal and equal suffrage as well
as the fact that the deputies had been elected by it. The constitu­
tional committee had originally come up with a definition of social
independence excluding a considerable number of people. This
tactically weakened the position of those who wanted to restrict
8 An antagonistic middle- and working-class consciousness was, of course,
older in England than in Germany. During the Chartist period of the thirties,
a working-class consciousness spread inside and outside the Chartist move­
ment. Some Chartist leaders rejected the overtures of the Anti-Corn Law
League, not because they disagreed with its direct objectives, but because of
its middle-class policies which were considered discriminatory against
labor. On the other hand, many middle-class leaders, like Peter Gaskell, re­
jected working-class organization as—in his words— “an ‘Imperium in
imperio’ of the most obnoxious description.” But this did not vitiate the
overall trend toward accommodation. Class terminology was revived again
in the sixties, but the exacerbation of class conflict was attenuated by the
passage of the Second Reform Bill in 1867. See Asa Briggs, “The Language
of ‘Class’ in Early Nineteenth-Century England,” in id., ed., Essays in Labor
History: In Memory of G. D. H. Cole (London: Macmillan, 1960), 63 and
73. For a portrait of the typical moderate trade union leader who strove for
the integration of a “respectable” trade union movement into the national
community see Asa Briggs’ description of Robert Applegarth in his book
Victorian People (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1955), pp. 168-96.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

32

the suffrage. The influential liberal historian Rudolf Haym, a mem­
ber of the assembly’s right center, complained of this motion revealingly: it “excluded quite honorable classes from the right to
vote with a recklessness which was not at all objectively defensible.
Therefore, it had all the odiousness which the people see in the
contrast between the workers with the ‘callous fist’ and the ‘gentle­
men with soft hands.’ The unacceptability of this motion must be
considered very unfortunate.” 4
The historical “accident” of the adoption of equal suffrage was
to remain without major consequences.5 It might have greatly
changed the subsequent relationship between the middle classes
and the labor movement; it might have meant the beginning of the
integration of the lower classes under a successful “middle-class
elite.” However, the constitution adopted by the Constituent As­
sembly never went into effect because the King of Prussia was un­
willing to become emperor of a united Germany by the grace of the
people. Thus, universal and equal suffrage did not exist in Prussia
when the labor movement was permanently established in the early
1860’s. In contrast to England and the United States, where a per­
manent labor movement emerged only after universal suffrage had
advanced substantially, the German labor movement had to fight
for fundamental political freedom. From 1849 until 1918 a threeclass suffrage, solely based on the criterion of taxable wealth, re­
mained in effect for state and municipal elections in Prussia; and
after 1866 Prussia constituted two thirds of Germany.6 The three4 Rudolf Haym, Die deutsche Nationalversammlung (Frankfurt: Jügel,
1849), 293.
8 It can be argued, of course, as Conservative opponents did, that the liberal
acceptance of universal and equal suffrage proved the ultimate ideological
compatibility between liberals and democrats and that the “material” interest
in political survival prompted the liberal acquiescence in further democrati­
zation. However, a hiatus often remains between sociological explanations
derived from social structure and ideology and the uniqueness of historical
“accidents.”
8 The electoral law of May 1849, which imposed the three-class suffrage in
Prussia, and the Prussian Constitution of January 31, 1850, established a

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

33

class suffrage became the most important political symbol of the
second-class citizenship of the workers.
Without the institutional counterweight of universal suffrage,
the bourgeois class representation was likely to resist a considera­
tion of specific labor interests at the time of the first workers’ at­
tempts to again organize themselves.7 More important than this
inclination, however, was the actual course of events which pre­
vented a liberal coalition with working-class interests. The exigen­
cies of the Constitutional Conflict and of its aftermath reinforced
the liberal aversion to equal suffrage at the very moment that a few
radical workers demanded it. The liberals even refused member­
ship in the Nationalverein to workers. Schulze-Delitzsch, the promi­
nent sponsor of the cooperative movement, pleaded with workers
in Berlin to recognize the importance of the “middle estate” for
their own interests: “On the German Mittelstand rests the develop­
ment of the true German national character [Wesen]. . . . You
serve yourself best if you correctly interpret your position within
general, indirect suffrage for both municipal and state elections. The voters
were divided into three classes according to their tax payments. Each class
voted for the same number of electors who elected the parliamentary depu­
ties. Thus, a very small number of millionaires had as much voting power as
hundreds of professionals, higher civil servants and businessmen, who, in
turn, balanced the votes of tens of thousands of workers. This system was
adopted at the suggestion of David Hansemann, a liberal Rhenish business­
man, who took over a ministry shortly after the outbreak of the revolution.
Hansemann, representative of the industrially most advanced province of
Prussia, had been in favor of a similar system as early as 1830 and took as
a model for the three-class suffrage the municipal suffrage of the Rhineland.
Though this system was imposed by a king leading a successful counter­
revolution, it actually served also the interests of the grand bourgeoisie.
Cf. Gagel, op. cit., 18 and Gustav Schmoller, “Die preussische Wahlrechts­
reform von 1910 auf dem Hintergründe des Kampfes zwischen Königtum und
Feudalität,” Schmollers Jahrbuch, vol. 34, 1910, 1261-79; reprinted in id.
Zwanzig Jahre deutscher Politik: 1897-1917 (Munich: Duncker, 1920), 67.
7 A few workingmen’s associations were founded in the wake of the 1848
revolution; they disappeared with the defeat of the revolution. See fn. 22,
p. 20.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

34

the great development of bourgeois society.” 8 A correct interpreta­
tion would lead them to save money in their own economic interest
and not to spend it on political action. In doing so they could re­
gard themselves honorary members of the Nationalverein. The
latter argument addressed to workers in Leipzig— after Berlin, the
significant industrial center at the time in Germany—failed to im­
press many of them.
The liberals were afraid that universal, equal and direct suffrage
would only help the government and the conservatives. Because
Prussia was still a predominantly agrarian state, with patriarchal
relations prevailing in the countryside, the industrial workers could
not have balanced the increase of conservative votes. Furthermore,
not even the urban masses were much interested in constitutional
issues. The bourgeoisie feared that the rural and urban lower
classes, if given equal and universal suffrage, might support a Bonapartist solution.9
Bismarck proposed universal, equal and direct suffrage for tacti­
cal reasons of domestic and foreign policy in 1866, and one year
later he introduced it for the federal elections in the North German
Federation; in 1871 it was incorporated in the constitution of the
Empire.10 In 1866 Bismarck moved first in the Bundestag (the
8 Quoted in Gagel, op. cit., 36.
9 These liberal fears had already been great in 1848 when Louis Napoleon
was elected under universal suffrage. Cf. H. Gollwitzer, “Der Cäsarismus
Napoleons III. im Widerhall der öffentlichen Meinung Deutschlands,” His­
torische Zeitschrift, Vol. 173, 1952, 23-75.
10 The liberals were also afraid of the direct election method; the system of
electors had fortified bourgeois power. Under the new system, the liberal
parties had to adjust to the requirements of mass agitation. This was very
difficult for the liberal notables who were accustomed to address themselves
to a small body of independent, educated electors. Pastors, teachers, burgo­
masters and Landräte (government-appointed county commissioners or dis­
trict heads) replaced the electors as political opinion and decision makers. To
be sure, many electors held such positions, but now an institutional support
was withdrawn from those who had had no other office than that of an
elector.

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

35

consultative organ of the German states), in Frankfurt, for the con­
vening of a national assembly. This assembly, to be elected by uni­
versal and equal suffrage, was to reform the Bund of the German
states. Thus, Bismarck gained a great tactical advantage over the
liberals by making himself the champion of national unification
and by advocating a more democratic suffrage than they favored.
Bismarck hoped for a conservative mass vote against the liberals,
especially in the countryside.11 In his memoirs, however, he justi­
fies himself mainly on the grounds of foreign policy:12 the demand
for universal suffrage was a warning to Austria and other countries
that Prussia might support nationalist and revolutionary forces
within their territories; it also prevented Napoleon III from gaining
a pretext for intervention on the side of Austria against Prussia,
since his power had been established by universal suffrage. When
he wrote his memoirs in the nineties Bismarck still considered uni­
versal and equal suffrage justified, although he vigorously opposed
the secret ballot, which had been adopted under a liberal motion:
it “is incompatible with the best characteristics of Germanic blood.”
Bismarck was supported in his attack upon the three-class suf­
frage by the polemics of Hermann Wagener, the social welfare
expert of the conservatives, who attacked it along with other taxbased suffrage as plutocratic: “This electoral system is nothing but
the representation of money capital with the deceitful pretense that
it is a representation of the people. It leads to the rise of a modern
11 In the sixties Bismarck had thought that indirect and class suffrage fur­
thered the revolutionary movement more than direct and equal suffrage.
Therefore he introduced the latter. He reasoned that the great majority of the
common people in Prussia would vote for the King’s party and repudiate the
liberal bourgeoisie. Bismarck recognized, however, the danger of universal,
equal and direct suffrage once revolutionary sentiments would spread among
the people. See his letter to the Prussian minister in London, Count Bernstorff, April 19, 1866, in Hans Rothfels, ed., Bismarck und der Staat:
Ausgewählte Dokumente (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1953), 326.
12 The following is a summary of Bismarck’s arguments as presented in his
Gedanken und Erinnerungen (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1898), Vol. 2, 59 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

36

moneyed aristocracy. . . . Compared with such a dreary system
we consider the general suffrage a genuine advance.” 13 Like Bis­
marck, Wagener believed at the time that the opposition to the
Crown was most likely to come from well-to-do people. Therefore
he resorted to the argument that universal and equal suffrage was
necessary in order to balance the social inequalities of society. The
outstanding historian and National Liberal deputy, Heinrich von
Sybel, replied that equal political rights were only justified once all
social inequalities had been eradicated.14
Both sides obviously emphasized arguments according to tactical
convenience. However, the tactical component should not be over­
estimated. The commitment of the liberals to the three-class suf­
frage which once had been imposed upon them was accompanied
by an ideological re-evaluation in keeping with major historical
trends of German liberalism. Many liberals of the sixties still ad­
hered to the idealist philosophy of law and state. They were con­
cerned about the intrusion of society into the realm of the state and
did not want politics to become a conflict arena for social groups
and class interests; this awareness of danger had been awakened
largely by Lorenz von Stein’s analysis of class developments in
France.15 The new theory of the relation between political rights
and social position stipulated that the latter should be determined
by political functions, not personal wealth; however, wealth would
be the basis on which these functions were performed. The theory
enabled the liberals to justify a limited suffrage and to demand
anew the predominant position in the state for the propertied
13 H. Wagener, “Wir fahren fort,” in the Neue Preussische Zeitung, April
18, 1866, quoted in Joachim Knoll, Führungsauslese in Liberalismus und
Demokratie (Stuttgart: Schwab, 1957), 51 f.
14 Cf. Gagel, op. cit., 56 ff.
15 Cf. Lorenz von Stein, Geschichte der sozialen Bewegung in Frankreich
von 1789 bis auf unsere Tage (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell­
schaft, 1959). 3 vols. The volumes were originally published in 1849-50. A
selected English edition translated and introduced by Kaethe Mengelberg
will be published in the near future by the Bedminster Press.

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

37

and educated classes. It rejected the egalitarian tendencies of de­
mocracy in favor of a principle of stratification according to polit­
ical function.16
The liberals were embittered that, at the same time in which they
were involved in a showdown over the preservation and enlarge­
ment of parliamentary rights, a class-conscious labor movement
arose to attack them from behind.17 The liberal bourgeoisie, dis­
tinguished by property and education, could indeed claim that it
was the only social and political power that could fight, with some
chance of success, the absolutist and conservative-aristocratic
forces. The liberals felt that they had the right to expect the
allegiance of the masses because they were fighting for the whole
people; they did not understand that in focussing on constitutional
issues and in championing increasingly laissez-faire doctrines they
were fighting more for their own interests than for those of the
working class. Liberalism was vulnerable to a political class cleav­
age because its strength depended largely on the acceptance of the
bourgeois leadership by the lower classes. Therefore, the liberals
opposed the incipient independent labor movement, since this
16 The suffrage system finally lost much of its importance as an issue between
liberals and conservatives. The Progressives lost many votes in the old
Prussian provinces under both the three-class system for the Prussian diet
and the universal system for the North-German diet; however, the newly
formed National Liberal Party did very well in the new provinces. As a re­
sult, the liberals no longer objected so strongly to the universal suffrage of
the North-German Federation and the conservatives were no longer eager
to abolish the three-class suffrage of the Prussian diet. National Liberals and
Progressives began to accept, with some reservations, the universal suffrage
and used its establishment as an opportunity to press for greater liberaliza­
tion of political institutions. They demanded, especially, an administrative
reform of the counties because the conservatives derived strong advantage
from the self-administration of the big estates in the Eastern provinces. The
conservatives retained their dominance after the introduction of these re­
forms in the seventies because now the small farmers turned to them: one
of their major grievances had been removed through liberal efforts.
17 See, e.g., an article by the Progressive, A. Streckfuss, in the Berlin Volkszeitung (Oct. 22, 1862), reprinted in Ferdinand Lassalle, Gesammelte Reden
und Schriften, Eduard Bernstein, ed. (Berlin: Cassirer, 1919), Vol. 3, 16 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

38

movement considered, as one of its Lassallean slogans said, “the
idea of the working class as the dominant principle of society.”
Later tactical adjustments of some liberal leaders who recog­
nized the socially conservative function of equal suffrage18 could
not prevent the deepening of the cleavage which developed in the
sixties between the bourgeoisie and the incipient labor movement
as a consequence of ideological commitments strengthened by
strategic considerations. At the same time, the forces of liberal
intransigence against the authoritarian monarchy were decisively
weakened. A new liberal disaster, due to the military victories of
the Prussian monarchy, could be turned into partial success when
the government offered the liberals a chance to participate in the
unification of Germany. This necessitated a close political alliance
with the monarchy and the adoption of a cautious policy of compro­
mise as the only remaining means of reform. Under these condi­
tions, the liberals were not interested in securing working-class
support by appealing to its politically most active and also most
radical part, which appeared, in the balance of power, as a quan­
tité négligeable.

2. Working-Class Interests and Democratization
The developments of the 1860’s left the incipient working class on
its own. Class-conscious organization appeared to some politically
interested workers, mostly energetic journeymen in small-scale in­
dustries, as the only alternative; in contrast, the English working
class could for decades support the liberal bourgeoisie in the ex­
18 Schulze-Delitzsch finally came out for equal suffrage because he wanted
political, but not social equality. He feared that political freedom would be
lost in the process of attaining social equality, since the latter could only be
realized through the revolutionary intervention of an all-powerful absolutist
or socialist state. Cf. Gagel, loc. cit.

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

39

pectation of gradual democratization. Despite the Constitutional
Conflict, however, the 1860’s were a decade of improving political
conditions for German workers. Limited rights of association and
universal and equal suffrage on the federal level were granted be­
fore democratization was blocked at the end of the decade.
A crisis of aspiration in an improving situation is a well-known
phenomenon. During the repressive decade of the fifties, in 1856,
Alexis de Tocqueville observed: “Experience teaches us that, gen­
erally speaking, the most perilous moment for a bad government
is one when it seeks to mend its ways. Only consummate state­
craft can enable a king to save his throne when after a long spell
of oppressive rule he sets to improving the lot of his subjects. Pa­
tiently endured so long as it seemed beyond redress, a grievance
comes to appear intolerable once the possibility of removing it
crosses men’s minds.” 19 Tocqueville had in mind the ancien régime
and the French Revolution, but his generalization was also to apply
to German developments of the near future. Prussia had a states­
man, possessing “consummate statecraft” who instituted revolu­
tionary changes from above—national unification, universal and
equal suffrage, laissez-faire principles in economic policy—which
fortified rather than weakened the supreme authority of the
monarchy.
The liberal crisis of aspiration was strong enough to challenge
the dominant regime for a while. The workers were too weak to
pose a threat to the government, but a few thousand urban work­
ers raised their level of aspiration to the point of seizing opportuni­
ties to improve their lot through adult education and organization.
The resurgence of political life sensitized them to their second-class
citizenship. In the fifties, journeymen and workers had been com­
pletely passive politically. Their status was low. “Married journey­
men were rare and such marriages were frowned upon,” recalls
Vahlteich, one of the first proletarian labor leaders. “Male factory
19 Alexis de Tocqueville, The Old Regime and the French Revolution (New
York: Doubleday Anchor, 1955), 176 f. By permission of the publisher.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

40

workers were held in low esteem; female workers were subjected
to prejudiced contempt. This does not mean that journeymen were
particularly respected either.” Vahlteich acknowledges that the re­
lationship between masters and journeymen was often cooperative
and that many masters considered it a point of honor to help their
journeymen in bad times. However, discrimination was keenly felt
through the existing “legislation and thus through the courts, the
police and the hospital administrations.” 20 On the other hand,
many workers and journeymen often indulged in behavior which
inevitably aroused the moral censure of middle-class persons.
Workers’ associations were outlawed until the early sixties. This
prevented the development of an articulate political consciousness
among a large number of workers; a few workers, however, man­
aged to develop it. Just as industrialization was not an entirely
indigenous process in any country apart from England, so labor
protest was also influenced by the first responses in England and
France. Some workers absorbed liberal ideas about self-help, bor­
rowed from England, and socialist ideas about independent work­
ing-class organizations, which had trickled into Germany from
France.
The first organizational opportunity for workers became avail­
able through nonpolitical organization within the liberal movement.
Liberal intellectuals who, with the exception of Schulze-Delitzsch,
did not belong to the top leadership of the Progressives began to
found workers’ educational associations as subdivisions of bour­
geois organizations. They were either motivated by liberal ideas
about the importance of education and self-help as major means of
improving the lot of the workers or by tactical considerations aris­
ing from the struggle with the conservatives. When a workers’ edu­
cational association was founded by liberals in Leipzig in Febru­
ary 1861, Vahlteich, one of the few workers who had read some
socialist literature in the fifties, pleaded immediately for equal
20 Julius Vahlteich, Ferdinand Lassalle und die Anfänge der deutschen A r­
beiterbewegung (Munich: Birk, about 1902/3), 16.

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

41

rights and political independence of the workers, before 400 persons
who had accepted the public invitation to form the association.21
He rejected the emphasis on education and argued that this should
be the task of the public schools, not of an association of adults.
Young August Bebel, who was to become the greatest spokesman
of the Social Democratic labor movement, still sided with the liber­
als against the proposal of independent labor associations, but he
was greatly impressed by the vigor with which Vahlteich and
Fritzsche, another worker, stood up to the educated liberal gentle­
men and wished that he could do the same.22 Social and political
problems were not yet in the foreground of the interests of the
Leipzig association; however, a faction more closely concerned with
the promotion of specific workers’ interests emerged. It was headed
by two democratic intellectuals and Vahltéich and Fritzsche, both
of whom were later to become Reichstag members. In 1862 Vahl­
teich went a step further and demanded universal suffrage. Eventu­
ally the liberalization of political conditions made it possible to
establish an association, Vorwärts, which devoted itself to agita­
tion and the organization of mass meetings. The move toward
independent working-class associations was not possible without
antagonizing devoted friends of labor who could not understand
why the workers should want to have their own associations.
The Progressives managed to win the majority of politically inter­
ested workers; they failed to control the minority, which adopted
some socialist ideas. This minority combined with a few democratic
middle-class intellectuals, who rejected the liberal constitutional and
unification policies as too moderate, to establish an independent
labor movement. Both groups existed at the very margin of the
political life of the emergent nation; they were the only ones inter­
ested in radical democratization.
21 The association was established as a branch of the bourgeois Polytechnical
Society in order to avoid police interference. On Vahlteich’s role and the his­
tory of the Leipzig organization, see op. cit., 12 ff.
22 Cf. August Bebel, Aus meinem Leben (Berlin: Dietz, 1946), Vol. 1, 56.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

42

The first independent national labor organization was founded
by Ferdinand Lassalle (1825-64), whose style of life was romantic
heroism and idealistic exaltation. He was the son of a well-to-do
Jewish merchant, a brilliant student of philosophy and law, and a
democratic tribune with aristocratic affinities. He joined the left
in 1848 and spent six months in prison in 1850/51 for allegedly
advocating armed resistance against officers of the state. From
1846 until 1854 he litigated successfully, though with dubious
means, for the interests of Countess Hatzfeldt in a divorce and
property suit which attracted national attention and ranged the
liberal against the conservative public. The fight for the countess,
who became his life-long and politically influential friend, was for
him a battle against feudal injustice, in which he could play a con­
spicuous and chivalrous role. Marx and Engels, who were absorbed
in the class struggle and hostile to universal ethics, considered the
defense of an aristocratic lady by a radical democrat and socialist
an embarrassing and irrelevant pursuit. In the fifties and early
sixties Lassalle wrote voluminous philosophical, legal, economic
and dramatic works. He entered politics again during the Italian
War of 1859, advocating Prussian predominance over Austria. In
contrast to Marx, he did not consider foreign politics an extension
of domestic politics, and he was not averse to an alliance with Bis­
marck and the conservatives against the liberal bourgeoisie. Las­
salle leaned heavily on Marx’s analysis of capitalist society, but the
two men were personally and politically too different to get along
well. Their precarious friendship lasted until 1862, when Lassalle
started his working-class agitation against the liberals; this tactic
was contrary to Marx’s evolutionary scheme, which necessitated
working-class support for the middle classes in order to precipitate
the bourgeois revolution.23
23 Lassalle died fittingly in a duel with an aristocrat over the latter’s fiancée,
whom he tried to marry, imploring the support of the Catholic church. His
collected works were published in 12 vols, by Ed. Bernstein, op. cit.,
1919/20 and by Gustav Mayer in six vols., Nachgelassene Briefe und

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

43

Lassalle created the labor movement explicitly as a means of
democratization by mobilizing working-class interests. For him,
the middle class was following “no longer the banner of a demo­
cratic movement,” it was governed not only by “the fear of
government, but also by the fear of the people. . . . Our liberal
bourgeoisie cannot smash the military state, cannot win political
freedom.” 24 Lassalle’s motive for turning to the workers was rooted
in his awareness of the powerlessness of the democratic intellec­
tuals. He exclaimed that only “myself and about one thousand
ideologists in Germany” are fighting for “political freedom,” sup­

Schriften (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1921-25); the most important
German biography is by Hermann Oncken, Lassalle (Stuttgart: Deutsche
Verlagsanstalt, 1920), 3rd ed.; for a good English biography, see David
Footman, Ferdinand Lassalle: Romantic Revolutionary (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1947); for comparisons between Lassalle and Marx see
Franz Mehring, Die deutsche Socialdemokratie: Ihre Geschichte und ihre
Lehre (Bremen: Schünemann, 1878), 2nd ed., 55 f, Footman, op. cit., and
Carl Landauer, European Socialism (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press, 1959), Vol. I; on Lassalle’s legal and social philosophy,
see Thilo Ramm, Ferdinand Lassalle als Rechts-und Sozialphilosoph (Vienna:
Westkulturverlag, 1953).
24 Ferdinand Lassalle, “Arbeiterlesebuch,” op. cit., Eduard Bernstein, ed.,
III, 273. The following Lassalle quotations are from pp. 279-87. The
“Arbeiterlesebuch” consists of two speeches delivered at Frankfurt/Main on
May 17 and 19, 1863, before a Workers’ Day of local workingmen’s educa­
tional associations. A few days earlier Dr. Louis Büchner, a South German
democrat and the author of the famous materialist best-seller Kraft und Stoff
(and brother of the revolutionary dramatist Georg Büchner), had taken a
stand against a separate working-class organization, but he had urged the
workers to listen to Lassalle’s case. Lassalle repeated, in an unprecedented
four-hour speech, his economic ideas and proposals without impressing the
majority of his audience; but he did impress them greatly with his attack on
the Progressives in his second speech and with his appeal to the workers to
carry the banner of democracy. Lassalle knew that his South German audi­
ence would be predisposed toward such an appeal; he wrote to Rodbertus
that he would “shake his old revolutionary mane,” but this tactical element
does not negate the fact that democratic rather than specifically socialist
appeals gained him mass support.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

44

ported by perhaps ten to fifteen thousand people scattered through­
out Germany but not by the interests of any one class.
It is in the greatest interest of political freedom to mobilize a class
interest, a social interest and, in particular, the interest of the propertyless classes which predominate in sheer numbers and [potential] power.
. . . I have to reject the misunderstanding that I want to establish a
separate movement merely of the working class. The banner which I
have raised is the democratic banner. . . . I am turning against the
sleepy and feeble movement which the bourgeoisie promotes as a class
and can only promote as a class, the liberal-progressive movement.
. . . It is a general democratic movement of the people, not a mere
class movement, for which I call.25
In order to play the role which Lassalle attributed to them, the
workers had to become independent from the liberals and aware
of their own class interests. Therefore, Lassalle set out to estab­
lish an independent proletarian party which was to revolutionize the
political and social order. However, Lassalle propagated an ideal­
istic notion of revolution which, in contrast to Marx’s, did not assert
the inevitability of class struggle and violent change and which
stressed the possibility of class conciliation and of the peaceful
victory of “principles.” Lassalle’s idealism had, of course, some
tactical components. In view of the strength of the government and
his prosecution by police and courts (for example, for having ad­
vocated “class hatred” in his Arbeiterprogramm), he had to stress
25 Lassalle was not against the middle classes as such and against their ac­
cumulation of wealth, but he rejected the political class prerogatives which
the bourgeoisie wanted to arrogate to itself by virtue of its economic position.
See his “Arbeiterprogramm,” op. cit., II, 174. This was a lecture delivered
to predominantly Progressive workers in Berlin on April 12, 1862. It was
the first introduction to historical materialism presented before workers;
but it was also idealist and non-Marxian in that Lassalle said, “We are
all workers insofar as we have only the will to be useful in some way to
human society” (186), and insofar as he assigned to the state “the function
of advancing freedom, the development of the human race towards freedom”
(197). The workers were reportedly unimpressed. Later, however, the lecture
became very popular within the labor movement.

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

45

the nonviolent aspect of his revolutionary intentions. Furthermore,
he wanted to keep alive the slim chance that the Prussian govern­
ment might come to terms with him by conceding universal and
equal suffrage and offering economic aid for producers’ coopera­
tives.26
The demands for universal and equal suffrage and state-sup­
ported producers’ cooperatives were the basis of Lassalle’s agita­
tion, expressed for the first time in his most popular and influential
writing, the Open Address (Offenes Antwortschreiben) of March
1863. The demand for producers’ cooperatives was sure to find
vociferous opposition from many quarters, liberal and socialist; but
at least it could be presented under the given political conditions.
Lassalle was primarily interested in establishing the principle of
state help on a large scale and in giving the workers an irresistible
reason to press for universal and equal suffrage, both as a politi­
cally and economically indispensable condition of their advance­
ment. As long as the workers were not running their own producers’
cooperatives, Lassalle argued, the “iron law of wages”—which
maintained that the average wage of the workers would always
gravitate about the subsistence level socially necessary for survival
and reproduction—could not be abolished. He maintained that
this was the “normal condition of the whole working class” and
that welfare schemes could not obliterate it; therefore, the workers
should not concentrate their attention on welfare plans, but take
a much more comprehensive perspective: “The working class
CArbeiterstand) must constitute itself as an independent political
party and embrace the universal, equal and direct suffrage as its
principal slogan. . . . The representation of the working class in
the legislative bodies of Germany is the only means of satisfying its
26 Bismarck was quick to recognize, after Lassalle’s plea for state interven­
tion, that a small labor movement could attack the liberals from the rear,
while it was not large enough to endanger the government. In 1863/64
Bismarck and Lassalle talked together about welfare policies and universal
suffrage.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

46

legitimate interests politically.” In this way the state will become
“the great association of the poorer classes.” 27
Lassalle started his campaign with the Workers*Program of 1862,
which came to the attention of Vahlteich and his few class-con­
scious fellow workers in Leipzig. They got in touch with Lassalle
and agreed with him on the convening of the first general assembly
of the General German Workingmen’s Association in Leipzig. De­
spite Lassalle’s vigorous agitation, through his Open Address, only
14 people came together on May 23, 1863, representing about 400
people in 11 cities. By early 1864, Lassalle’s organization num­
bered not yet 1,000 members; he had hoped that he could organize
100,000 workers within a year or so and that the popular response
to his address would be similar to the people’s reaction to Luther’s
theses of 1517.
The situation was particularly difficult for the Lassalleans in
Berlin, where the Progressives controlled most of the politically
engaged workers. Lassalle’s address, To the Workers of Berlin,
in the winter of 1863 had little impact; his followers were continu­
ously exposed to the threat of physical force at the hands of Pro­
gressive workers. Only conservatives, wearing black and white
cockades on their top hats, supported the Lassalleans against the
liberal workers by attending their meetings.28
Lassalle set out resolutely to further his democratic interests
by organizing the workers in an authoritarian fashion. His authori­
tarian tendencies grew stronger once he found out how difficult it
was to win workers for his cause. His authoritarianism was also en­
couraged by certain working-class characteristics of his followers.
Traditional status consciousness persisted side by side with the
new class consciousness and facilitated the subordination of work­
27 Lassalle, “Offenes Antwortschreiben,” op. cit., Ill, 47 and 81.
28 Cf. Vahlteich, op. cit., 27. As late as 1869, Bebel asserted in the North
German diet that “certain groups in the Prussian government” see the ad­
vantage of using the split between the bourgeoisie and the workers for their
own purposes. See Reichstag Protocols, March 18, 1869.

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

47

ers to educated men.29 More important, however, was the fact that
even the most active workers were young, without sufficient experi­
ence in politics and organizational matters, without more than ele­
mentary education, and without financial resources. Thus, even
those critical of his authoritarian tendencies depended, at least for
some time, on his intellectual brilliance, his learning and his po­
litical skill, as well as on his considerable financial means, if they
wanted to succeed in establishing a nation-wide labor movement.
Lassalle vigorously combatted ideological competition by closing
uncontrolled channels of communication between bourgeois intel­
lectuals and workers. All intellectuals who applied for member­
ship in a local had to be cleared by party headquarters. Lassalle,
the bourgeois with aristocratic manners, and his most important
successor, Johann Baptist von Schweitzer, scion of an old aristo­
cratic family, succeeded in welding together the nucleus of a class­
conscious labor movement which was held together by two means:
intensive indoctrination and organizational isolation. Schweitzer’s
exit, in the early seventies, did not change this policy, as can be
seen from the following statement by the major Lassallean news­
paper:
Reconciliation is an insult to the worker, if it is to be approached on
the basis of the present society. Therefore, the awakening of class con­
sciousness, the separation of the workers from the rest of society, is
29 An example of traditional status consciousness and the high regard of edu­
cated men is a Reichstag speech in 1869 by Försterling, a member of the
Lassallean General German Workingmen’s Association— a splinter group
which Countess Hatzfeldt, Lassalle’s aristocratic friend, sponsored after his
death for the sake of the “pure” Lassallean program. Försterling demanded
the release of the association’s president, Mende, who had just been arrested
even though he was a Reichstag deputy. He pointed to the class difference
between himself, a worker, and Mende, an educated man. He complained
that Mende was put together with other prisoners and was not allowed to pay
for his own maintenance; he considered this a particular hardship since
Mende belonged to the “educated classes.” He added that he would not
have cared so much if it had happened to him. See Reichstag Protocols,
April 28, 1869, 645.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

48

the first step to victory; and this separation is accomplished by the
preaching of Lassalle’s doctrines and by the tight-knit organization of
the General German Workingmen’s Association, in which the worker
feels that he belongs to the [closed and] united working class.30
Although Lassalle and Schweitzer’s centralist methods were ef­
fective, they also produced severe strains. A minority of Lassalleans
left the party because of its centralist organization and cult of the
dead Lassalle, but without giving up their class-conscious attitude.31
The Lassallean belief in the necessity of a class-conscious labor
movement survived these strains as well as the breaking up of the
General German Workingmen’s Association into various competing
groups after Lassalle’s death in 1864. The Lassalleans, within and
without the Lassallean associations proper, impressed the need for
political class organization on other workers and thus forced their
democratic and socialist opponents, under Bebel and Liebknecht,
to speed up the separation from the bourgeois left in the late sixties.
30 Der neue Sozialdemokrat, 1871, 77, quoted in Richard Schuster, Die
Social-Democratic, nach ihrem Wesen und ihrer Agitation quellenmässig
dargestellt (Stuttgart: Steinkopf, 1875), 141. The phrase geschlossene A r­
beiterklasse means conventionally “the united working class,” but geschlossen
literally means “closed”; thus the choice of the term clearly expresses the
progressing class separation of the labor movement.
31 Among these members was Vahlteich who had been class-conscious be­
fore meeting Lassalle. As the latter’s secretary, he was one of the first to take
a stand against his authoritarian tendencies and proposed decentralization of
the Workingmen’s Association. Lassalle, shortly before his death in 1864,
tried to eliminate Vahlteich. At the time, Vahlteich’s break with Lassalle
was delayed by A. Vogt, who wrote a letter dispatched with Liebknecht’s
consent urging Vahlteich to yield in favor of another attempt to control
Lassalle— by uniting the “party Marx and comrades” with Lassalle’s organi­
zation. Vahlteich notes that the “party Marx,” as it was called in the letter,
consisted of only two persons, Vogt himself and Liebknecht. This is in­
dicative of the lack of influence Marx had at the time. Vahlteich finally went
over to Liebknecht and Bebel. See Vahlteich, op. cit., 80-84.

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

49

3. The Self-Isolation of the Labor Movement
The second labor party which emerged in the sixties was also
founded by a basically democratic intellectual, Wilhelm Liebknecht
(1826-1900). Liebknecht’s family descended from Martin Luther.
His ancestors were higher civil servants and university professors.
He received an academic education but did not feel any inclination
to pursue an academic career in the Germany of the forties. In
Switzerland he had his first contacts with organized German work­
ers in 1847. He participated in the two abortive military campaigns
of Republican volunteers in Baden, who hoped to save the 1848
Revolution. From the fifties on, he put his faith in mass propaganda
rather than revolutionary action by a minority. For 13 years he
lived in exile in London, where he joined the Communist League
and became an intimate friend of Marx’s family. After getting an
amnesty, he went to Berlin in 1862. Three years later he was ex­
pelled from Prussia and went to Leipzig in Saxony where he won
August Bebel (1840-1913) for radical democracy.32 Bebel, the
32 In contrast to Lassalle and Schweitzer, there are, to my knowledge, no
major biographies of Liebknecht and Bebel, for decades the two most promi­
nent leaders in the German labor movement. For Bebel’s description of his
early relationship with Liebknecht, see his autobiography, op. cit., I, 11418; for a comparison between Liebknecht and Bebel’s views in the six­
ties, see Gustav Mayer’s excellent biography, Johann Baptist von Schweitzer
(Jena: Fischer, 1909), 150; for an invidious contrast between the “Prussian
hater” and “Communist” Liebknecht and the “simple, honest” working-class
leader Bebel, see Mehring, op. cit., 84-87. Mehring, a middle-class intel­
lectual, joined the Social Democrats in the eighties and became their most
brilliant editorialist; in his history, still written from an outsider’s viewpoint,
he condemned Liebknecht and Bebel’s anti-Prussian and “internationalist”
line and regretted the decline of the positive Lassellean attitude toward state
and nation. He was not aware of the ideological and tactical differences be­
tween Liebknecht and Marx-Engels. Bebel acquired some knowledge about
socialism by reading Lassalle with polemical intent; he had no theoretical

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

50

son of a noncommissioned officer, was orphaned early and lived
through years of poverty but rose to become a master turner.
Through him Liebknecht gained influence on the non-Lassallean
workers’ associations, which were loosely linked with the liberals.
Bebel was at the time chairman of the liberal Leipzig workers’ edu­
cational association and also of the permanent committee of the
Union of German Workingmen’s Associations, which had been
founded in Frankfurt in 1863.
Liebknecht was ostensibly Marx’s representative in Germany, an
agent of the International, who fought the Lassalleans. However,
he differed from Schweitzer mainly with regard to national unifica­
tion and the relation between democratization and industrialization.
In fact, Schweitzer was better schooled in Marxism than Lieb­
knecht, who never gained as thorough an understanding of Marx­
ian theory as his Lassallean opponent; Schweitzer was also the first
to present an outline of the Marxian analysis of capitalist society
to the Reichstag on March 17, 1869. It is not surprising in view of
his Catholic aristocratic background that he was primarily concerned
with the effects of industrialization on the individual and with the
economic reorganization of society. For the middle-class intellectual
Liebknecht, the fight for democratic liberties and against the “feudal
classes” was paramount.*33 Schweitzer’s greater interest in fighting
discussions with Liebknecht on Marx and Lassalle. Bebel’s turn toward social­
ism and Marxism was typical, in its slowness, of the most active members
of the labor movement. See Robert Michels’ necrologue, “August Bebel,”
Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft, Vol. 37, 1913, 675. The gradual advance of
Marxism is treated in Ch. VII. For a Revisionist biographical essay on Bebel,
see Hellmuth von Gerlach, August Bebel (Munich: Langen, 1909).
33 Both Liebknecht and Schweitzer maintained the inseparableness of demo­
cratic and socialist ideals, but Schweitzer held that “the question of owner­
ship, the question of absolute poverty and of limitless wealth is the only
really important question of this century. With its solution, all other prob­
lems will be solved; and if it is not solved, every other solution will be pretty
irrelevant.” Reichstag Protocols, March 2, 1870, 145. Mayer added:
“Whereas Liebknecht was more inclined to consider socialism as a func-

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

51

the evils of capitalist society, rather than in fighting Prussia, made
it easier for him to be pragmatic. He supported the imminent unifi­
cation of Germany by Prussia as the only realistic solution. Lieb­
knecht hoped until the late sixties for a federated nation state which
would include Austria.34 When the Prussian victory over Austria
and Saxony in 1866 buried the last hopes for a major bourgeois
democratic challenge of the authoritarian monarchy, Liebknecht
founded the Saxonian People’s party, which rallied the “demo­
cratic, petty-bourgeois, anti-Prussian elements.” 35 It was made up
of small businessmen, craftsmen and workers.36 Vahlteich observes
in his memoirs that the same districts in Saxony (left of the Elbe
River) that voted for the left in 1848 also voted two decades later
for Liebknecht’s party.37 Liebknecht and Bebel believed, as did
Lassalle in the early sixties, that the chances of democratization
depended on the mobilization of the working class. Political democ­
racy would have to become social democracy; it would have to en­
compass the economic and social interests of the working class.
“Democratic and socialist are for me identical terms,” said Lieb­
knecht in his programmatic speech at the 1868 convention of the
non-Lassallean Union of German Workingmen’s Associations in
Nuremberg; and one of his supporters, a delegate of the South
tion of democracy, Schweitzer inclined to the reverse evaluation of the
relationship. . . . Liebknecht considered it the major task of his party to
prevent the Junkers from exploiting the class struggle between the pro­
letariat and the bourgeoisie for their own selfish purposes. This he thought
to accomplish by dissolving the ‘artificially created and nourished distrust’
[i.e., created by the Lassalleans] against the ‘so-called bourgeois democracy’
and by trying hard to keep the petty bourgeoisie at the side of the working
class in their common political struggle against Reaction.” Mayer, op. cit.,
299 and 306.
34 For a detailed exposition see G. Mayer, op. cit., Ch. VII, 147-172.
35 Vahlteich, op. cit., 40.
36 Cf. Gustav Mayer, “Die Trennung der proletarischen von der bürgerlichen
Demokratie,” Archiv für die Geschichte des Sozialismus, II, 1912, 24.
37 Vahlteich, op. cit., 6.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

52

German People’s party, added: “Democracy must become social
democracy if it honestly wants to be democracy.” 38
Liebknecht and Bebel wanted to win over the working class
without losing the democratic lower middle-class groups they had
organized. However, they came under the pressure of class-con­
scious workers, and Liebknecht was motivated by them at the
Nuremberg convention to push through a program supporting “the
endeavors of the International Workingmen’s Association.” 39 Sixtyone associations voted for the program; 32 voted against it. Under
continued pressures Liebknecht and Bebel finally founded the
Social Democratic Workers’ party at Eisenach in 1869. Its mem­
bers came to be called the Eisenachers. Liebknecht only hesitatingly
accepted the name “Workers’ Party” at the insistence of exLassalleans. He later denied that the name was limiting the socialist
movement to the working class, and he interpreted the term “work”
in an idealistic fashion as “application of humanity”— “Arbeit ist
Betätigung des Menschentums.” 40
Marx and Engels were often exasperated with Liebknecht’s
democratic and federative aims. “I dislike Liebknecht’s tabloid to
the highest degree. Nothing but hidden South German federalism,”
wrote Engels about his Demokratisches Wochenblatt to Marx in
1868. He was dismayed that Liebknecht wanted to run the paper as
an organ not only of the Saxonian People’s party but also of the
38 Protocol of the Fifth Convention of the Union of German Workingmen’s
Associations in Nuremberg, Sept. 1868, reprinted in Wilhelm Liebknecht, ed.,
Der Hochverratsprozess wider Liebknecht, Bebel, Hepner (Berlin: Vorwärts,
1894), 782 f. Until its merger with the Progressives in 1910, the South Ger­
man People’s party founded in 1868 represented South German republicanism
and preserved the democratic heritage of the 1848 revolution.
39 Loc. cit.
40 Protocol of the 1875 Gotha convention, 35, quoted in Kurt Brandis, Die
deutsche Sozialdemokratie bis zum Fall des Sozialistengesetzes (Leipzig:
Hirschfeld, 1931), 29. Brandis is at pains to show that, contrary to older
interpretations, the Eisenachers were essentially no more Marxist than the
Lassalleans were. I agree with this view (cf. Ch. VII) without sharing the
polemical interests of the author, a revolutionary Marxist.

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

53

International— “the German petty bourgeois (<Spiessbiirger) and the
European workers.” Particularly ridiculous to Engels and Marx
was the statement “that bourgeois society or, as he says, ‘the
social’ is determined by ‘the political’ and not vice versa. Naturam
si furca expellas, etc. Nearly every article is full of nonsense.” 41
Until after the beginning of the Franco-German War, they ap­
proved of Liebknecht and Bebel’s opposition to Bismarck’s unifica­
tion and war policies. They realized that their moralistic pathos ac­
counted for much of their appeal among anti-Prussian groups, but
they feared that the insistence on principles and the fervent stand
for a democratic and federative solution of German unification
would, in the long run, prevent them from pursuing a realistic
policy.42
Liebknecht and Bebel’s round-about opposition to the FrancoGerman War at first dismayed many Eisenachers; but the continua­
tion of the war against the French Republic kindled their indigna­
tion and also effected a rapprochement with the Lassalleans, whose
representatives had at first voted for the war credits. When Lieb­
knecht and Bebel were prosecuted for their stand, they became
martyrs in the eyes of many workers, and their fame and extraor­
dinary position within the labor movement were guaranteed.43
Engels’ letters of Feb. 2, 1868, July 6, 1869, Oct. 14, 1868, in V. Adorat­
sky, ed., Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe (Berlin: Marx-Engels Verlag, 1931),
III:4, 19, 202, 111.
42 Cf. Engels’ letter of Oct. 22, 1867, Marx’s letter of Dec. 17, 1867, op. cit.,
I ll:3, 438 and 464; Marx’s letters of Aug. 17 and Sept. 2, 1870, 111:4, 369
and 375. Eduard Bernstein agreed decades later with Marx and Engels that
the moralistic basis on which Liebknecht and Bebel refused to vote for the
war credits in the North-German diet could have been shared by any bour­
geois pacifist and democrat. Cf. Bernstein, “Von der Sekte zur Partei,”
Zeitschrift für Politik, Vol. 3, 1910, 513.
43 Liebknecht and Bebel’s position appeared as an opportunity to the Saxonian
government, prompted by Bismarck, to prepare a trial against them for high
treason. After considerable legal and political difficulties, the government
finally succeeded, in 1872, in sentencing them to two years confinement in a
fortress. Cf. Paul Kampffmeyer and Bruno Altmann, Vor dem Sozialisten­
gesetz (Berlin: Der Bücherkreis, 1928), 68-76. The Leipzig trial gave Lieb-

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

54

Though Liebknecht was so deeply involved in the issue of unifica­
tion that, as Gustav Mayer said of him, “for several years socialist
aims were of secondary importance to him,” 44 he was not demoral­
ized by the unification of Germany through Bismarck as so many
South German democrats were. He and Bebel now fell back on
Marx and Engels’ conviction that the social and economic develop­
ments following unification would necessarily further the cause of
the Social Democrats. “The future belongs to us,” wrote Bebel in
November 1870, because “our greatest enemies, against their will,
further most . . . the development of things.” 45 The patriotic
enthusiasm about the military victories and unification slowed
down, at first, the expansion of the two Social Democratic parties,
but postwar developments worked in their favor. The precarious
situation of the industrial workers, even if they succeeded in rais­
ing wages during the boom of the early seventies, and the persistent
interference of the authorities with party and union organization
tended to neutralize the patriotic feelings of many workers after
1871.
The unification of Germany removed the major issue between the
knecht and Bebel an opportunity to propagandize their views before an audi­
ence larger than they could have had without the trial. The public took a great
interest in the trial which lasted for two weeks— an extraordinarily long dura­
tion for a trial at that time. The prosecution cited many pamphlets, articles,
letters and speeches in the presentation of its case; it read the whole Com­
munist Manifesto and dealt especially with the defendants’ relation to Marx
and the First International. This gave Liebknecht and Bebel a chance to
define the nonviolent revolutionary aspirations of their party, a position to
which the Social Democrats adhered from then on. Liebknecht immediately
published an edited version of the trial manuscript (ca. 600 pp.); it became
one of the major pieces of Social Democratic literature and played a sig­
nificant role in mobilizing sympathies among workers for Social Democratic
leaders. The second edition (1894, op. cit.) also contains about twenty addi­
tional manuscripts (convention protocols, proclamations, reports, party pro­
grams, etc.) which had been used as evidence by the prosecution and the
defense. This swells the volume to 942 pages.
44 Mayer, Schweitzer, op. cit., 150.
45 Mayer, “Die Trennung,” op. cit., 65.

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

55

Eisenachers and the Lassalleans. Much antagonism, however, per­
sisted until the increasing persecution by the government after the
1874 elections and internal dissensions of the Lassalleans produced
a situation which broke down resistance to a merger in 1875. Before
the merger the Eisenachers severed their ties with the bourgeois
democrats. The first break had occurred in 1869, when the party
was founded. At that time a prominent early sympathizer of labor,
Sonnemann, the owner of the left-wing Frankfurter Zeitung and
leader of the South German People’s party, turned away from the
Social Democrats.46 The bourgeois adherents of the South German
People’s party had furthered the Workingmen’s Associations from
which the Social Democratic Workers’ party emerged; the People’s
party recognized many demands of the Social Democrats and fought
the laissez-faire credo of the outstanding Progressive leaders Richter
and Bamberger. The same type of republican who belonged to the
People’s party in southern Germany often joined the Social Demo­
crats in northern Germany for lack of a better alternative. For a
time many of these democrats and republicans belonged to both
parties before they were forced to make a decision, when the
Eisenach congress of 1873 adopted a motion requiring all members
with dual membership to make a choice.47 Thus the dividing line
between the South German People’s party and the Social Democrats
was not laissez-faire, as with the other liberal parties, but it was
created by the socialist insistence on organization along class lines.
There were more intellectuals among the Eisenachers than there
were among the numerically and organizationally superior Lassal­
leans. Eduard Bernstein recalls from the early seventies that the
Eisenachers, to which he belonged, were sometimes called a “gen­
eral staff without soldiers.” The majority of the members in Berlin,
for example, were workers, but intellectuals dominated the discus­
46 Cf. Paul Massing, Rehearsal for Destruction (New York: Harper, 1949),
156, 184, and 252 f.
47 Cf. Wilhelm Schröder, Geschichte der sozialdemokratischen Parteior­
ganisationen in Deutschland (Dresden: Kaden, 1912), 18 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

56

sions, and this predominance retarded the increase of working-class
membership.4849
Bernstein points out an organizational phenomenon which was
partly due to the perseverance of the democratic mentality of the
48ers: The Berlin Eisenachers came together only once a month
for a Social Democratic party meeting, but three times for meetings
of the older Democratic Workingmen’s Association {Demokrat­
ischer Arbeiterverein). A fight for reorganization ensued which be­
came a struggle between the attitudes of two generations. The
opposition—the members under 30 years of age— argued that the
name Democratic Workingmen’s Association gave rise to the mis­
understanding that the association was not a truly socialist organi­
zation but only an appendage of some bourgeois-democratic party.
The South German Ignaz Auer, who had been a worker and who
was rapidly rising within the party, warned that workers coming
from southern Germany into Berlin would not join the association
because of its name and would join the Lassalleans instead.40
48 Cf. Eduard Bernstein, Sozialdemokratische Lehrjahre (Berlin: Bücher­
kreis, 1928), 9 f. Actually, there were just enough intellectuals and business­
men to help the labor movement establish itself. Among those who stuck to
the labor movement despite its increasing class consciousness was Karl
Höchberg, a wealthy bourgeois and ethical socialist. He published later the
first theoretical journal of the party, Die Zukunft, and after its suppression
the Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik in Zürich. Only few
newspapers drifted into the Social Democratic camp; one of them was the
Demokratische Zeitung in Berlin; cf. Bernstein, loc. cit., and Adolf Held, Die
deutsche Arbeiterpresse der Gegenwart (Leipzig: Duncker, 1873), 86-94.
49 In defence of the organization’s name, the chairman of the Democratic
Workingmen’s Association, Theodor Metzner, used an argument similar to
Marx’s argument objecting to the term “social democratic.” Metzner con­
sidered the proposed name Social Democratic Workingmen’s Association “an
accumulation of equivalent notions which must be avoided in the interest of
clear thinking” (Bernstein, op. cit., 10). The opposition won out. The younger
members took over the organization which soon became strong competition
for the Lassalleans. The political strength of the Berlin Eisenachers in­
creased particularly when they gained control over vocational associations
such as the Saddler Journeymen’s Association. Ignaz Auer was elected chair­
m an of the association’s executive committee in the early seventies. On

Rise of the Class-Conscious Labor Movement

57

By the middle of the seventies, the separation of the Social Demo­
crats from the remnants of the democratic bourgeoisie was com­
pleted. However, the socialist insistence on class-conscious organi­
zation remained linked with democratic “bourgeois” ideology. This
was recognized by Marx in his critique of the 1875 Gotha program
draft of the united Socialist Workers’ party (renamed Social Demo­
cratic party in 1890):
Its political demands contain nothing beyond the old democratic litany
familiar to all: universal suffrage, direct legislation, popular rights, a
people’s militia, etc. They are a mere echo o f the bourgeois People’s
party. . . . Even vulgar democracy, which sees the millennium in the
democratic republic and has no suspicion that it is precisely in this
last form o f state o f bourgeois society that the class struggle has to be
fought out to a conclusion— even it towers mountains above this kind
of democratism, which keeps within the limits o f what is permitted by
the police and not permitted by logic.50

Marx knew well Liebknecht’s democratic inclinations, but he
did not sufficiently realize that there were no major theoretical dif­
ferences between the Lassalleans and the Eisenachers, many of
whom had been educated in the Lassallean organizations. Marx
assumed that the Lassalleans had triumphed over the Eisenachers,
but Bernstein recalls that Liebknecht was responsible for much in
the program which Marx attributed to the Lassalleans.51 Lieb­
knecht simply suppressed Marx’s critique; even Bebel does not
seem to have known it at the time. Not before 1891 did the party
become aware of Marx’s letter when Engels published it before the
Erfurt program was adopted.
Marx and Engels’ criticism of the term Social Democratic, at the time when
Schweitzer chose this name for his newspaper, see their letters of Nov. 16
and 18, 1864, in Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe, op. cit., I ll:3, 203 and 205.
50 Lewis Feuer, ed., Marx and Engels: Basic Writings on Politics and Philos­
ophy (Garden City: Doubleday Anchor, 1959), 128. By permission of the
editor.
51 Cf. Bernstein, op. cit., 46.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

58

After the First World War, revolutionary Marxists and leftwing critics like Brandis, Korsch, Lukacs and Rosenberg rediscov­
ered that before and after their unification the Social Democrats
adhered to many features of radical democratic ideology.52 What
Lukacs stated about Lassalle was also true of the Eisenachers:
“The whole conception of revolution, despite all of its proletarian
details, remains within the ideological realm of bourgeois so­
ciety.” 53 Brandis, too, was right in concluding that the Lassalleans
as well as their opponents did not make a complete break with the
“bourgeois world of ideas” because “they did not shed the ideology
of bourgeois democracy.” Therefore “the separation from it re­
mained organizational.” 54 From the viewpoint of the total revo­
lution, the Social Democratic ideology had to appear as a failure
to arrive at the “correct” class consciousness, but we must add that
for the authoritarian state as well as for the overwhelming majority
of the middle classes “bourgeois democracy” was as unacceptable
as a proletarian-revolutionary ideology. Since the labor movement
became the major advocate of extensive democratization, the fight
for this goal was bound to result in an intensification of the class
struggle and sooner or later in a major clash with the authoritarian
monarchy.
52 For Korsch and Rosenberg, see Ch. VII, 167.
53 Georg Lukacs, “Die neue Ausgabe von Lassalles Briefen,” Archiv für die
Geschichte der Arbeiterbewegung, XI, 1925, 414.
54 Brandis, op. cit., 36 f.

Ill
Bismarck and the Spectre o f
Revolution

1. The Incompatibility of Parliamentarism and the
Labor Movement with Bismarck’s Reich
The labor movement was regarded in leading government circles
as a permanent revolutionary potential within the Reich because
it could have been satisfactorily integrated only if the very struc­
ture of Bismarck’s edifice had been greatly modified. Foreign policy,
domestic policy and the constitutional history of the Prussian state
must be seen together in order to understand the particular form
which Bismarck gave Germany in 1871 and in order to compre­
hend his policies and attitudes toward the labor movement. Bis­
marck approved of the German middle-class aspiration to unify
Germany because he considered this to be in the interest of Prussia,
as well as of the other parts of Germany, Austria excepted. Until
the early fifties he had supported Austria; then he realized her in­
ability, as a state of many nationalities, to effect German unifica­
tion. He concluded that the only solution was an alignment of the
Prussian military aristocracy with the militarily powerless German
middle classes. The Prussian aristocracy would organize the mili­
tary power required to establish and defend a united Germany;
and the middle classes would contribute their intellectual, commer­
cial and industrial resources. He managed to convince the King of
Prussia and to get sufficient though not complete support from the
Prussian aristocracy. Also he could count on the support of the
majority of the German liberal bourgeoisie.
Bismarck established the Reich as an authoritarian regime. In

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

60

order to understand this particular authoritarianism it is necessary
to look briefly at the constitutional history of Prussia.1 The en­
lightened absolutism of Prussia evolved after 1850 into monarchi­
cal constitutionalism. Its essence was the rule of the king through a
responsible minister, appointed by him without parliamentary con­
firmation. The constitution which was imposed in 1850 did not
stipulate clearly the form of this responsibility, but it was largely
self-responsibility of the minister in the sense that he was free to
decide whether his conscience and political evaluation agreed with
the policies of the monarch or of the parties.2 All bills passed by
parliament and signed by the king were countersigned by the prime
minister who thus took constitutional responsibility for them. The
responsible minister had a mediating role which made his position
more delicate than that of a parliamentary minister.
Under monarchic constitutionalism, the king retained his ulti­
mate authority, and the crown did not derive its position from a
contract with the people. In fact, in a sense, the people did not
exist as a political entity proper; the constitution recognized the
people only as civil society (bürgerliche Gesellschaft), represented
by parties in a parliament which was not the supreme institution of
the political society— the latter was formed by the authoritarian
military state. As a military entity, the people were the personal
instrument of the king. The army did not take a loyalty oath to the
constitution, and the relations of the king to the army and the
church were beyond the realm of ministerial responsibility and
parliamentary participation. The king was the supreme commander
and the head of the Protestant state church.
It is important to understand that monarchic constitutionalism
1 The discussion of monarchical constitutionalism follows the brilliant com­
parative analysis by the historian Otto Hintze in “Das monarchische Prinzip
und die konstitutionelle Verfassung,” Preussische Jahrbücher, Vol. 144,
1911, 381-412.
2 The Constitution satisfied the demands of the more moderate liberals by
recognizing the equality of all citizens before the law and by providing for
the joint exercise of legislative power through the king and the two chambers.

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

61

was not just an “imperfect” transition to parliamentarism, as it
often appeared to English and French observers and to German
liberal adherents of parliamentary government; it was an institution
consistent with the heritage of the absolutist Prussian state which
had developed from patrimonialism to “state consciousness” : that
means, the monarch subordinated himself to the totality of the state
interest or “the idea of the state” (Staatsidee) without, however,
really giving up his absolutist powers. The Prussian state was based
squarely on the ultimate authority of the military monarchy by
virtue of “the historical right of the dynasty.” In 200 years the
crown had created a powerful Prussia from a conglomeration of
territories and in view of this accomplishment and Prussia’s role in
German unification, no power and no argument could change her
preeminence.
Monarchic constitutionalism became the Prussian-German sys­
tem of government. There was no contemporary parallel to it in
Europe. France had had it from 1814 until 1830. Russia was slowly
approaching monarchical constitutionalism but had not yet realized
it. The Dual Monarchy had parliamentary rule in Hungary as well
as “parliamentarized” ministerial government, as it was called, in
Austria; that is, members of parliament were in the government,
but the civil servants predominated. England had been a parlia­
mentary monarchy since 1835 when the parliamentary majority
leaders definitely took over the government. The eminent constitu­
tional historian Otto Hintze argues that the decisive difference be­
tween England and Prussia was the predominance of society in the
former and of the state in the latter:
The m odem state in England has been based on the ruling social classes
— agrarian and industrial— not on the crown. Society has here, so to
speak, swallowed the old monarchical state; it has politicized itself
and has becom e a “political society”; the crown functions as a con­
servative emblem. . . . The parliamentary system corresponds to the
tendency towards the formation o f that industrial type o f state which
Herbert Spencer praised as the highest form of civilization; the m o­

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

62

narchic-constitutional system, however, is based on the characteristics of
the military type o f state which prevails on the Continent. Insular
security, on the one hand, and the need for military preparedness, on
the other, characterize the different existential conditions to which
the governmental forms adjusted here and there. In England the so­
cially ruling classes, first the agrarian and then the industrial classes,
have taken over leadership and reconstructed the state according to
their interests and needs; and they have made, step by step, the conces­
sions to which they were forced by the lower strata. [In Prussia] the
old authoritarian state (<obrigkeitliche Staat), which arose out of the arts
o f war, has retained the leadership and engages now in subordinating
social class conflict to the interests o f the state. . . . In the age of
absolutism . . . the authoritarian military state had nearly swallowed
up society and its econom ic interests; only the reforms of Stein and
Hardenberg again emancipated society from the state; and [monarchic
constitutionalism] meant an organic association of society and state in
which, however, the latter remained dominant.3

Liberal and conservative theoreticians of the first half of the
19th century, including Hegel, did not differentiate clearly between
the monarchical and parliamentary principle in a constitutional
regime. The conservative theoreticians showed little interest in
elaborating a distinction between their own country and conserva­
tive England, since they were more interested in fighting the prin­
ciples of the French Revolution. But when England clearly
developed into a parliamentary regime, the leading conservative
theoretician of the Prussian cause, Friedrich Julius Stahl, came for3 Op. cit., 387 f. My emphasis.— Hintze’s comparison appears to me com­
patible with the view that in Anglo-Saxon countries, too, the state increas­
ingly acquired a mediating function in the course of democratization and
industrialization; witness Lloyd George’s reforms at the end of the period.
The point is that in some Western countries the state became, so to speak,
an instrument of the industrializing pluralist society for the balancing of
diverse class and group interests. Governmental bureaucracies develop
vested interests, but American higher civil servants, for example, do not form
a status group as did the Prussian civil service. Cf. Reinhard Bendix, Higher
Civil Servants in American Society (Boulder: University of Colorado Press,
1949); cf. also Max Weber’s critique of the German bureaucracy in my
Ch. XI, 299 ff.

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

63

ward with the purposively distinct principle of monarchic consti­
tutionalism.4 The Prussian constitution of 1850 implicitly followed
this principle, and the policies of Frederick William IV certainly
corresponded to it, though he would rather have been a more per­
sonal absolute ruler. The principle became decisive for German
historical development when Bismarck came into power and af­
firmed it as the basis for his self-image as chancellor and prime
minister.
Bismarck considered monarchical constitutionalism an appro­
priate form for Prussia and the Reich in view of the heterogeneity
of both. In addition to the important regional cleavage between
East Elbia and Prussia’s western provinces, there were great re­
gional differences in the Reich. The religious cleavage was more
pronounced in the Empire than in any other European country.
Besides the political cleavages attendant to the regional and re­
ligious differences, there were party differences independent of
them. Since the Reichstag was constitutionally excluded from re­
sponsibility for government policies, the parties were socio-eco­
nomic and religious pressure groups rather than political organi­
zations responsible to the whole nation (as was possible under
parliamentarism).5 Bismarck encouraged the development of parties
4 F. J. Stahl (1802-61) opposed the status quo in the thirties and lost his
professorship, but after the 1848 revolution he became the most effective
conservative spokesman. His philosophy of state derived the state from the
Divine order of the world and vigorously maintained the Divine right of
kings. As staff member of the important conservative Kreuz-Zeitung he
played a great role in public opinion. He was highly regarded by the ro­
manticist Frederick William IV and influential in shaping the Prussian con­
stitution of 1850 along conservative lines.
5 For Hintze the existence of the great cleavages precluded parliamentarism
in Prussia, the Reich and, on the highest level, in the Double Monarchy,
since parliamentary government required a considerable degree of homo­
geneity in a country. He referred to Switzerland and the United States as
other examples of very heterogeneous countries unable to afford this form
of government. Cf. op. cit., 381 and 400 ff. It should be added that Hintze
personally preferred the system of monarchic constitutionalism over parlia­
mentarism, as did most other academicians. He hoped that the “monarch,

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

64

as interest groups. This permitted the government to rule by
the principle of divide et impera and by the compromise poli­
cies of do ut des. In practice, however, the government could only work with a coalition of conservatives and Catholic Center or con­
servatives and moderate liberals, since the left-wing liberals and
the Social Democrats were interested in changing the system of
monarchical constitutionalism into a parliamentary monarchy or
even a republic.
Bismarck did not hesitate to use the constitutional imperatives,
as he defined them, against the king and against the popular repre­
sentation. Twice, in 1857 and 1866, he prevailed on the king not
to change the constitution in the crown’s favor. The second time,
Bismarck was interested in mitigating the conflict with the liberals
because of his foreign policy plans. In the mid-sixties, he ruled un­
constitutionally by disregarding the budgetary rights of parliament
to enable a reorganization of the army; however, he was also will­
ing to compromise, if the same purpose was served. Without an
army capable of victory over Austria and France, he could not hope
to unify Germany.
In 1882 Bismarck gave the Reichstag a lecture on the reasons
why a strong king and army, not a strong parliament, had been
necessary for unification. This was an attack on the parliamentary
conceptions just propounded by Hänel, a prominent progressive.
Bismarck reminded the deputies that the king of Prussia “had been
in complete possession of power, in legislative and in every other
respect, when the constitution was given” in 1850. He considered
it very fortunate that the king’s successor, William I, had not con­
sented to a parliamentary form of government in the early sixties:
If William I had selected the ministers according to the liberal ma­
jority and had followed its foreign policy precepts, the army would
not have been reorganized. Bismarck concluded:
as a representative of the idea of the state” rather than of the “legitimisticreligious idea,” would be able to cope with the “democratic tendencies of the
present period” (op. cit., 412).

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

65

The gentlemen in parliament had such a limited understanding o f the
political possibilities in Europe that they did not recognize that if they
wanted German unification the first requisite was a strong Prussian
army and the signature o f the king of Prussia.6

When Bismarck established the Reich in 1871, he was con­
fronted with the problem of balancing the demands of the middle
class with those of the aristocracy, since he believed it necessary
for the stability of the Reich to have a strong army as well as a
prosperous middle class. The army was needed for the protection *
of the new Empire, surrounded by major powers (Russia, Austria,
France); and it served as a guarantee of domestic peace. The liberal
middle classes were needed for carrying out the legislative work of
unification through the Reichstag. Bismarck incorrectly anticipated
that the ruling houses of the other German states would try to slow
down unification. Representatives of the middle classes could work
in parliament on legislation and discuss all political issues, but they
could not determine the domestic and especially the foreign policy;
they could vote on military appropriation, but the army was directly
and completely an instrument of the king and emperor. The show­
down of the early sixties had proven that even the parliament’s re­
fusal to grant military appropriations could not weaken the power
of the king and army.
Bismarck used the power of his office and of the constitution to
suppress the cleavage embodied in the domestic enemies of his
specific setup of the Reich: the Prussian conservatives, the Cath­
olic Center party and the Social Democrats. The old conversatives
were the pillar of the Prussian monarchy, but when their social and
material interests were infringed upon they often turned against the
Reich and, not infrequently, against the Prussian crown. They ad­
hered first to dynastic and specifically Prussian values, rather than
national values, and later they concentrated most successfully on
6 Bismarck in the Reichstag on Jan. 24, 1882, reprinted in Rothfels, ed.,
op. cit., 280.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

66

agrarian pressure-group policies. At first their power was based on
institutional prerogatives, which gave them a dominant role in the
army and administrative control on the village and county level in
East Elbia. When the small towns and peasants gained self-adminis­
tration in the early seventies, antagonism against the aristocratic
landowners diminished and the conservatives picked up many rural
votes. Bismarck clashed with the conservatives several times and
held them at bay. Only a strong chancellor of the Reich and min­
ister-president of Prussia or a personally strong monarch could
keep them in check. Thus the system of monarchical constitution­
alism failed to insure automatically the predominance of the gov­
ernment. The Prussian government never became wholly a govern­
ment of the Conservative party; the party, however, often exerted
a veto power. After Bismarck’s dismissal in 1890, neither his suc­
cessors nor William II were able to restrain the conservative landowners from the single-minded pursuit of their political and eco­
nomic group interests, nor were they able to wring from them
political concessions deemed necessary for the survival of the
Reich.7 The three-class suffrage functioned to keep the conserva­
tives permanently in power, once they had gained control of the
Prussian diet in the wake of the National Liberal collapse of the
late seventies.
During the first years of the Reich many Prussian aristocrats
resented the profits of the urban middle classes from unification and
French reparations. For decades the East Elbian landowners con­
tinued to oppose industrialization because of the rapid social
changes it brought about. Their opposition was shared by the
Center party, the second great opponent of Bismarck’s Reich,
which united federalist groups from all strata—aristocrats, priests,
7 Bismarck’s first successor, Caprivi, was under strong pressures from the
conservatives because of his liberalization of protective tariffs. Hohenlohe
maneuvered cautiously and sometimes won on political issues. Biilow re­
signed in 1909 when the conservative refusal to accept inheritance taxes for
increased military expenditures destroyed his conservative-liberal coalition.
Bethmann-Hollweg was unable to initiate suffrage reforms in Prussia.

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

67

farmers and workers, most of them Catholics. These groups were
against the economic rise of the middle classes and against the
political predominance of Prussia. The different class interests were
so strongly accentuated that many Catholic middle-class persons in
the Rhineland and southern Germany continued to support Bis­
marck and the National Liberals, despite the conflict with the
Catholic church.8 Bismarck resented the Center party especially be­
cause of its alliance with the Catholic Polish provinces and its agi­
tation among the workers. The Catholic church and the Center
party encouraged a labor movement independent of the liberal
bourgeoisie, but dependent on them. Class cleavage was particu­
larly severe in areas where the workers were predominantly
Catholic and the managers Protestant, such as in Upper Silesia.
In the seventies the third political opponent of the Reich, the
Social Democratic labor movement, was much less strong than the
others but even less compatible with the structure of the Reich.
Because of his fight against the Center party and the conservatives
and his fear of a Catholic coalition between France and Austria,
supported by south German Catholics, Bismarck viewed the Social
Democrats, in the short run, as a minor threat. However, he con­
sidered them a great potential danger to the social and political
order of the Reich; he saw the paramount danger to his system
and to European society in cumulative tendencies toward a lowerclass revolution, basically perceived in the image of the French
Revolution rather than of Marx’s proletarian revolution. He was
8 Bismarck and the liberals fought the so-called Kulturkampf against the
Catholic church from 1872 until 1887. It began after the new papal dogma
of infallibility had resulted in a split within German Catholicism. The gov­
ernment recognized the small independent German Catholic church; this
was the beginning of protracted struggles leading to the expulsion of the
Jesuits and the arrest of bishops. The church and the Center party eventually
emerged as the winners; from then on the party was willing to support the
government in exchange for extensive concessions. Only three measures of
the Kulturkampf survived: the supervisory right of the state over clerical
affairs, state supervision of schools, and civil marriage.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

68

convinced that the two supreme dangers to the Reich were an inter­
national war, uniting Germany’s neighbors against her, and an in­
ternational revolution; a revolutionary situation in Germany and
other countries was most likely to arise after a concerted attack of
major European powers on Germany. Bismarck tried to coordinate
his diplomacy and domestic policy in order to forestall such a possi­
bility.9 However, as in his fight against the Catholic church and
the Center party, he exaggerated foreign policy motives in his ad­
vocacy of antisocialist legislation. He emphasized the support such
a legislation would provide to the precarious position of the Tsar
in his struggle with social and pan-Slavic revolutionary forces.10
As Hans Rothfels has pointed out, it would be wrong to consider
this argumentation as evidence for the thesis, adhered to by many
German historians, of the primacy of foreign policy.11 Bismarck
often hid his domestic intentions behind arguments of foreign
9 Rothfels, ed., op. cit., XLVII.
10 This weakness of Tsarism was not recognized by the labor movement. In
their rapprochement with nationalism after the turn of the century, the Social
Democrats were strongly influenced by what they perceived as the deadly
threat of Tsarism. They took the appearance of overpowering strength of
the Russian regime at face value. In a memorandum to William II, in Feb.
1918, the Prussian minister of the interior, Drews, linked the strong impres­
sion which the Russian revolution of 1917 made on the Social Democrats'
with their overestimation of the power of the Tsarist regime. Cf. Erich Volkmann, Der Marxismus und das deutsche Heer (Berlin: Hobbing, 1925), re­
print in the appendix, 309 f.
11 Cf. Rothfels, loc. cit. The idea of the primacy of foreign policy which
gained currency, as a normative and empirical concept, because of the events
leading up to German unification was explicitly rejected by Drews. He ex­
plained to the Emperor that domestic issues in Germany were more crucial
than foreign issues, in contrast to other countries where parliamentary ma­
jorities could be formed on the basis of agreements in foreign policy. Linked
to domestic cleavages, struggles over issues of foreign policy were bitter in
Germany. Drews charged that the right-wing parties were responsible for
delaying the suffrage reform in Prussia, which would have to be carried
through by the crown, if consensus on foreign policy was to be preserved.
Thus, to the very end of the Reich the irreconcilable cleavage between right
and left continued which made the authoritarian regime so vulnerable to the
domestic consequences of outside military defeat. Cf. Volkmann, loc. cit.

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

69

policy, since he could in this way more easily manipulate public
opinion. The fight against the Catholic church and the Social
Democrats was primarily a domestic matter.
Bismarck believed that the government could not offer enough
to the Center party, the Social Democrats and also the Progressives
to commit them permanently to the Reich as he had established
it.12 As he had feared, these three groups were to unite in the hour
of military defeat to establish the parliamentary republic. He hoped
that a strong authoritarian system could indefinitely prevent the
revolutionary potential from becoming active; he considered it
much too dangerous to make concessions to the masses, trying to
integrate them into the political process. This was one of his reasons
for refusing to grant even the moderate demands of the liberals for
more parliamentary rights. He judged the bourgeoisie incapable of
holding its ground against the lower classes. Because of its lack
of military power and its universalist ideals existing side by side
with its particularistic convictions about the importance of prop­
erty and education, the bourgeoisie had a tendency to make con­
cessions when hard pressed. To Bismarck every step in the di­
rection of genuine mass participation in politics meant a strength­
ening of the revolutionary force which would first produce chaos
and then Caesarist dictatorship. He was correct in assuming that
greater bourgeois participation would probably be followed by
more concessions to the labor movement, but he failed to recognize
that this might stabilize the Reich rather than precipitate its down­
fall.
Although Bismarck had a basic difference with the liberals, he
shared many of the prevailing liberal ideas. He believed that the
educated and propertied classes were the real support of the state;
through their influence the agitation of ambitious demagogues and
the appetites of the masses could be controlled; the masses were
not responsible for themselves and easily fell prey to dictatorship.
12 Cf. Bismarck, Gedanken, op cit., Vol. 3, 1921, 131.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

70

He did not want Germany to run “the French circle.” 13 After his
dismissal by William II in 1890, he emphasized the importance of
a free press and modern parliament in providing a countervailing
power against the ruling monarch and his bureaucracy. He felt that
the best intentions of the most idealistic monarch can bring ruin if
there is no effective check on his power. But as long as he was
chancellor, he did everything to prevent the rise of such a counter­
vailing force. On the other hand, he was clearly aware of the
dangers of a permanently dissatisfied bourgeoisie. In some of his
many speeches from retirement he stated that he feared the dis­
satisfaction of the educated and propertied classes more than dis­
satisfied masses which, he believed, could be pacified by material
improvement or crushed by the army.14
In another of these speeches he maintained that stable govern­
ment was possible only “if we manage to refrain from extremes
and if we concentrate on those opinions which are represented by
the educated bourgeoisie.” 15 He regretted the appeal for votes from
the lower classes and reiterated his policy of uniting the moderate
conservatives and the National Liberals in order to create a stable
majority in the Reichstag. Compromise, he said, is an essential
element of a constitutional state. He criticized the parties for be­
lieving that each might eventually win an absolute majority, and
urged the “merger of the moderate parties which represent the edu­
cated bourgeoisie.” 16 This makes it clear that he well-nigh equated
13 This paragraph summarizes Bismarck’s arguments in Gedanken, op. cit.,
Vol. 2, 59 f.
14 Cf. address before 700 secondary schoolteachers in Friedrichsruh, April
18, 1895, in H. Kohl, ed., Die politischen Reden des Fürsten Bismarck (Stutt­
gart: Cotta, 1905), Vol. 13, 326 f.
15 “Ansprache an die Südwestdeutschen,” Kissingen, July 24, 1892, in Kohl,
ed., op. cit., l lOf. This speech was addressed to a relatively liberal middleclass audience of 5,000 southwest Germans, including bank directors, law­
yers, factory owners and their families. As in the case of the address to
secondary schoolteachers, his emphasis may have been influenced some­
what by the composition of his audience.
16 Loc. cit.

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

71

“educated” with “moderate,” the latter implying acceptance of the
political framework he had set up.17
There was, then, little room in Bismarck’s Reich for the direct
participation of the bourgeoisie in government, except through the
mediation of the chancellor or through personal relations with the
emperor, as in the later case of William II. If Bismarck’s system
was to work, there was no place for an independent working-class
movement. He could not accommodate a potential mass movement
which would strengthen the forces of parliamentarism. Arthur
Rosenberg’s conclusion that “the structure of the Empire did not,
indeed, permit anything but the repression of the working class,” 18
is correct if we also include isolation under repression. After an
abortive attempt at direct suppression, isolation became the major
means of keeping the labor movement in check.

2. Bismarck’s Attack Upon Parliamentarism and
Social Democracy
Bismarck consistently acted on his understanding of the balance of
forces necessary for the preservation of the Empire. In the late
seventies he began to attack the liberals. Economic developments
played a considerable role in Bismarck’s policy change. In the early
seventies the government outdid the liberals in its laissez-faire trade
policies. Its attitude changed, however, when the postwar boom
was ended by the international depression of the mid-seventies and
foreign industrial and agricultural competition increased sharply.
In the decade after 1867, Bismarck had a successful working agree17 Bismarck did not, of course, mention that he had broken the liberal ma­
jority in the Reichstag. He preferred a compliant coalition of liberal and con­
servative parties or a liberal-conservative government party to an independent
majority party.
18 Rosenberg, op. cit., 21 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

72

ment with the National Liberals. Through it, a vast number of legis­
lative and administrative problems of unification, ranging from a
code of civil and commercial law to the reform of currencies and
measurements, were solved. Since Bismarck needed liberal support
for higher taxes and for the Kulturkampf, the liberals opportunely
asked for extended parliamentary rights—in particular for greater
budgetary rights in the Prussian diet. Confronted in the late seven­
ties with the alternatives of making more concessions to the liberals
or to the conservatives, Bismarck resolutely decided in the latter’s
favor, and a new era of restoration began. He used the issues of
tariffs and of antisocialist legislation to destroy his old liberal
majority. He also hoped that the new tariff income would make the
Reich independent of the financial contributions of the States and
even allow him to give money to them. This exchange would have
weakened the position of the States vis-à-vis the Reich and ad­
versely affected the budgetary control exerted by the Reichstag and
the State parliaments.
Until 1877 the National Liberal party had a strategic position
in the Reichstag; it was able to form a majority with the conserva­
tives as well as with the Progressives. Until the mid-seventies, Na­
tional Liberal relations with the progressives were good; they de­
teriorated when antagonism between Bismarck and the Progressives
over the military appropriations became more intense. In the elec­
tions of 1877, the two parties fought each other and emerged weak­
ened in relation to the conservative parties. The National Liberals
failed to win enough seats to retain their strategic position between
right and left, but despite their increasing weakness, the liberals
continued to refuse passage of antisocialist bills. Many liberals did
not care to strengthen the government beyond the extraordinary
powers that they had given it for fighting the Catholic church. Even
after the first attempt on the life of William I in 1878, the Reichs­
tag voted, 243 to 60, against the proposed legislation; but when
the second attempt occurred, Bismarck used public hysteria and
bourgeois fear of the “red danger” to dissolve the parliament. He

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

73

saw his chance to split the National Liberals: the left wing was for
free trade and against antisocialist legislation, while the right wing
wanted to follow the trends in bourgeois public opinion and to com­
promise with the government. Bismarck weakened the liberals in
the elections, especially the left wing of the National Liberals. The
National Liberal party was now ready to consent to antisocialist
legislation, although it considerably softened the government’s pro­
posal. The final bill passed with 221 to 149 votes; it outlawed all
permanent Social Democratic organizations and nearly all unions,
but it permitted campaign activities before elections and the send­
ing of Social Democratic deputies into the Reichstag. This attenua­
tion undermined much of the long-run effectiveness of the anti­
socialist law.19
The defeat in 1878 of the National Liberals and the Progressives
was a turning point in German history. Soon afterwards, in 1881,
the National Liberal party split over the tariff issue. Its left wing
was firmly committed to laissez-faire principles, as were the Pro­
gressives. In seven years, 1874 to 1881, the party sank from the
dominating position of 152 seats to 45 seats. The liberal majority
was definitely destroyed and liberalism divided into several factions.
Bismarck skilfully took advantage of the rise of industrial and
agrarian interest groups. In 1874 Reichstag representatives from
the industrial regions formed an inter-party association for protec­
tive tariffs. Then the Verein der Steuer-und Wirtschaftsreformer
(Association of Tax and Economic Reformers) was founded; and
in 1876 the Zentralverband deutscher Industrieller was founded by
the leader of the Free Conservatives, von Kardorff. When Bismarck
turned against the National Liberal notables they proved particu­
larly vulnerable to the attack because they often had no party
machine or interest group to support them. For the same reason,
19 The major provisions of the law are reproduced in Bertrand Russell, Ger­
man Social Democracy (London: Longmans, Green, 1896), 100 ff; too late
for consideration came Wolfgang Pack, Das parlamentarische Ringen um
das Sozialistengesetz Bismarcks 1878-1890 (Düsseldorf: Droste Verlag, 1961).

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

74

the educated liberal deputies from the cities lost their rural districts
to the conservatives.20 Until the eighties the liberals drew consider­
able strength from the Protestant countryside. Then the conserva­
tives appealed to strictly agrarian interests and built up farmers’
organizations, which proved to be very efficient interest groups.
After the exodus of the left wing of the National Liberals, the
dividing line between left and center no longer ran through the
party. The liberal left formed the Advanced Liberal party (Frei­
sinn) in 1884, to which most of the prominent liberals belonged:
Richter, Rickert, H and, Virchow, Bamberger, Schrader and others.
This was a large group of 106 deputies. Bismarck set out immedi­
ately to destroy them. He kept the public continuously disquieted
about the Social Democratic party and again exploited the bour­
geois fear of the “red spectre.” Friedrich Naumann points out that
from the perspective of 1910, it is hardly comprehensible how much
concern the small Social Democratic party evoked; it had only
about 30,000 members in 1875 and from 9 to 12 deputies in the
Reichstag between 1874 and 1881.21 Before the elections of Feb­
ruary 1887, half of the seats in the diet were held by the Center
party, the Social Democrats, and the advanced liberals. Bismarck
dismissed the old diet after they vigorously opposed his demand for
appropriation of the military budget for seven years. He formed an
alliance of the two conservative parties and the National Liberals:
the so-called “cartel.” The campaign was the most vigorous organ­
ized up to that time; Bismarck whipped up public hysteria again
20 Cf. Rosenberg, op. cit., 14; for statistics on the decline of liberalism in
rural districts, 29. In contrast to the liberals, the Center party could fall back
on the organizational strength of a universal church and the religious com­
mitments of its followers in its struggle with Bismarck. Bismarck had hoped
to weaken the party by ending the Kulturkampf at the same time that he
smashed the National Liberals. But from 1874 until 1912, the party held be­
tween 91 and 106 seats. Since Bismarck destroyed his own liberal majority in
1878, he frequently had to rely on the Center party’s support from that time
on. With the exception of the period from 1887 to 1890, the Center retained
its strategic position until 1906 and resumed it again in 1909.
21 Cf. Naumann, op. cit., 34 ff.

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

75

and finally got the kind of governmental Reichstag he wanted. The
total vote was larger than ever before; from this time the estab­
lished pattern brought defeat to the left whenever the right made
an all-out nationalist appeal against the enemy inside and outside
of the Reich. Biilow was later to repeat this strategy in the “Hotten­
tot” elections of 1907, so called because of the greatly exaggerated
importance of colonial issues. A new record turnout occurred in
these 1907 elections.22
The great hope of the advanced liberals, and one explanation for
their frequent ideological and tactical rigidity, was the prospect that
Crown Prince Frederic would side with them when he succeeded
William I as emperor.23 Because of the authoritarian structure of
the Reich, a liberal on the throne, or at least a man sympathetic
to the liberal cause, would best be able to facilitate the develop­
ment of parliamentarism. Bismarck was much concerned about this
possibility; he managed to weaken the advanced liberals so rapidly
that the Crown Prince felt compelled to move toward the right in
order to insure satisfactory public support once he should become
emperor. Frederick III had no chance to prove himself; he died
three months after William I, in 1888.
Despite the recklessness with which Bismarck fought the liber­
als, he did not, in these later years, harbor the intense hostility
against them that he did against the politically isolated Social
Democrats. By 1878, he considered it possible that the labor move­
ment might, in the long run, become a greater revolutionary threat
than the liberals had ever been. From the very beginning of the
labor movement, there had been no lack of interference by the
police and other governmental agencies, but until the mid-seventies
22 From 1871 to 1884 participation of those entitled to vote increased from
51 per cent to 60.6 per cent; in 1887 it suddenly rose to 77.5 per cent; in 1907
it jumped to 84.7 per cent.
23 In a famous letter of 1863, the Crown Prince had advised Bismarck against
violating the constitution. Reprinted in Robert Saitschick, Bismarck und das
Schicksal des Deutschen Volkes (Basel: Reinhardt, 1949), 85 f; for other
quotations on the liberalism of the future Frederick III, see p. 86., op. cit.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

76

the government of the Reich did not attempt nation-wide suppres­
sion. During the middle of the sixties, when Bismarck played with
the idea of using Lassalle against the liberals,24 police and courts
remained active against the labor associations. The laws on associa­
tion, promulgated during the counter-revolution of the fifties, made
it nearly impossible for a labor organization to escape conflict with
the authorities. The Lassallean organization in Berlin was first dis­
solved by the police in July 1865; and Bernhard Becker, Lassalle’s
first successor, was banished from the capital.
The uprising of the Paris Commune in the spring of 1871 seemed
to socialists and the public to be a major manifestation of a trend
toward a proletarian revolution in Europe. The governments were
greatly concerned about the Commune and the First International,
even though the latter was very weak and planned no direct over­
throw of any government. Diplomatic exchanges and international
conferences took place among the major governments.25 Bismarck
began to consider major legislation against the antipatriotic and
internationalist Social Democrats. He did not want a Social Demo­
cratic mass vote added to that of the Center party and the Polish
Nationalist party, groups which already disturbed the smooth work­
ing of his system. The 1874 election returns showed a marked in­
crease of socialist votes. In 1871 the two socialist parties had ob­
tained 102,000 votes and one seat in the Reichstag; in 1874 they
drew 352,000 votes and gained nine seats. Bismarck was now
ready to resort to extensive repression: The Prussian police stepped
up its policy of harassing the labor movement. In March 1876 the
recently united Social Democratic party was suspended in all of
Prussia.
Bismarck’s federal antisocialist legislation of 1878 had its de­
sired effect upon the liberals by disuniting them, but he was not
satisfied with its effect upon the Social Democrats. [One of the most
24 Cf. Gustav Mayer, “Der Allgemeine Deutsche Arbeiterverein und die
Krise von 1866,” Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft, Vol. 57, 1927, 167 f.
25 p aui Kampffmeyer and Bruno Altmann, op. cit., 76-92.

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

' C . 77

severe measures, the expulsion of Social Democratic functionaries
from their place of residence, had an unforeseen consequence. The
displaced Social Democrats went to areas where the party was
weak and started successful organization drives and campaigns?]
Compared to contemporary Russian practice and later historical ex­
amples, the antisocialist legislation was moderate repression. There
was no deportation of “undesirable elements” as in Russia; there
was no Siberia. Although Bismarck wanted to expatriate and deport
functionaries, he failed to persuade the liberals to make antisocial­
ist legislation more strict. The liberal belief in the Rechtsstaat was
strong; many liberals also remembered the treatment received from
Bismarck during the sixties. As long as the Social Democratic
movement did not increase by leaps and bounds, Bismarck was
willing to accept the limitations of the law. In 1890, however, a
situation arose in which the complete suppression of the Social
Democrats or the eventual destruction of the Reich appeared to
him as the only alternatives.
After some fluctuations in the early years of the antisocialist
legislation, the^Social Democrats nearly doubled their vote—from
763,000 in 1887 to 1,427,000 in 1890jnstead of eleven^seats in
1887. when “the Social Democrats were scarcely more strongly rep­
resented in the Reichstag than was the Polish Nationalist party,” 26
they now had 35 seats. Bismarck lost his majority of 1887. He con­
sidered the situation critical; the votes of all opposition groups—
including the Center, Poles, Alsatians, Danes and Guelphs—had
risen, in a time of peace and prosperity, to 40 per cent of the total
vote. Bismarck began to advocate a revision of the electoral law
through a legal change of the constitution or through a coup d'état.
Both were difficult to accomplish. First, a Reichstag majority that
would curtail its own powers could not be found. Second, the rul­
ing monarchs were not inclined toward radical constitutional
changes. As early as 1884 Bismarck let the Federal Council declare
2®Rosenberg, op. cit., 20 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

78

that the Empire was a federation of ruling monarchs who could dis­
solve it at will. However, such a radical “legal” move would have
been indistinguishable from a coup d’état. Bismarck conceded that
his proposals could be interpreted in different legal ways. How­
ever, he stated in his memoirs, in a passage which remained un­
published for a long time and which reveals his exalted interpreta­
tion of the minister’s role under monarchic constitutionalism:
I have never doubted that, in a severe crisis, a minister must advise his
monarch to stage a coup d ’état, and then be personally responsible for
the consequences, rather than let his fatherland succumb to anarchism
and the state perish before his eyes. I would not let the sentence com e
true, “C’est la légitimité qui nous tue,” but would disregard legitimacy.
If this should fail, then fighting it out is still more decent and less
irremediable than sinking into a moral morass. . . . A state which
fights for its very existence does not make its decisions dependent upon
the advice of law faculties.27

Such a determined minister needed a compatible monarch, and
this William II was not, neither in temperament nor in age. Shortly
before the latter ascended the throne, Bismarck wrote him a pro­
grammatic letter in which he exhorted the man who was to abandon
his throne 30 years later:
I perceive the most solid support o f the monarchy in a ruler who is
ready not only to participate actively in the affairs of state in quiet
times, but also to die for his right in critical times, falling with the
sword in his hand on the steps of his throne rather than to yield. Such
a ruler no German soldier will desert; and the old rhyme of 1848 re­
mains true: “Gegen Demokraten helfen nur Soldaten.” (The only
appropriate weapon against democrats are soldiers.)28
27 Otto von Bismarck, Die gesammelten Werke. Gerhard Ritter and Rudolf
Stadelmann, eds. (Berlin: Deutsche Verlags-Gesellschaft, 1932), Vol. 15,
449 and 637.
28 Bismarck added, with venom against Court Chaplain Stoecker and his at­
tempts to woo the workers and the lower middle classes with his Christian
Social Program: “Priests can spoil much in this regard and are of little use;

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

79

Bismarck tried to convince William II that “the Social Demo­
crats produced, more than foreign countries, a danger of war for
monarchy and state, and that they should be viewed by the govern­
ment in terms of a military and power problem, not a legal prob­
lem.” 29 The young emperor, however, was not interested in a
military showdown, but in the enhancement of his popularity. He
even hoped, for a short time, to win the workers by a substantial
extension of welfare legislation. Conservative ministerial officials
introduced, in the wake of the antisocialist legislation, comprehen­
sive welfare legislation to prove to the workers that the Crown did
not oppose them as workers, that it was serious in fulfilling its
patriarchal obligations, neglected in the governmental laissez-faire
period. Bismarck was correctly skeptical about the desired effect on
the political attitudes of the workers; he feared that the welfare
legislation might interfere with business interests. Despite his switch
to a limited tariff policy, he continued to share some of the views
of laissez-faire liberals. He objected to the Imperial Address on
social welfare legislation of 1890, arguing that workers should not
be forbidden by law “to control freely their own working-time
and work opportunities and those of their families.” 30 But he
differed from the laissez-faire liberals in his insistence that
positive social reforms could only be carried out by the king and
his officials, not by voluntary associations. He added that volun­
tary associations were good only “as weapons for the attack on
and destruction of the existing conditions, not for their preserva­
tion and improvement.” 31
the countries most pious towards priests are also the most revolutionary; in
1848 all clergymen supported the government in religious Pomerania, but
the countryside voted socialist: all day-laborers, innkeepers and small mer­
chants.” From a letter to Prince William on Jan. 6, 1888. The letter warned
him of committing himself to Stoecker’s program. Gedanken und Erinner­
ungen, op. ciî., Vol. 3. 16 f.
29 Op. ciî., 42.
80 Loc. ciî.
31 Op. ciî., 21.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

80

Bismarck maneuvered for a stiffer antisocialist law, but achieved
only a lapse of the old law by default: the majority of the Reichstag
was in favor of retaining antisocialist laws, but the liberal left did
not want a stricter law, and the right wing rejected the old law as
too lenient. Bismarck planned a rapprochement with the Center,
which displeased William II at the time, and he finally fell by op­
posing new welfare legislation.32
However, William II was very soon disappointed with what he
saw as the workers’ ingratitude and moved closer to Bismarck’s
position, but he did not seriously consider a coup d'état for fear
of having to call Bismarck back. Other German monarchs gave him
negative advice about the coup d'état.33 Bismarck tried to advance
his plans through newspapers which were loyal to him and through
parliamentarians such as the Free Conservative leaders Kardorff
and Stumm-Halberg. He considered a constitutional crisis his best
chance to stage a come-back. Inextricably fusing genuine concern
and tactical exaggeration, he told Kardorff in December 1895 that
it must be “a matter of course for serious, practical politicians . . .
to counteract the eventual desires of socialist majorities to turn
the Reichstag into a Convention” à la 1793.34 However, many offi­
32 On the fall of the antisocialist legislation against Bismarck’s will, and for
his clash with William II, see Bismarck, op. cit., Vol. 3, Ch. 5. In his
memoirs, Bismarck severely criticized William’s attempt to reconcile the
Social Democrats, “the worst enemy,” and perceived the struggles over his
relation to the Emperor and over social welfare legislation as resulting from
an improper influence of “intrusive advisers such as Hinzpeter, Berlepsch,
Heyden, Douglas . . . and career-minded generals” (op. cit., 130). See also
the memoirs of the leader of the Free Conservatives, Wilhelm von Kardorff,
S. von Kardorff, ed. (Berlin: Mittler, 1936), 208-24, and of Friedrich von
Holstein, The Holstein Papers, Norman Rich and M. H. Fisher, eds. (London:
Cambridge University Press, 1955), 146-49.
33 Cf. Bismarck, op. cit., 79, and the 1895 memorandum to Hohenlohe by
Philipp Eulenburg on a conversation with William II, in Fürst Chlodwig zu
Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst, A. von Müller, ed. (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags­
anstalt, 1931), 99 ff, cited henceforth as Hohenlohe.
34 Quoted in Fritz Hellwig, Carl Ferdinand Freiherr von Stumm-Halberg
(Heidelberg: Westmarck Verlag, 1936), 511.

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

81

cials were more concerned with the implications of interrupting the
established governmental process than with the great Kladdera­
datsch, as the potential lower-class revolution was colloquially
called. They accepted the system of monarchic constitutionalism
as Bismarck had set it up and resisted his attempts to tear it down
with his own hands. This acceptance and the fear of Bismarck’s
revenge, if he should return to power, aligned many influential
officials, including Holstein, the “grey eminence” of the foreign
office, against a coup d'état.
Throughout the nineties chancellors Caprivi and Hohenlohe in­
sisted on strict legality. They were twice under strong pressure from
the Emperor, the Prussian Minister of the Interior, big business and
the right-wing parties to pass new laws against the Social Demo­
crats. Big business was angry about the resurgence of strikes;35
the Emperor and the public were shaken by a wave of anarchist
terror in 1894, which claimed the life of Carnot, the President of
the French Republic.
At the time, the Emperor was increasingly receptive to the in­
fluence of Stumm-Halberg, the industrial tycoon who was one of
the most vociferous champions of managerial paternalism and
of the absolute authority of the state. After Carnot’s assassination,
Stumm-Halberg addressed a letter to Chancellor Caprivi explain­
ing that the government’s lack of vigor had resulted in its loss of
prestige within “broad circles of the nation’s best elements”; he
hoped that the favorable moment of public excitement would not
be missed for imposing antisocialist legislation.36
Chancellor Caprivi answered this remarkably blunt epistle with
a no less remarkably cautious reply on July 8, 1894:
It seems to me that we have serious reasons for not introducing bills,
while accepting their rejection or being content with the diligentia
85 See the correspondence between the coal and steel magnates Fritz Krupp
and Stumm-Halberg, op. cit., 493 ff.
86 Op. cit., 500.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

82

praestata— as was done in the seventies and eighties. The conditions
of the Empire and of the state are too grave for such a policy. Once
the government has made it clear through proposing a bill that the
existing laws are insufficient, that much more rigorous ones are neces­
sary, it cannot accept the rejection of such a proposal. Then it must be
ready to dissolve the Reichstag and, if necessary, to take the most seri­
ous steps. Before deciding on such a move, the government must con­
sider whether to take such steps at all or how to take them concretely.
I do not want to mention the general difficulties for such extreme meas­
ures in the pluralist (vielköpfige) Empire. But the question cannot be
avoided: If laws against the anarchists or Social Democrats are re­
jected, if new elections do not produce a better Reichstag, would we
not merely promote the business of Social Dem ocracy, increase dis­
satisfaction and produce new Social Dem ocratic followers? These are
very serious problems which have to be recognized clearly before one
takes the first step.37

The government responded to the pressures exerted upon it by
sporadically vigorous application of the existing laws. In the wake
of Carnot’s assassination, the Prussian Minister of the Interior,
Botho Graf zu Eulenburg, unsuccessfully proposed the Umsturz­
vorlage (Antisubversion Bill). Caprivi and Eulenburg fought to a
draw, which the exasperated Emperor attempted to remedy by dis­
missing both and by appointing the aging Prince Hohenlohe as a
chancellor who would presumably be more pliant.38 But the latter
did manage to defeat the last attempt to impose new antisocialist
legislation in 1898, the so-called Zuchthausvorlage (Penitentiary
Bill). This was also a decisive defeat for Stumm-Halberg, whose
influence on the Emperor declined because he had drawn him per­
sonally into the party struggles about social reform and Social
37 Op. cit., 501 f.
38 Botho zu Eulenburg had energetically executed the antisocialist legislation
between 1878 and 1881, when he resigned after a conflict with Bismarck. His
predecessor was Friedrich Graf zu Eulenburg, who unsuccessfully asked the
Reichstag in 1875 for legislation against the Social Democrats (see Ch. V,
p. 107 f). He also resigned after a clash with Bismarck. The third Eulenburg,
Philipp Graf zu Eulenburg, was the go-between for William II and the gov­
ernment, before he fell into disfavor.

Bismarck and the Spectre of Revolution

83

Democracy. Monarchic constitutionalism, however, prescribed an
indirect role to the emperor. William II’s repeated attempts at per­
sonal rule failed because they intensified conflict among the very
groups most committed to the authority of the monarchy. Prince
Hohenlohe keenly perceived the requirements for the stability of
the dominant system: “Only if a people is convinced, as it is in
England, that its liberties will not be tampered with, will it be
ready to vote conservative. The fear of Social Democracy must be
greater and weigh more heavily than that of a coup d’état.” 39
There were, logically, three alternatives for the government in
the 1890’s: (1) The complete repression of the Social Democrats,
if necessary by a coup d’état, that is, by the abolition of the Reichs­
tag or by the imposition of a new restrictive electoral law; (2)
Democratization—by first giving the middle classes a greater share
in government and by subsequently integrating the Social Demo­
crats into the national community; (3) Continued isolation of the
39 Hohenlohe, op. cit., 99. The last time rumors of a coup d’état were in the
air was during the Daily Telegraph Affair of 1908— so called after the pub­
lication of some views of William II on England and Germany. This time
the supposed coup was directed against the Emperor. However, the most
famous statement ever made in the Reichstag in favor of a coup d’état was
unrelated to any concrete plan and merely a highly emotional declaration of
allegiance to the monarch. In a debate on the desirability of greater parlia­
mentary control of the army in 1910, Oldenburg-Januschau, the incarnation
of the Prussian Junker, declared that the officers’ corps was “an estate per­
sonally linked to the Supreme War Lord; the public has no business concern­
ing itself with it. (‘Very true’ on the right, shouts on the left.) Yes, gentle­
men, this too is an old Prussian tradition; that you don’t like this tradition, I
readily believe. The king of Prussia and the German emperor must be able
at any moment to say to a lieutenant: Take ten men and close the Reichstag.
(Great and lasting amusement. Unrest and shouts on the left, ‘very true’ on
the right, repeated stormy shouts and unrest on the left.)”
For Oldenburg-Januschau this was not equivalent to the advocacy of a
coup d’état, because the King of Prussia had affirmed in 1861 that he could
give any order to the army without the consent of the minister of war who
was constitutionally responsible. Appropriately enough, Oldenburg-Januschau
broke down after his speech and wept. See Reichstag Protocols, 1910, 898 C,
and Oldenburg-Januschau, Erinnerungen (Leipzig: Koehler, 1936), 108-13.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

84

Social Democrats. Bismarck failed in his attempt at the first alter­
native before and after his dismissal. The second alternative was
beyond the vision of William II and of his officials. The Emperor
and the government elected the easiest course; they continued to
isolate the labor movement while not blocking its expansion among
the working class. This policy was persistently adhered to until the
First World War, facilitated by the relatively constant strength of
the German left between 1893 and 1906, when the Social Demo­
crats made their advances partly at the expense of the advanced
liberals, who also lost heavily to parties further to the right. In the
short run, this policy of isolation was convenient; in the long run,
it was bound to be dangerous in times of external crisis.

IV
Bourgeois and Social Democratic
Attitudes Toward Revolution and
Patriotism
With the increasing governmental policy of repression in the seven­
ties the cleavage widened between the small but growing labor
movement and the large bourgeois public, which was proud of the
achievements of national unification and intolerant of any basic
criticism of it. This chapter contrasts Social Democratic perspec­
tives with those of general public opinion. As far as the evidence
permits, I will distinguish the attitudes of articulate opinion-leaders
from those of their public. I will select examples of the most ex­
treme statements of the period in order to make clear what kinds
of statements aroused intense hostility and also in order to indi­
cate the degree to which they were largely rhetorical and, on
balance, even restrained.1 The issues of patriotism and revolution
and, slightly less so, of idealism and materialism established a clear
dividing line. The divergent attitudes will be illustrated in some
detail in order to facilitate the reader’s understanding of the highly
charged political atmosphere.

7. The Issue of Revolution
Within the political setting of the sixties and the new national struc­
ture of 1871, the Social Democrats were radicals because of their
democratic aspirations and socialist ideals— not because of any
1 Chapters VI, VII and VIII, will also deal with moderate as well as unpub­
licized and inarticulate attitudes.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

86

specifically Marxist tendencies, which played an insignificant role
in the early years of the socialist movement.2 A vague ideology of
democratic and socialist reconstruction perturbed the conservative
as well as the liberal public. Even if the Social Democrats had re­
nounced all revolutionary rhetoric, as most unions actually did,3
their social-democratic aims alone were bound to produce hostility
on the part of a government committed to the perpetuation of the
power structure of the Reich, and on the part of the conservative
and liberal bourgeoisie. However, the Social Democrats did not
eschew quasi-revolutionary rhetoric, though they tried to tone it
down sufficiently to escape prosecution. They also adhered to their
own patriotic values. Thus, hostility on both sides was aggravated
by widely divergent attitudes toward unification and the Reich.
Friedrich Naumann remembers that the Social Democrats were
considered dangerous because many of them, as well as a large part
of the public, believed in the eventual possibility of a proletarian
revolution.4 Bismarck did his best to exaggerate the revolutionary
danger of the labor movement. He viewed the uprising of the Com­
mune with genuine concern as to its long-run implications, but, in
the short run, he valued the tactical advantages accruing to him
from this uprising. He observed with satisfaction in 1872 that the
impact of the Commune had driven many Germans toward the
right on the political continuum:
N o attentive observer could fail to notice how extensive and massive
the conversion from red to moderate liberalism has been in Germany,
from moderate liberalism to conservative attitudes, from doctrinaire
opposition to a feeling o f interest in the state and o f responsibility for
it, since the experim entum in corpore vili which was carried through
2 See the detailed discussion of this problem in Ch. VII.
3 In order to avoid suppression by the police and the courts and in order to
attract more members, many of the small unions of the seventies tried to be
nonpolitical. Nevertheless, most unions were dissolved by the authorities in
the late seventies.
4 Cf. Naumann, op. cit., 24.

Attitudes Toward Revolution and Patriotism

87

by the Commune before Europe. France serves usefully as a deterrent
example. If she were to play yet another act of the interrupted drama
for Europe—I do not like to wish for that out of humane considera­
tions—this would contribute even more strongly to the illumination of
the benefits of a monarchic constitution and to the attachment to
monarchic institutions in Germany.5
In 1878, when he manipulated the public hysteria about the two
attempts on the life of William I, Bismarck told the Reichstag that
he had fully recognized the dangers of the Social Democrats to
state and society when its spokesmen “praised the Commune as a
political model and openly embraced the gospel of those murderers
and incendiaries.” 6 Both the Eisenachers and the Lassalleans de­
fended the uprising of the Commune and predicted that this sup­
pression of the proletarian vanguard would precipitate more vigor­
ous efforts of self-liberation on the part of the rising European
proletariat. Bebel made a passionate address in the North German
Reichstag on May 25, 1871, after the Commune had been bloodily
suppressed:
You should be firmly convinced that the whole European proletariat
and everyone who has still within him a feeling for freedom and inde­
pendence looks to Paris. And though Paris is suppressed at the mo­
ment, I would like to remind you that the battle in Paris is merely
a small skirmish of outposts, that the decisive events are still to come,
and that within a few decades the battle cry of the Paris proletariat—
“War on the palaces, peace for the huts, down with misery and idle­
ness”—will be the battle cry of the whole European proletariat.7
The major Lassallean journal, the Neue Socialdemokrat, wrote
on the Commune and on its implications for the future:
The mighty uprising of the proletarians, the June battle [of 1848],
was followed by the mightier uprising of the Paris Commune; and the
5 From a directive to the ambassador in Paris, Graf von Arnim, Berlin, Dec.
20,1872; see Rothfels, ed., op. cit., 269.
6 Kohl, ed., op. cit., 1893, Vol. 7, 267.
7 Reichstag Protocols, May 25, 1871, 921.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

88

latter will be followed by the mightiest uprising o f the people for the
social emancipation of the fourth estate. (1872, 98) . . .
We German socialists must fight no less hard than our brothers, the
proletarians o f the other civilized countries (.Kulturländer). Neither
the heroic battle o f the Paris Commune has been equaled elsewhere
nor its glorious downfall, when it buried itself under the smoking ruins
o f Paris after being repressed with abominable atrocity by the Ver­
sailles henchmen. N o w a m ovement is gripping the proletariat o f the
whole world. This m ovement will bring about new struggles with the
same terrible effect until the class struggle will end with the victory of
the fourth estate, with the triumph of socialism. (1873, 3 4 ) 8

This Social Democratic attitude toward the Commune further
antagonized the remnants of the democratic bourgeoisie.9 The
shock of middle-class persons about the Commune paralleled the
horror which the terrorism of the French Revolution had evoked,
and hurt socialism for some time in much the same way as it had
liberalism. On the other hand, the Commune was bound to be an
encouraging event for many a Social Democrat who morally re­
jected the existing society and vaguely hoped for an ultimate over­
throw of the ruling classes. Nearly all of them realized, however,
that the emergence of the powerful Bismarckian empire forestalled
any revolution for some time to come.
The clash between bourgeois and Social Democratic attitudes
can be documented particularly well through two contemporary
books by bourgeois writers on the Social Democrats.10 The authors,
Reverend R. Schuster, a Protestant, and A. Held, a professor of
8 Quoted in R. Schuster, op. cit., 159 f. It should be added that many of these
rhetorical outbursts suffer from considerable syntactical inadequacies which
impede the translation.
ô Cf. G. Mayer, Schweitzer, op. cit., 415.
10 See Schuster, Die Social-Demokratie, nach ihrem Wesen und ihrer Agita­
tion quellenmässig dargestellt, 1875, op. cit. and A. Held, Die deutsche A r­
beiterpresse der Gegenwart, 1873, op. cit.

Attitudes Toward Revolution and Patriotism

89

political science and Kathedersozialist,n were representative of the
most sophisticated bourgeois opinions; but their indignation and
antipathy were shared, in similar and often aggravated form, by
the bourgeoisie in general. Both authors quote extensively from the
leading Lassallean and Eisenacher journals, the Neue Socialdemo­
krat and the Volksstaat, and from other Social Democratic publi­
cations; in fact, about half of Schuster’s 232 pages are quotations.
This has the advantage of placing the antagonistic attitudes and
group perspectives next to one another, the authors’ comments
being a direct reaction to Social Democratic statements challenging
the government and the bourgeoisie.
Most Social Democratic leaders were cautious in the choice of
their radical vocabulary. However, the two most prominent radi­
cals, the ex-student Wilhelm Hasselmann, a Lassallean, and Johann
Most, an Eisenacher, indulged freely in colorful imagery and at­
tracted particular attention from worried bourgeois observers.1112
In order to demonstrate the subversive intentions of the Social
Democrats to his readers, Schuster quoted some of the revolution­
ary and military imagery of the Neue Socialdemokrat, edited by
Hasselmann. The revolutionary climax is here envisaged as the
advance of the “workers’ battalions” who shout Lassalle’s name as
their battle cry:
The avalanche is rolling. We hope that it will grow bigger and bigger.
Lassalle himself had heard the heavy steps o f the workers’ battalions. He
visualized his avengers. N ow the anticipated hour draws nigh. Already
our enemies tremble at the mere sound o f Lassalle’s name: they
tremble when the factory slave mutters his name with a heavy sigh;
they tremble when the people in the street, drunk with enthusiasm,
11 On the academic social reformers, the so-called “socialists of the chair,”
see Ch. VI, 136 ff.
12 In the nineties both became prominent anarchists in the United States. Cf.
Max Nomad, “Johann Most, Terrorist of the Word,” in his Apostles of Revotion (Boston: Little, Brown, 1939), 256-301.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

90

call it with glittering eyes; they tremble because they fear the great
reckoning, they fear that som e day hereafter the call to arms will be
heard in the streets and the thundering cry— Lassalle— will rise from the
phalanx o f the proletarian battalions. Let us m ove ahead undismayed.
Forward with Ferdinand Lassalle. (1871, 6 2 ) 13

Hasselmann follows Lassalle’s tactic of predicting a violent revo­
lution if the ruling classes continue their old policies.14 He quotes,
for example, the old French revolutionary song “ça ira” and makes
some threatening remarks about violence, but then he qualifies his
statement:
Ah ça ira, ça ira
Les aristocrates a la lanterne.
A h ça ira, ça ira.
Les aristocrates, on les prendra. . . .
When the people began to sing this fierce song, they did not just sing it.
The men o f the revolution were quick to act, and soon, here and there,
the body o f an aristocrat or cleric would hang from a lamp-post. This
ça ira is a true warning. If the bourgeois felt their hearts beat and had
a moral hangover from hearing this song during the struggle o f the
Paris Commune, we will not regret this. On our part, we would like
them to consider that the fierce popular revenge o f 1793 took place
because the ruling classes interfered, through force and conspiracy,
with the lawful development of the revolution. The French people
would never have resorted to axe and rope if the treacherous aristocracy
had not used force first. Only if the people find a peaceful way to their
sacred rights blocked, will they hang and behead all traitors of the
people without giving pardon. (1873, 13) 1516
13 Quoted in Schuster, op. cit., 160.
14 This remained a standard Social Democratic argument. In a passionate
speech on March 27, 1908 (Reichstag Protocols, 4351), Bebel warned that the
revolution would be inevitable if the ruling classes refused to adjust them­
selves to the social changes which had produced a proletariat “which, in terms
of political education and insight into the character of the state and of bour­
geois society, has a greater sophistication than the bourgeoisie had fifty or
sixty years ago.”
16 Quoted in Schuster, op. cit., 161.

Attitudes Toward Revolution and Patriotism

91

Another “if-statement” reaches its climax in the following meta­
phor: “If the ruling class does delay the peaceful, lawful social
revolution for too long, the social revolution will break through
violently with wildly streaming hair and iron sandals on her feet”
(1871, 54). Schuster acknowledges that the revolution is made de­
pendent on the “compromising or resistant attitude of the other
social classes,” but he considers this merely an attempt to shift
responsibility to the latter according to the “ordinary gangster
logic which makes the victim’s resistance responsible for the harm
done to him.” 16 Schuster seems to believe seriously that the party
leaders are aiming at a violent revolution, whereas the rank and file
are ignorant about the real intentions of their leaders. As evidence
for the revolutionary aspirations of the leadership he quotes from
the Proletarian Song-Book (Proletarier-Liederbuch) edited by
Johann Most. Among the examples he cites are the Workers’ Mar­
seillaise which was sung at the end of meetings, a revolutionary
rephrasing of the famous Lutheran song “Ein’ feste Burg ist unser
Gott” and a “Proletarian Song” whose first verse may be approxi­
mately rendered in the following way:
A call resounds from land to land,
The poor should clasp each other’s hand,
And call a halt to tyranny
And stop the slave’s agony.
The drums are beaten dully,
The red flags flutter briskly:
Let us live working or die fighting.1617
16 Schuster, op. cit., 156.
17 Quoted in Schuster, 162. The rephrasing of religious songs for political
purposes must have offended many people besides parsons like Schuster. His
political and religious sentiments were particularly offended by the following
parody of the Lord’s Prayer, describing the relationship between Bismarck
and the National Liberals:
Prince Bismarck who art in Varzin,
Hallowed be thy name,
Thy session come,

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

92

The quotations from Hasselmann’s Neue Socialdemokrat and
Most’s Proletarier-Liederbuch exemplify the most radical appeals,
made by leaders who were at least regionally influential among the
workers. For Schuster they reveal a “most brutal fanaticism,”
“revolutionary passion” and “open preaching of bloody revolu­
tion.” 18 They indeed show that a glowing image of revolution,
arising from the historical examples of 1789, 1848 and 1871, ap­
pealed to Hasselmann, Most and a few others; but by their com­
plete lack of concreteness, they also indicate the purely rhetorical
character of this type of revolutionary threat. There was no mass
base for such revolutionary sentiments. Held concludes in his
analysis of the Social Democratic press in 1872 that revolutionary
rhetoric and passion diminished in relation to the distance from
party headquarters.19 However, he notices a “general revolutionary
spirit of bitterness” expressing itself in “a tendency to tackle prac­
tical problems energetically.” The workers, he thinks, follow the
Social Democratic leaders primarily because they are flattered by
them and see them as their most active friends.20
In addition to revolutionary imagery, Hasselmann also used antiSemitic rhetoric extensively. Most, who once defeated Court
Thy will be done in the [Prussian] deputies chambers as it is in the
Reichstag.
Give us today our daily lesson,
And forgive us our speeches
As we forgive those of the [Prussian] Upper House;
Lead us not into temptation with legislation
But deliver us from all serious progress,
For thine is the Reich, and the glory and the power,
Amen.
Quoted in Schuster, 43 and Held, 75, from the Dresdener Volksbote, 1872,
291, a paper of the Eisenachers.
18 Schuster, op. cit., 164.
19 According to Schuster, there were about fifteen socialist newspapers before
the merger of the parties in 1875. They appeared at least once a week. There
were also eleven more or less socialist trade union papers. Op. cit., 233 f.
20 Held, op. cit., 72 f.

Attitudes Toward Revolution and Patriotism

93

Chaplain Stoecker in an open dispute before a mass meeting of
workers,21 engaged more than any other leader in antireligious
propaganda to make workers officially abandon their church affili­
ation. To Reverend Schuster, as well as to most middle-class
persons, this rhetoric was repulsive and sounded openly subversive.
Therefore, they favored strong action by the government.
Schuster was incensed about what he called the “anti-German
activities” of the Eisenachers and heartily approved of the court
sentences for Liebknecht and Bebel.22 He saw in the Reich a
guarantee against any revolutionary danger and asserted, with some
justification, that the intransigence of the Eisenachers was partly
due to their realization that the unification of the nation through
Prussia had destroyed all short-run prospects for the revolutionary
establishment of a democratic republic.23
The academic observer Held was more detached in his approach
than Schuster. The same was true of the liberal leaders in the
Reichstag in their relation to the bourgeois public. These leaders
refused several times before 1878 to heed the government’s plea for
a comprehensive antisocialist legislation, justified by similar rhe­
torical evidence.24 However, Held and the liberal party leaders did
not necessarily have less bitter feelings about the Social Democrats
than middle-class persons who were not politically sophisticated or
committed to standards of academic objectivity. For example,
Ludwig Bamberger, a liberal leader and banker, flatly called Hasselmann and Most “beasts” in an invidious comparison with the
more congenial type of functionary prevailing in subsequent years,
when the party no longer appeared a revolutionary danger to him.
Anyone who knew the Reichstag at the time when such beasts as
Hasselmann, Most and their consorts were raging in its chambers, can
scarcely recognize their successors in the deputies who, as reporters or
21 Cf. Massing, op. cit., 24 f.
22 Cf. Ch. II, 53.
23 Schuster, op. cit., 23, 25, 29.
24 Cf. Ch. V, 107.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

94

chairmen o f com missions cooperate in a friendly and gem ütliche fashion
with their colleagues to make small changes, for better or worse, in the
bourgeois world. . . . Certainly, they have not abjured their belief in
the wickedness and untenableness o f present-day society but they have
becom e too intelligent to believe any longer that the German state can
be overthrown on the barricades and that, even if this were possible,
barricades would really do away with [private] property.25

In general, the Eisenachers seem to have been less venomous and
more cautious in their rhetoric than the Lassalleans. This may be
seen from a comparison of Bebel’s speech on the Commune with
the general tone of Hasselmann’s articles. For Professor Held and
Reverend Schuster, however, the Eisenacher leadership was no less
revolutionary, and the leaders themselves did not want to appear
less revolutionary than the Lassalleans. Both Held and Schuster
quote as proof of revolutionary mentality the concluding address
of Chairman Geib at the first convention of the Social Democratic
Workers’ party at Eisenach in 1869:
There is a tree which bears golden fruit, but if those who planted it reach
for the fruit it withdraws. A snake, guardian of the fruit, is wound
around the tree. This tree is today’s society; the snake stands for the
present conditions which deny to us the enjoyment of the golden fruit.
Gentlemen! We are determined to enjoy the golden fruit, to drive away
the snake. If this is not possible in a peaceful fashion, we— as men who
do not shrink back from action— will fell the old tree and plant a new,
strong one. H ow can we best reach our goal? By implanting the spirit of
brotherhood and liberty into the hearts o f the workers and by clasping
hands [i.e., by uniting] with our brothers in all parts of the world.26

This was certainly not a clear call to revolutionary action, ad­
dressed as it was to “gentlemen” {meine Herren). Also indicative
of this is the fact that Geib dropped the metaphor when he came
25 Ludwig Bamberger, Wandlungen und Wanderungen in der Sozialpolitik
(Berlin, 1898), 18, quoted in Massing, op. cit., 192.
26 Convention protocol, p. 75, quoted in Schuster, op. cit., 155 f. and Held,
op. cit., 19.

Attitudes Toward Revolution and Patriotism

95

to the means to be employed, speaking merely of the international
solidarity of the workers.
In order to bolster their case, Schuster and Held employ an
auxiliary argument, frequently used at the time, that the Social
Democrats had to be revolutionary even if they denied it or did
not want it. “Democracy has no chance to achieve its goal peace­
fully since society [sic!] will not voluntarily submit,” Schuster says,
revealingly emphasizing the democratic rather than socialist char­
acter of the labor movement and identifying “society” with the
middle and upper classes.27 Held, too, contrasts democracy and
middle-class interests:
If Lassalle asks in his Open Address, “What is the state?” and answers,
“The great association of the poorer classes”—then this means that mass
rule is to replace the now dominating influence of the educated and
propertied classes. Since these classes will never voluntarily yield, this
can only be achieved through a democratic revolution.28
The Eisenachers were vulnerable to this charge, since Liebknecht
repeated again and again in the early seventies that the Social
Democrats expected nothing from parliamentary activities, that
they used them only for the purpose of agitation. Schuster quotes
from Liebknecht’s famous speech on this position and from an
article in the latter’s Volksstaat, in both of which the revolutionary
character of the party was affirmed and parliamentary politics re­
pudiated.29 Of course, behind this emphasis on agitation stood also
27 Schuster, op. cit., 155, my emphasis.
28 Held, op. cit., 18, my emphasis.
29 “The Social Democratic party is a revolutionary party; if it is lured onto
the level of parliamentarism, it will cease to be revolutionary— to exist at all.
We participate in the Reichstag elections and send deputies into the Reichstag
exclusively for the purpose of agitation. The strength of our party rests in the
people; there is our realm of activity; we should talk from the rostrum of the
Reichstag only in order to address the people. If we move away from the
revolutionary origin and character of our party, if we lose only for a moment
the contact with the revolutionary people, we are up in the air and will be
pitilessly strangled like that giant of antiquity [Antaeus]. [The Social Demo-

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

96

the realization that the party was too weak to be influential in
parliament and that the Reichstag was constitutionally weak in re­
lation to the government and the crown: “The Reichstag is power­
less and merely hides the absolutism of the government.” 30 For
decades the Reichstag remained a sounding board for the party’s
agitation, but Liebknecht quickly dropped the revolutionary argu­
ment and affirmed the reformist and parliamentary character
of the party when the antisocialist legislation approached; the
party never returned to its earlier position.
Liebknecht’s antiparliamentarism was based, to a large extent,
on his bitter opposition to the Prussian solution of German unifi­
cation. The problem of unification linked the issues of revolution
and patriotism.

2. The Issue of Patriotism
From the very beginning of the Reich, the Social Democrats of
both persuasions violently attacked the nationalist values embraced
by a majority of the people. Until the outbreak of the First World
War, the Social Democrats appeared to the great majority of the
middle and upper classes not only as a potential threat to the estab­
lished order but also as utterly unpatriotic, despite their protesta­
tions of their own kind of patriotism. The achievement of unifica­
tion was considered as something so great by the majority of the
middle classes that any fundamental opposition to the particular
cratic deputies] cannot be effective within the Reichstag, only outside of it;
[they cannot be successful] through legislation, but only through agitation.
The Reichstag should be only a means, not an end for them, not their area
of activity, but a visible platform from which to address the people and to
enlighten them about the true character of society, from the center of class
domination.” Liebknecht in the Volksstaat, 1874, 50, quoted in Schuster,
op. cit., 153 f.
30 Id., 1874, 112, quoted in Schuster, loc. cit.

Attitudes Toward Revolution ana Patriotism

97

form of the Empire was perceived as a lack of patriotism. During
the first years after unification, the differences in outlook and evalu­
ation were articulated with special regard to the Reich, Bismarck,
the military leaders and the Franco-German War.
Liebknecht’s attacks in the Volksstaat were relentless, mixing
historical truth and involved satire. Schuster’s reactions reveal the
exalted affirmation with which South German educated men viewed
the Reich, Bismarck and the Prussian army during these years. The
following synopsis contrasts the irreconcilable views:
Schuster's views:

The views of the uVolksstaat”:

“The feeling of one’s own worth at
long last awakened in the breast of
every good German, and the joy
about the glorious and honorable
history of our dear fatherland.”

“150 per cent patriotism.”

“The men who sacrificed goods “Murderous patriots.”
and blood for the love of their fa­
therland and those who hold the
fallen martyrs in high honor, those
who are proud of the victories
bought with their sacrifices and
who consider the love of the fa­
therland the first virtue of the
citizen.”
“The attitude which the ‘organ of
the Social Democratic Workers’
party’ takes toward the events of
the war and their effects, so very
advantageous for the German fa­
therland, offends every German
heart most deeply.”

“The war became necessary be­
cause of Bismarck’s policies of
conquest.” (1871, 84) “Diplomatic
tricks à la Ems dispatch and as a
last means blood and iron—this
is the whole recipe of Prince Bis­
marck.” (1872, 66) “Bismarck pre­
pared the war long in advance; he
played out the candidacy for the
Spanish crown at the very moment
when success seemed most as­
sured.” (1873, 74)

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany
“Moltke, whose name is the most
celebrated among the German
army leaders, has, among many
others, for all times a just claim
to the gratitude of the German
nation.”

“Through all annual sets of the
Volksstaat up to this day, the per­
vasive endeavor to deprecate the
honor of the German arms is to
be seen.”

98

“Holy Moltke whether he writes
voluminous volumes, as he has
done, or ‘keeps voluminous si­
lence,’ as it is alleged; Moltke
whose value is to be sought in the
speed of slaughter, the quantity
and quality of the slaughtered;
‘holy Moltke,’ the nine-centimeter
canon mounted on his skull, the
Mauser rifle clenched in his teeth,
the shrapnel detonators in his
nostrils, the ‘efficacious’ sabre bay­
onet and the ‘elegant’ Uhlan lance
in one hand, the endowment purse
filled with captured funds in the
other; this ‘holy Moltke’ is the
queer enlightening figure of the
19th century.” (1874, 35)
“The victory ecstasy has been
cooled with a pail of water—and
this the most amusing side of it
—from a source whence one did
least expect it: the Great Prussian
General Staff, which best knows
how the ‘victories’ were gained.
From the book just published by
the general staff we can glean two
facts which are expressed there in
meagre words: (1) that Prussia
was already prepared for the war
with France in 1869, and (2) that
France was not prepared for the
war with Prussia at the inception
of the ‘holy war.’ The defeat of an
unprepared, numerically inferior
army—this is an accomplishment
for which neither particular ‘gen­
ius’ nor bravery are necessary and
which does not justify the chubbyfaced fanfares of Bismarck’s

Attitudes Toward Revolution and Patriotism
G-r-r-reat national
(1872, 58) 31

99
trumpeters.”

The quotations from the Volksstaat are not directly indicative
of the attitudes of the Eisenachers toward the Reich and Bismarck
but of the position with which Liebknecht confronted the readers
of the major party journal sent to all members. At most, a few
thousand Lassalleans and Eisenachers may have shared Lieb­
knechts intransigence in the early seventies. However, among
them were hundreds of very active members who later influenced
many thousands of workers. Furthermore, the increasing govern­
mental repression facilitated, in the second half of the seventies,
the spread of some of Liebknechts attitudes and emotions.
Underlying the opposition of the Social Democrats to the Reich
were patriotic values often articulated by their spokesmen. In 1889,
for example, Liebknecht told the representatives of the other par­
ties in the Reichstag that they were not the fatherland and that
they were wrong in asserting that the workers loved their country
less than they did. He argued that the Social Democrats were “a
thousand times more patriotic” than the ruling groups because
they wanted a “reasonable, comprehensive social reform” which
would turn “Germany into the fatherland of happy and free
men.” 32
Though Liebknecht’s position derived from his experience as an
intellectual, it may be assumed that workers liked to hear that they
were better patriots than the ruling classes because they fought for
social and economic improvements. Such an argument was most
important, since the ruling groups typically expected the labor
movement to bear the proof that their aspirations and activities
were not detrimental to the national interest. Liebknecht’s patriotism
was determined by the perspective of intellectuals like himself, Marx,
31 Schuster, op. cit., 26-35. My emphasis. For another quotation from the
Volksstaat on the last subject and for Held’s reaction see his book, op. cit., 64.
32 Reichstag Protocol, Nov. 5, 1889, 137.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

100

Arnold Ruge and Edgar Bauer, to whom large-scale social recon­
struction appeared the only means of bringing the social and polit­
ical conditions of German society up to the level of its cultural
achievements. They suffered deeply from this discrepancy and were
prone to vacillate from depression about the social and spiritual
conditions to exaltation over the cultural achievements. A littleknown story may illustrate the tensions of Marx, Bauer and Lieb­
knecht, even if the location, an English pub, may indicate a
“human, all too human” element to which everyone can easily suc­
cumb. Liebknecht was in London
. . . together with my two com panions “without a country.” . . .
Edgar Bauer, hurt by som e chance remark, turned the tables and ridi­
culed the English snobs. Marx launched an enthusiastic eulogy on Ger­
man science and music— no other country, he said, would have been
capable o f producing masters o f music such as Beethoven, Mozart,
Händel and Haydn, and the Englishmen, who had no music, were in
reality far below the Germans, who had been hitherto prevented only
by the miserable political and econom ic conditions from accomplishing
any great practical work, but who would yet outclass all other nations.
I had never heard him speaking English so fluently. For my part, I
demonstrated in drastic words that the political conditions in England
were not a bit better than those in Germany . . . the only difference
being that we Germans knew our public affairs were miserable while
the Englishmen did not know it, whence it was apparent that we sur­
passed the Englishmen in political intelligence.33

The particular patriotic tension which plagued intellectuals like
Marx and Liebknecht was not recognized by Held. He conceded—
and probably not many German professors were willing to do that
— that Marx
. . . is undeniably the most eminent personality in today’s Social
Dem ocratic party. . . . H e is critically the most astute and at the
33 Marx and his friends fled the pub. They stoned several street-lamps and
ran from the police. See Wilhelm Liebknecht, Karl Marx (Chicago: Kerr,
1904), 147-49.

Attitudes Toward Revolution and Patriotism

101

same time most scholarly man the party has. . . . This man lacks all
national feeling. . . . The tendency to have only a smile for German
national pride has remained with him. This spirit has been transmitted
to the German Social Democrats. . . . The enthusiastic devotion to
the nation state which our propertied classes have preserved despite
the materialism o f our time has completely disappeared among the
Social Democrats, who see in the war o f 18 7 0 /7 1 , just as Marx does,
only the beginning of the repression of the Commune by the armies
of both sides in the interest o f the bourgeoisie.34

It was the sentiments rather than the actual political behavior of
many Social Democrats which remained intransigent toward the
Reich. Schuster complains in 1875 that “the 18th of March, the
anniversary of the uprising of the Paris Commune, is for the Ger­
man Social Democrats a holiday which they oppose to the second
of September, the national holiday of the German people.” On this
day Napoleon III surrendered at Sedan in 1870. “Every year on
the 18th of March all Social Democratic associations, at the instiga­
tion of the party executive, commemorate the Paris Commune.” 35
After 1918 Sombart could still say that “there are probably few
convinced proletarian socialists to whom the heroes of the June
battle [of 1848] and of the Paris Commune do not mean more
than the heroes of Gravelotte and Tannenberg mean to the Ger­
mans [sic!].” 36 By contrasting, perhaps inadvertently, “convinced
proletarian socialists” and “Germans,” Sombart indicated the depth
of the rift which continued to divide German society.37
34 Held, op. cit., 50 f. Held’s statement would be incorrect if it implied that
Marx was a major influence in shaping the contemporary anti-Prussian atti­
tudes of the Eisenachers and their opposition against a Reich united by
Prussia. Cf. Ch. 11:3 and VII:3.
35 Schuster, op. cit., 159.
36 Werner Sombart, Der proletarische Sozialismus (Jena: Fischer, 10th ed.,
1924), Vol. 2, 34.
37 This antagonism may be related, on the highest intellectual level, to the
irreconcilability of the perspectives of two great adversaries, Marx and
Ranke. While Marx looked at contemporary history in terms of the chances
for a revolution, Ranke considered history only meaningful if it was a con-

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

102

3. The Issue of Idealism versus Materialism
The issue of idealism versus materialism may be briefly discussed
as the third major issue between the labor movement and the bour­
geois public. To educated observers, even those favoring social
reforms such as Schuster and Held, the Social Democrats of both
parties appeared as a particular threat to ideal values. By the
time Schuster and Held felt prompted to write their books, the
Social Democratic agitation lacked the sophisticated argumenta­
tion with which Lassalle had addressed himself to the workers as
well as to the educated. The idealized aspect of Lassalle’s con­
ception of the revolution could no longer be realized. It had de­
pended on the support of the educated classes, but they were
horrified by his appeal to the interests of the working class. The
Social Democratic agitation was now indeed more vulgar; there
was increasing emphasis on the class struggle; nearly all agitators
were self-educated men.
For Held the most dangerous aspect of Social Democracy was
its lack of idealism (Idealität). He explains this as a result of a
revolutionary movement that is no longer led exclusively by edu­
cated men. Only if the Social Democrats were idealists would they
have something in common with the “higher classes.”
I would be inclined to declare that all the democratic hobbies are a
harmless byproduct of the energetic drive for higher wages, and even
to consider the perpetual invectives against the propertied and against
tinuous progress uninterrupted by revolutions. He even said that he would
not have written his work on world history without a “great deed of Provi­
dence,” the victory of the forces of order over “revolutionary Caesarism.”
He meant by this the victory of Prussia over France in 1870. See Karl
Kupisch, Vom Pietismus zum Kommunismus (Berlin: Lettner Verlag, 1953),
193.

Attitudes Toward Revolution and Patriotism

103

every government action as merely the aimless pathological intensifica­
tion o f the enjoyment o f political opposition, if the hatred against the
contemporary social and political order would not have degenerated
into flat, anti-state mentality and crass materialism. . . . Lassalle ad­
dresses himself successfully to those workers in whom the feeling of
being suppressed pariahs and disinherited proletarians has becom e the
dominant sentiment, those who have lost the urge to rise gradually
through hard work . . . who seek the responsibility for their misery
exclusively outside themselves and for whom it is the greatest satisfac­
tion to revenge themselves on those powers they consider enemies.
. . . Am ong workers in the large industries, this type o f dissatisfaction
is a mass feeling. . . . This combination of impassioned dissatisfac­
tion about social conditions with the ideas o f political revolution was
preconditioned by the history o f the German labor m ovement which
received its first intellectual impetus from France.38

Related to the emphasis on idealist values was an adherence to
the ideal of the cultured and highly educated individual by genera­
tions of liberals. The socialist emphasis on collective values conse­
quently horrified them. Friedrich Naumann explains the antago­
nism between the older generation of liberals and socialists as
having been largely a clash between two groups each of which
believed itself to be more progressive than the other. He knew from
personal experience that many educated and well-meaning liberals
could not understand why the workers did not better appreciate
their new freedom, won through liberalism. These liberals failed
to understand the workers’ everyday deprivations, which made
them interested in collective ideals and action.39 This was not just
a blind spot. The older liberals’ humanistic outlook was unrelated
to much of the political and social reality of the time. Therefore,
many educated persons abandoned it or made it even more ab­
stract when the chance arose to take part in political and eco­
nomic reconstruction. After 1870, the younger bourgeois gener­
ation turned increasingly to the social and economic opportunities
38 Held, op. cit., 49 f and 15 f.
39 See Naumann, op. cit., 95 ff.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

104

of industrialization, embraced more “realistic” values, and more
frequently seized chances to fuse with the old upper class.
The same humanistic values that made many older liberals turn
against socialist ideals were also adhered to by many Social Demo­
crats, who combined both and who played them out against the
turn of the bourgeoisie to more “realistic” values. During the
height of the postwar boom in 1872, a Social Democratic journal
attacked “the general corruption” which made the educated akin
to businessmen in the pursuit of “material interests.”
To be sure, there are within the so-called “better classes” groups which
keep aloof from the general corruption. But they have no influence;
they do not stand out in comparison with the M ammon and in com ­
parison with those adaptable intellects which follow “the trend of
material interests.” The German spirit, tired of forming theories and
ideas, is today intent on becom ing “practical.” Our historians are proud
to defend without any “sentimentality” Sulla’s proscriptions as well as
the coups d ’état of modern saviours of society. They consider action,
active intervention, and the success resulting from it to be the highest
achievement; they think it ridiculous to measure a successful action in
terms o f morality. The spirit o f our Treitschkes com es to the fore in
our speculators. It is the same ingenuity— the petty-bourgeois would
call it insolence or shamelessness— which seizes profits with a quick
hand. The language is somewhat different, the scholar expresses him ­
self in a slightly different manner from the jobber, but the closeness
is revealed even in the style. Some of the advertisement for sharehold­
ing companies may very well have been written by a scholar.40

Though the Social Democrats were generally in favor of techno­
logical progress and rapid industrialization, their moralistic position
and adherence to older humanistic values, as in this journal, may
have supported attitudes inimical to industrialization. Irrespective of
40 Demokratische Blätter. Zeitschrift für politische und soziale Fragen,
1872, 8-9; S. Kokosky, ed., quoted in Held, op. cit., 95 f. The journal was
published for educated readers and presented a “liberal democratic” or “social
democratic” protest against the political and economic developments of the
time. According to Held, the article was typical of the journal’s perspective.

Attitudes Toward Revolution and Patriotism

105

the adherence of some Social Democratic leaders to these values, they
were class ideals based on higher learning. The kind of knowledge
esteemed in the institutions of higher learning militated most of the
time against serious attempts to understand the social problems of
industrialization, the ideology of the Social Democrats, and the
mentality of the workers attracted to it. At the time, Held and
Schuster were among the few educated persons familiar with Social
Democratic literature. Even though most educated people were
ignorant about socialism and the Social Democrats, they were
against them and feared them. The former Austrian minister of
finance, Albert Schäffle, who wrote the first German academic
treatise on Marx’s Kapital in 1874, regretted the widely held mis­
conceptions about socialism:
In opposition to all contrary views, which have been very widely spread,
it must be emphatically stated that socialism does not universally ex­
clude either property in general, or private property in particular. . . .
Even educated people betray a scandalous ignorance on the question of
“negation o f property,” which is already clearly perceived by thousands
o f workmen and is readily ascribed to the m alevolence of the upper
classes.41

In subsequent years the academic social reformers did much to
further the understanding of the social problems of industrialization,
but the public was slow to become more sophisticated.
41 Albert Schäffle, The Quintessence of Socialism (London: Sonnenschein,
1890), 101 f. Cf. also Tönnies on Schäffle’s critique of the ignorance of the
“propertied and educated classes.” See Ferdinand Tönnies, Kritik der öffent­
lichen Meinung (Berlin: Springer, 1922), 479. Educated people read about
the labor movement in the partisan bourgeois press. Held quoted sympa­
thetically from a Social Democratic article which complained that the bour­
geois press never bothered to view the demands of striking workers objec­
tively. Op. cit., 69 f.

V
The Antagonistic Discourse Between
the Spokesmen o f the Government
and the Labor Movement
From the beginning until nearly the end of the Reich, many of the
arguments that the spokesmen of the government and the labor
movement used against one another remained the same. This was
so largely because Bismarck’s system necessitated at least an iso­
lation of the labor movement. Thus, the high-pitched rhetoric of
the government continued under Biilow after 1900 when there was
growing awareness that the policies of the Social Democratic party
and the unions were reformist. The Social Democratic spokesmen
were intransigent in attack and defense and, since they had no way
out of their isolation, stuck to their highly aggressive rhetoric even
after the party and the unions had become more and more involved
in reformist activities through municipal, state and federal insti­
tutions. Only the expressions of patriotism and the plea for social
recognition underwent some moderating changes. The fact that
strategic requirements forced both sides into mutual all-out rejec­
tion does not mean, of course, that the emotional antagonism was
not genuine, based as it was on very different value orientations.
However, there was often a disparity between the public and pri­
vate views of the spokesmen involved and, on both sides, a purpose­
ful exaggeration of certain qualities in the opposing party. Although
the private views were sometimes milder than the public ones, or the
public views more severe than the public actions, as in the case of
William II, the net effect of the public images presented was the
perpetuation of the deep cleavage between the labor movement and
the dominant system.
The most important forum for the great national debate, where

The Antagonistic Discourse

107

these images were evolved, was the Reichstag. Here the spokesmen
of the government and the labor movement came together, face to
face. Therefore, the present chapter will give particular attention to
Reichstag speeches. It will use other materials in so far as they are
relevant to bring out the private views and public rhetoric of higher
civil servants and of the Emperor himself. Where possible, direct
exchanges have been selected to bring out the divergent perspec­
tives.

1. High-Ranking Government Officials on the Social
Democrats and a Social Democratic Rejoinder
After the electoral gains of the Social Democrats in 1874, police
and courts stepped up their activities, and Bismarck began maneu­
vering for more stringent repressive legislation. The government
knew that it could not immediately achieve its objectives, but it
wanted to discredit the liberals in the eyes of those who wanted
such legislation and to go on record as proposing legislation against
the Social Democrats. A government bill was defended by the
Prussian Minister of the Interior, Count Friedrich zu Eulenburg,
on January 27, 1876, before the Reichstag; it was poorly pre­
pared.1 Eulenburg presented the official position of the Prussian
government to the public. He knew that he would not be able to
convince the majority of the Reichstag. The speaker for the liber­
als, Lasker, told him afterwards that he had presented nothing new
to his listeners. One passage in Eulenburg’s speech became famous
and was used for decades by the Social Democrats as evidence of
the determination of the Prussian ruling class to resort to physical
force at an opportune time. Eulenburg stated that if strong meas­
ures were not taken now, the present weak provisions of the law1
1 See Reichstag Protocols, Jan. 27, 1876, 941-54.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

108

would have to be used as a makeshift until “the guns will shoot and
the sabres strike.” Underlying this statement was his conviction, real
or pretended, that the Social Democrats would one day resort to
force although they were presently careful to keep within legal
limits. He reasoned logically rather than realistically that civil war
was inevitable because the Social Democrats would never gain a
parliamentary majority, because “society” would not voluntarily
allow itself to be “equalized.” 2
On this score Eulenburg’s reasoning is similar to that of Schuster
and Held. There are further parallels between the arguments of
the three men, and they refer partly to the same evidence. Eulenburg, for example, mentioned three articles that Schuster also dis­
cussed in his book. Because of the scarcity of informative books
on the Social Democrats, it appears quite likely that Eulenburg’s
advisers knew the two books. The fact that the three men refer
to the same articles may mean that this was the worst evidence
against the Social Democrats that could be found. Indeed Held had
shown that most of the party papers, especially the union papers,
were more restrained and more occupied with practical problems
than were the two major Social Democratic journals. At any rate,
the similarity of arguments and evidence indicates an area of
shared perception and thinking on the part of government officials
and educated men from other fields.
Eulenburg tried to show that the insistence of an article in the
Lassallean Neue Socialdemokrat of 1871 on the inevitability of
the class struggle contradicted the emphasis on legality which Social
Democratic speakers usually professed at the end of their speeches.
He also quoted the Eisenacher Volksstaat to the effect that the
Social Democratic Workers’ party is revolutionary and considers
parliamentary activities only from the viewpoint of agitation,3 that
the revolution is inevitable with or without a parliamentary frame­
work, and that Christianity is a hindrance to social progress. Eulen2 As with Schuster, the term “society” excludes the workers. Cf above, p. 95.
3 Cf. above, loc. cit.

The Antagonistic Discourse

109

burg presented an historical sketch of the development of the two
labor parties which had merged only a year before in Gotha. He
read the whole Gotha program and commented that it betrayed
much but that no organization inimical to the state would openly
admit its real intention for two reasons: in order to avoid conflict
with the law,4 and in order to attract followers before gradually
indoctrinating them. For Eulenburg the real aims of the Social
Democrats are the “red republic,” “communism” and “atheism.”
Because of these aims, repressive measures appeared necessary
to him.
Hasselmann undertook the defense of the party. Under the cir­
cumstances he had to restrain his usual aggressive rhetoric. How­
ever, the speech has interest as a summary of the defensive argu­
ments of the party and as an example of the irreducible elements
of opposition against the dominant system. His major argument
was that social conditions give the workers a right to protest against
the existing social order and that moral indignation is continually
spreading among them. He insisted on the possibility of peaceful
social progress and on the Social Democrats’ resolution to propa­
gate Socialism within the confines of the law. He rejected the
“eternal accusation” that the Social Democrats were Reichsfeinde
(enemies of the Reich). He tried to defend the economic views of
the party with references to Adam Smith, Ricardo, Rodbertus and
Schmoller. Interpreting the Gotha program’s demand for socializa­
tion of the means of production, he pointed to Bismarck’s pro­
jected nationalization of the railroads as a first step by the govern­
ment in the same direction. On religion he stated that the Social
Democratic program declared it a private matter, while the pro4 Here is another parallel between Eulenburg and Schuster: Eulenburg’s sus­
picion about the real intentions of the Social Democrats is shared by Schuster,
who presents extracts of an article from the Volksstaat defending the neces­
sity of a cautious statement of aims (Volksstaat, 1874, 33, quoted in Schuster,
op. cit., 16). Schuster comments that this “confession” makes it impossible to
take the Gotha program at face value. This is the same argument as Eulen­
burg’s.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

110

posed repressive bill aimed at persecuting atheists. Also, he did
not fail to link a denial that the Social Democrats were champions
of free love with the party’s protest against prostitution and com­
mercially contracted marriages. Hasselmann’s speech is a good
example of what was later called “vulgar materialism” by advanced
Marxists. However, there were few among the 350 odd agitators
and even fewer among the 30,000 odd members of the united
party— Eulenburg’s estimate for August 1875—who could attain a
higher level of comprehension and tactical skill.
Eulenburg’s three themes— the real goals of the Social Democrats
as the Red Republic, communism and atheism—were standard
arguments. These were indeed the ideal goals of many a Social
Democrat; but the government usually went so far in picturing the
depraved characteristics and horrible dangers of Social Democracy,
that it was relatively easy for Social Democratic agitators to deny
them. Typical of the tone of such governmental pronouncements
to warn the public, especially workers, is the following statement,
which the head of the regional Prussian government in Schleswig
published in the official government paper {Amtsblatt) in July
1872:
Everyone should know what to think o f party emissaries who do not
hesitate to glorify the bloody crimes perpetrated by the Commune in
March o f 1871— robbery, plundering, extortion, murder, gluttony,
arson. Their aim is to overthrow everything that is venerable, sacred
and dear to us— fatherland, throne, altar, custom and law—
and to replace the hearth at hom e with the ale-house-bench, to dissolve
property and possessions and to turn labor, which is the preserver and
nourisher of the nations, into a tool of ambitious party leaders. The
Red Republic is the goal of the Social Democrats. . . . Since the lead­
ers know that under the given conditions they cannot achieve these
goals, since they realize that the intelligence o f the population and the
strong arm o f the state block their way, they try to dissolve the bonds
which unite the population. Therefore, hatred is preached against the
propertied class, therefore the public order is undermined, the moral
code is relaxed, the Christian religion is exposed to scorn and mockery.

The Antagonistic Discourse

111

But above all, work and making a living are deprecated, the trust be­
tween employers and workers is destroyed, dissatisfaction is aroused
and kindled through strikes, the inclinations to indulge in slothfulness,
to frequent pubs, to join seditious, fruitless associations are furthered.
The cry “Hand over the capital” is intended to make simple workers
believe it possible to secure work and income without capital, and to
make them believe the foolish assertion that capital is the enem y o f
labor.5

The Arbeiterfreund, the only major contemporary bourgeois
journal concerned with social reform, criticized the approach of
this governmental warning as being hardly suitable for the purpose.
It considered it wrong to accuse the Social Democrats time and
again of glorifying the crimes of the Commune. In reality, the great'
majority of Social Democrats desired the communist republic with­
out its criminal excesses, which would at best be excused as un­
fortunately inevitable by-products.6
The ardor to repress the Social Democrats increased among those
higher civil servants who were dismayed to discover that a rising
standard of living would not necessarily pacify the workers. In
1876 William I was greatly impressed with the repressive tactics of
the police chief of the Bavarian capital, von Feilitzsch, and wanted
them applied in Prussia.7 Feilitzsch’s rationale was the following:
Practical experience has repudiated the theory, often propounded,
that the workers will be most satisfied when they have high wages, that
then the activities o f the Social Dem ocrats will lose their justification,
5 From a reprint in the Arbeiterfreund, 1872, 248 f. The journal pointed out
that Social Democratic agitation was very active in Schleswig-Holstein, de­
spite the region’s lack of industry. It explained the receptiveness to this agita­
tion as being due to a general activation of political interest and a general
dissatisfaction. These appear to be results of the uncertain political future of
the province, before its definite incorporation into Prussia in the sixties, of the
long period of partial or complete martial law and of the failure to satisfy
the workers’ urge for Bildung or to improve their social position and con­
ditions.
• Loc. cit.
7 See Kampffmeyer, op. cit., 122 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

112

that the agitation will com e to an end. The higher the wages, the more
the Social Dem ocrats prosper. If wages are high, workers work less;
the individual worker has time to attend the meetings o f the agitators
and to listen daily to their siren songs. His dissatisfaction is aroused
by the demands and fallacies propounded there. H e has enough money
to pay dues, to support the agitators, to buy socialist literature. N ot
sophisticated enough to recognize the truth, he throws himself into the
arms of his leaders, becomes a dissatisfied person, a bad worker, and
according to the m ot d'ordre o f the agitators he is not supposed to
accumulate savings. . . .
If the worker has only a moderate income, he must work every day
to satisfy his daily needs and to support his family; he has not enough
money or time, therefore he will be more satisfied with what he has
and will try to keep his job through industry, temperance and good be­
havior; the agitators themselves have to take a job; strikes will be im­
possible or will fail.8

Many higher civil servants seem to have retained for decades the
image of the Social Democrats which was formed in the seventies.
As late as 1908 a former liberal mayor gave the following polem­
ical account of the views of higher civil servants in northern Ger­
many:
In northern Germany it is possible to becom e an aged higher civil serv­
ant without hearing o f Karl Marx. But it is fashionable in Prussia to
know Lassalle, though only for his duel and his affair with a lady of
high birth. The goals, trends, ideals and justifications of socialism are
unknown among many educated persons. They are familiar with a few
phrases: “to divide everything,” “free love,” “religion is a private
matter,” “the increasing misery o f the masses,” “property is theft,”
“[the socialist state will be a] great penal institution,” “republic.” This
is the approximate image which quite a few judges and nearly all higher
administrative officials have of socialism. Some still talk of the great
K ladderadatsch [i.e., the catastrophic collapse o f society] and o f the
“great expropriation.” They have in mind the hazy notion that they
might one day not only lose their jobs, but also that they might be
forced to hand over their laboriously accumulated savings to a few
ex-convicts, probably o f Jewish descent. These unsympathetic persons
8 Quoted in ibid., 149 f.

The Antagonistic Discourse

&

would then compel them to work as prisoners without compensation
and to live on food from public soup-kitchens. This is the conception
o f socialism o f the Prussian higher civil servants. That socialism only
aims at the socialization o f the means of production is repressed. This
ignorance about socialism which creates fear is artificially bred. The
state skilfully insures that science and its representatives do not carry
too much knowledge into the ranks of the educated. It is already cause
for suspicion to write about socialism.9

2 y William ITs Private and Public Views and
Their Divergence from His Actions
When WilliamJH^realized, soon after the introduction of his exten­
sive social welfare legislation in 1890, that the effect of the anti­
socialist legislation could not easily be obliterated, he became one
of the most vociferous spokesmen againstjhe Social Democrats and
followed his general tendency to indulge in images of violence. It
is true that he did not act on these images. Either he knew better
himself, or he was advised by friends not to act, or the imperial
and state governments opposed action. Joseph Schumpeter tried
to defend William II by pointing to this divergence of word and
action.
H e was no insignificant ruler. Moreover, he was fully entitled to the
comment made upon him by Prince Biilow, in the most unusual defense
ever made for a monarch in a parliament: “Say what you will; he is
no philistine.” If he quarreled with the one man who could have taught
him the technique of his craft, critics o f his behavior to Bismarck
should not forget that the quarrel was mainly about the persecution of
socialists which the emperor wished to discontinue, and about the in­
auguration o f a great program of social legislation. If one disregards
talk and simply tries to reconstruct intentions by following the em­
peror’s act from year to year, one cannot help arriving at the conclu9 Lothar Schücking, Die Reaktion in der inneren Verwaltung Preussens
(Berlin: Hilfe, 1908), 1 7 1

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

TT4

sion that he was often right in his views about the great questions of
his time.10
By 1895, however, Williame n hesitated to açL strongly against
the Social Democrats because of his previous quarrèlwïtE Bis­
marck. He no longer continued to quarrel with Turn over the treat­
ment of the socialists, as he had done in the Imperial Privy Council
on January 24, 1890, the clash that resulted in Bismarck’s dis­
missal.11 In any case, his rhetoric was bound to contribute to the
perpetuation of the high tension between the Social Democrats and
the dominant system, just as his many impetuous speeches on other
subjects were bound to produce perplexity and antagonism abroad.
His public utterances thus reduced the chances of a gradual rap­
prochement between labor movement and dominant system.12
10 Joseph Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (New York:
Harper, 1947), 343. By permission of the publisher.
11 Cf. Wilhelm von Kardorf, op. cit., 214; also the report of Philipp Eulenburg, the go-between for Emperor and government, to Chancellor Hohen­
lohe, in Hohenlohe, op. cit., 97 f. Eulenburg remarked that William would
not go all-out against the Social Democrats without the consent of the
people, that means the Reichstag, as long as Bismarck was alive— for fear
of playing his game. Hohenlohe added that the major driving force behind
the suggestion to pass new laws against the Social Democrats was the Bis­
marck press, which urged the government “to use the enthusiasm of the 25th
anniversary of our victories, against the Social Democrats. Perhaps [Bis­
marck] merely agitates in order to make the government, which does not
accept his advice, appear weak.”
12 Eckart Kehr once suggested that the Social Democrats had no less a sense
of Prussian honor than the aristocrats and their overlord who so often spoke
of it: “At the time when the naval armament bills were passed the state
[showed the Social Democrats] with the proposed ‘Penitentiary Bill,’ which
was only the most consequent result of the Sammlungspolitik, that it did not
want to accept them into the nation. The Prussian sense of honor, very much
alive among Social Democrats, was offended and at a decisive moment it
was once more directed against the state and its policies.” Eckart Kehr,
Schlachtflottenbau und Parteipolitik 1894-1901 (Berlin: Ebering, 1930), 341.
Kehr was a brilliant Marxist historian and one of the best students of the
eighteen eighties and nineties; he died very young in the early nineteen thir­
ties. On the Sammlungspolitik, see my Ch. VI, p. 145.

The Antagonistic Discourse

115

The Emperor’s attitude toward the Social Democrats and the
typical divergence of word and deed may be seen in the 1895 at­
tempt at extensive repressive legislation. When the 25th anniver­
sary of the victory of the German army over Napoleon III atSejdan
was enthusiastically celebrated, on September 2, 1895, the Social
ßemocrats again ridiculed the values that were of great importance
to a large part of the population, arid they made some aggressive
remarks about William I. Thereupon, William II indulged in sug­
gestions of violence and hoped that mounting public indignation
would make it possible tojiass a new law agajnsEjhejocial Democrats. One of his proposals for a new law contained a paragraph
stipulating jail sentences for those who “defame the memory of
dead German ruling princes.’Ö^Xnother proposal would have pro­
hibited all Social Democratic meetings, as had been done in Saxony.
More William II did not want, but this much was too much for
Hohenlohe. The new Prussian Minister of the Interior, von Koller,
a typical Junker, presented four drafts to Hohenlohe and com­
mented bluntly:
The outcry that this is an exceptional law does not mean much because,
in the last analysis, every penal law is an exceptional law. W e must be
determined to treat the Social Democrats not as a party but to fight
them with means o f coercion as revolutionaries against state and
order.1314

Philipp Eulenburg conveyed Hohenlohe’s resistance to the court
and pointed to the possibility of the chancellor’s resignation. This
was enough to make William II yield to the opposition of his “dear
uncle,” as he addressed Hohenlohe, who was forty years his elder,
in his letters. The Prussian Minister of the Interior had to resign.
Thus, despite his uncontrolled verbal reactions, William II did not
support the extreme views of the Prussian government and the
13 Cf. Hohenlohe, loc. cit.
14 Loc. cit.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

116

right-wing parties. In a talk with Philipp Eulenburg, William II
first blurted out that the old adjutants of William I “should have hit
Bebel and his gang over the head in the offices of the Vorwärts”
Then “the patriotically aroused people would have smashed up the
printing shop and frightened the Social Democrats for the first
time.” After this outburst he referred to the King of Saxony, who
“just like he, the Emperor, was by all means against an Umsturzgesetz”— that is, against new comprehensive legislation. William
wanted the prohibition of Social Democratic meetings in order to
break “the terrorism of socialist leaders” against workers who at­
tended involuntarily. He hoped that the people would give him the
means to protect “the quiet elements in the state from attempts
on their lives.” 15 Eulenburg maintained that his real motive was fear
for his wife and children. If the people would not support him,
William said, he would be forced one day to act alone, ignoring
their protests.
An example of the intransigent public rhetoric of William II
is the Emperor’s Speech of 1907— the traditional address on the
occasion of the first meeting of a new Reichstag.16 Chancellor
Biilow had succeeded in bringing about a liberal-conservative
coalition, which won a great electoral victory by an appeal to na­
tionalist sentiments; the Social Democrats lost 50 per cent of their
seats even though their votes increased.
William II asserted that the Social Democrats had done nothing
for the workers or “the progress of culture.” They negate “every­
thing that is good and healthy in the existing conditions,” and they
are “against the steady peaceful development of state and society.”
Social welfare legislation would continue because it “rests on the
principle of the social obligation toward the working classes.” 17
is Op. ciu, 98-101.
16 See Reichstag Protocols, February 19, 1907, 2.
17 Welfare legislation, however, was not continued. Little more than one year
before this speech, on the occasion of the Morocco crisis, William II urged
Chancellor Biilow to prevent a war, because army and navy were not yet
sufficiently prepared and reorganized and the socialists were preaching open

The Antagonistic Discourse

117

In his reply to the Emperor, Bebel stated cautiously that the Em­
peror’s Speech was “objectively untrue”; then he launched a broad
attack on the political and cultural backwardness of Prussia, “the
incarnation of cultural stagnation” and the country with “the worst
and most miserable of all electoral systems.” *18 He quoted foreign
and German scholars and politicians on the Kulturfeindlichkeit
(hostility to culture), brutality, Caesarism, militarism and feudal­
ism of Wilhelminian Germany and Prussia.

3. Chancellor Hohenlohe Answers the Social Democrats
Prince Hohenlohe was a Bavarian aristocrat who considered him­
self a moderate liberal. In the late sixties he was very active, as
Bavarian prime minister, in promoting the unification of southern
and northern Germany. He was one of the staunchest South Ger­
man supporters of Bismarck. He took over the chancellorship from
Caprivi in 1894 and held it until 1900. Hohenlohe was not averse'
to new legislation against the Social Democrats nor to a constitu­
tional reform restricting equal suffrage in the Reich, but he refused
to work against the majority in the Reichstag. Because of the pres­
sure of the Emperor, the Bismarck press and other right-wing
groups, on the one hand, and the Reichstag’s unwillingness to pro­
vide the means for the legal suppression of the Social Democrats,
on the other, he could be expected to resort at least to sharp rhetoric
against the Social Democrats. He did this, to some extent, but he
publicly retained the reserve of the experienced diplomat and the
dignity of the grandseigneur.
revolt. With typical logical and grammatical jerkiness, he added in this non­
public communication: “First deter the socialists, behead them and render
them innocuous— if necessary through blood bath—then declare war on the
outside. But not before that and not a tempo." See Gerhard Ritter, Der
Schlieffenplan: Kritik eines Mythos (Munich: Oldenbourg, 1956), p. 131.
18 Reichstag Protocols, February 26, 1907, 51 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

118

An example of a statement which is at the same time defensive
toward the conservatives and the Emperor and aggressive toward
the Social Democrats is his Reichstag speech of December 10,
1895. He rejected the conservative criticism that the government
lacked initiative and pointed out that it did not command a firm
majority in parliament. He condemned the Social Democrats and
reaffirmed his determination to fight them—within the limits of
the existing laws. This was an indirect rejection of the attempts
of the Emperor and the right wing to institute new antisocialist
legislation. Hohenlohe contrasted the Social Democratic view of
the fatherland and the national celebrations on the anniversary
of the French army’s surrender in 1870 with the perspective of
the “peaceful citizen,” to whom Social Democratic activities ap­
peared anticultural, antinational and unpatriotic.
The Social Dem ocratic party now protests, through its press, the
present application o f the laws; I would like to point out that they are
themselves responsible for this. When during this summer the German
nation commemorated the great achievements and the victory of the
year 1 8 7 0/71 and remembered gratefully and proudly the venerable
Emperor, to whose courage and wisdom we owe the establishment o f
the German Reich, the party and the Social Dem ocratic press ridiculed
this national m ovement in accordance with the belief of its leader
that the fatherland, in our sense, is an anticultural (kulturwidriger),
reactionary notion. . . .
A ll o f this was very offensive and I have often been asked how long
we would tolerate it. The gentlemen o f the Social Dem ocracy must not
forget that the principles underlying the systems of collectivism, com ­
munism and similar systems do not impress the peaceful citizen as
matters of scientific discourse. The peaceful citizen perceives in them
anticultural, antinational and unpatriotic endeavors Ckulturwidrige,
vaterlandswidrige, vaterlandslose Bestrebungen). Quite a few people
do not see in the future state o f the Social Dem ocrats a state o f law
and order, but a robber state. It is natural that this diminishes the sense
of security and that, therefore, people look to the state for protection.
If we have tightened the reins o f government somewhat since last sum­

The Antagonistic Discourse

119

mer, it is in correspondence with the feelings of all people o f good will
in the German Reich.19

Hohenlohe’s diplomatic reserve, clearly evident in this statement,
did not indicate moderate private reactions against the Social
Democrats. In a private letter, dated December 23, 1898, he called
Bebel “the shameless loud-mouth” (den unverschämten Schreier).20
He was also physically affected by Gerhart Hauptmann’s play
Hannele, which he termed “social democratic” :
A terrible, wretched piece o f work, social-democratic-realistic, full o f
pathological, sentimental mystics, affecting the nerves, really horrible.
Afterwards we went to Borchard in order to return to a human mood
with champagne and caviar.21

4. The Rhetorical Duels Between Billow and Bebel
on Patriotism and Revolution
The rhetorical battle between the spokesmen of the government and
the Social Democratic party continued under Hohenlohe’s suc­
cessor, von Biilow, who held the chancellorship from 1900 until
1909. The rift in German society as well as the intransigent rhet­
oric persisted,22 but the dangers of new comprehensive antisocialist
19 Speech in the Reichstag, December 10, 1895, see Hohenlohe, op. cit., 141.
20 Op. cit., 475.
21 Diary, December 14, 1893, quoted by Kampffmeyer in his introduction to
Friedrich Ebert, Schriften (Dresden: Reissner, 1926), 55. Borchard was the
name of a famous restaurant in Berlin.
22 Pinson states correctly that Biilow verbally attacked the Social Democrats
as violently as Bismarck had done in the seventies and that the Social Demo­
crats retorted in the same fashion: “In the session of February 25, 1907,
Biilow called them ‘the party of hostility to Christianity,’ ‘the deadly enemy
of the national state and bourgeois society,’ a party, ‘born out of hate’ and

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

120

legislation and of a coup d'état against parliament subsided. In­
ternally, Germany continued to be more peaceful during these
years than many other European countries.
Every year, on the occasion of the discussions of the budget, the
public awaited the “duel” between Biilow and Bebel. Their speeches
were rhetorical highlights of the Reichstag debates; they were not
typical of the majority of speeches, which were concerned with
more concrete problems, such as details of a pending bill. Apart
from the ideological battle, the power struggle was carried on over
taxation to meet the ever expanding military expenditures: What
groups should be privileged or subsidized at the expense of what
other group? The federal taxes were mainly indirect and, therefore,
burdened the workers relatively more than the higher strata. Year
after year the Social Democrats would point to this and particu­
larly denounce the tariff policies that favored the landed estates at
the expense of the common man, who had to buy food at higher
prices. They also had frequent reason to complain in the Reichstag
about petty interferences of the authorities with Social Democratic
activities.23 Bebel and other leading deputies would use these de­
tails for their general critique of conditions in the Reich.24
Since the government was interested in keeping the Social Demo­
crats isolated, Biilow had to go on asserting as his predecessors
had done, that the party was unpatriotic and revolutionary. He
like an ‘Indian tribe on a war path.’ Socialist leaders, for the most part, did
not care to bridge this gap. In theory, at least, they would have none of the
capitalist state, or capitalist culture. An almost caste-like attitude was de­
veloped among the Socialist workers which bound fathers and sons to their
party but which looked askance at all others.” Koppel S. Pinson, Modern
Germany, Its History and Civilization (New York: Macmillan, 1955), p. 211.
By permission of the publisher.
23 For example, the government refused permission to Jean Jaurès in 1905
to come to Berlin and make a speech. Biilow defended the government’s
position against Bebel on December 9, 1905, Reichstag Protocols, 194 f.
24 See the details on military expenditures, foreign trade, tariffs, and the liv­
ing costs of workers in Bebel’s budget speech on December 7, 1905, 156-61.

The Antagonistic Discourse

121

therefore continued to use the old vocabulary, according to which
the Social Democrats were vaterlandslos, unpatriotisch, fanatisch
and kulturwidrig.25 The following were some of BUlow’s tactics
and recurrent arguments: He utilized theoretical literature, news­
paper articles and convention speeches of the party to attack the
party’s position in the Reichstag.20 He maintained that in contrast
to the internationalist German Social Democrats, foreign socialists
were patriotic,27 that the revolutionary Jacobins, for example, had
been ardent patriots while the Social Democrats merely shared their
fanaticism and dogmatism.28 He accused the Social Democrats of
continuously contributing to the misunderstandings abroad about
the intentions of the German government.29 He distinguished be­
tween the workers and the party and maintained that the great
majority of the German workers, even of the Social Democratic
workers, were patriotic and would do their duty in the event of
war.30 He was careful to point out that the government’s fight was
not directed against the workers, but against “the political and
revolutionary Social Democratic party.” 31
In his “duel” with Bebel in 1907, Biilow repeated his plea to
the Social Democrats “to stop offending the sentiments which are
sacred to the great majority of the German people.” 32 Social
Democratic papers indeed offended these feelings again and again
with their attacks on the Prussian military traditions. In 1905,
when a Social Democratic paper (Münchener Post) labeled the
“hero’s death” a simple act of slaughter, many people were prob­
ably as genuinely disgusted as was Schuster in 1875, when he
complained that
25 February 26, 1907, 66.
26 December 9, 1905, 195 f., and December 14,1905, 317-19.
27 December 9, 1905, 195 D.
28 December 14, 1905, 319 D.
29 December 9, 1905, 195, and December 14, 318 f.
3° December 14, 1905, 318 D.
31 February 26, 1907, 67 B.
32 February 26, 1907, 66 B.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

122

. . . the attitude that the “organ o f the Social Dem ocratic Workers*
Party” takes toward the events o f the war and their effects, which are
so very advantageous for the German fatherland, offends every Ger­
man heart most deeply.33

Billow made the most of this article and linked it to the con­
troversy between Jean Jaurès and Bebel at the Amsterdam congress
of the Second International in 1904, where the latter had spoken
about potential salutary effects of military defeat. Biilow con­
cluded by saying:
This forms the deepest rift between you and us, this constitutes the
greatest cleavage between you and us: this lack o f understanding for
the vital interests o f the nation, for those demands without which the
nation cannot maintain itself in the world.34

Three years later Biilow again referred to the Amsterdam speech,
which was often cited against the Social Democrats in newspapers,
and Bebel answered him.3^Bebel reasoned that military defeat had
led to salutary reforms in Prussia in 1806 and to the establishment
of constitutional or republican regimes in Austria in 1866, in
France in 1870 and in Russia in 1905.36 Underlying this contro­
versy between Biilow and Bebel was the recognition that a military
defeat was the supreme threat to Prussian predominance and the
internal security of the Bismarck Reich.
The historical role of Prussia and the Prussian three-class suf­
frage were particularly controversial issues between the Social
Democrats and the government. On March 26, 1908, Biilow re33 See Ch. IV, 97, above.
34 December 14, 1905, 319 D.
35 March 27, 1908, 4355.
36 However, the Social Democrats continued to dread a defeat at the hand of
Tsarism because they were convinced that this would mean the destruction
of the Reich as well as the labor movement. Bebel’s account of his difference
of opinion with Jaurès also brought out again the problem of the dispropor­
tion between the numerical strength of the party and its inability, because of
the constitutional setting, to democratize Germany.

The Antagonistic Discourse

123

affirmed the government’s intention to modify the Prussian threeclass suffrage, but he refused “a revolution from above” or a coup
d'état in favor of “the revolution from below.” 37 Provoked by a
speech of Bebel, he highly praised the role of Prussia in bringing
about and sustaining the Reich. He emphasized the mutual im­
portance of the Reich and Prussia and particularly stressed the
following: the peaceful aspects of unification, Bismarck’s readiness
to ask the Prussian diet for indemnity (which ended the Constitu­
tional Conflict), the South German states’ voluntarily joining
Prussia in the Reich, and the Prussian determination to respect
their constitutional rights and to accept their equality. The follow­
ing day Bebel answered Biilow that
. . . when Bismarck took on the task o f German unification and real­
ized it according to the precepts o f the Right, this was only in the inter­
est o f Prussia, so that the constitution and all else would depend
on Prussian power. . . . Ten million good Germans [i.e., A us­
trians] were thrown out o f Germany. . . . If you view history in this
way, the judgment on the role of Prussia will be different from the
one you habitually present. There is no doubt Prussia is today, as it
always was, the incarnation o f reaction, the drag-chain o f progress.38

Characteristic of the very strong democratic component of Social
Democratic ideology is the disappearance of nearly all specifically
socialist terminology, with the exception perhaps of a term like
“class” in some of Bebel’s most important speeches before the
Reichstag. Instead, a humanitarian and democratic credo is pro­
fessed, which has the following goals: to attain “the highest pos­
sible development of the physical, intellectual and political Bildung
37 March 26, 1908, 4290. With the refusal of “a revolution from above” or a
coup d’état, Biilow meant that he was not willing to impose a suffrage re­
form on the Prussian diet. Because of the conservative domination of the
Prussian diet, the government never managed to effect a reform. The last
negotiations about a suffrage reform were outpaced by the revolution of
November 1918.
38 March 27, 1908,4355.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

124

of the people,” “to enable the last of the citizens to be a Kultur­
mensch,” to create “a state which stands on the pinnacle of Kul­
tur,” and to make “Germany highly respected in the world and a
model for all other states.” Complementary to these tenets is the
conviction that there cannot be genuine cultural and political prog­
ress in Germany as long as the Junkers, “the most reactionary class
in the world,” go on ruling.39
' Bebel’s rhetorical strategy scarcely changed during Hohenlohe’s
and Biilow’s tenure. His basic arguments were the following:
(a) The Social Democratic party was not a revolutionary party
but rather a reform party which actually dissipated the revolution­
ary potential in the working class.
(b) It was not actually unpatriotic because it wanted finally a
freer and more beautiful fatherland.
(c) The dominant groups were not genuinely patriotic because
they imposed the burden of military expenditures mainly on the
workers, whose patriotism they distrusted and to whom they would
not grant equal rights and social recognition.
(d) The real revolutionaries were the big industrialists.40
Two examples may be given: During the Russian revolution of
1905 Bebel reminded the ruling classes of the revolutionary poten­
tial accumulating in the working class, but he went on to say that
39 These are phrases from Bebel’s great speech before the Reichstag on
February 26, 1907, 63, when he had to perform the difficult task of rehabili­
tating his party after it had lost fifty per cent of its seats, even though it had
gained more votes, in the nationalist “Hottentot elections” (so called because
of the exploitation of the colonial issue). The tactical contingency, however,
does not make Bebel’s declaration less genuine, as can be seen from a com­
parison with many other Reichstag speeches.
40 Bebel apparently had in mind not the consequences of large-scale organi­
zations, but the uncompromising opposition of big industrialists like Stumm,
Krupp and Heyl against the party and the unions. See August Bebel, Aka­
demiker und Sozialismus, second ed. (Berlin: Verlag der sozialistischen
Monatshefte, 1906), 24. On the same page, Bebel also defined the patriotism
of the workers: “He wants a fatherland in which he can live freely as a citizen
and under conditions worthy of a human being.”

The Antagonistic Discourse

125

the Social Democrats were actually dissipating this force.41 He de-l
dared that the workers could no longer be expected to fight for
the fatherland without worth-while reasons for doing so.
Georg von Rheinbaben, Prussian Minister of Finance, an­
swered Bebel, saying that he did not care for the help of the Social
Democrats in controlling revolutionary tendencies and that he pre­
ferred to rely on the authority of the state. He condemned Bebel
for suggesting that a majority vote of workers and not the call of
the Emperor should decide in the future whether or not the fatherland would be defended.
Two years later Bebel demonstrated the reformist character of
the party by quoting the famous passage in the 1867 preface to
Marx’s Kapital on the “economic laws of modern society which
cannot be disregarded.” 42 He maintained that the Social Democrats
never introduced a bill in parliament directed against the basic
social and political order, and he called socialism “the leaven which
forces bourgeois society ahead.” The beneficent influence of Lassalle, Engels and Marx and the labor movement in general on the
German universities was one way in which Socialism served this
function. The Kathedersozialisten and the Verein für Sozialpolitik
were no longer an object of ridicule for Social Democratic leaders
as they had been in the seventies.43
On several issues, the views of the opponents were diametrically
opposed, while the terms of the charges leveled against one another
were identical. For William II, Biilow, and Bassermann, the leader
of the National Liberals,44 Social Democracy was (a) an obstacle
to cultural progress, (b) a danger to national security, (c) disrup41 December 7, 1905, 162.
42 From the seventies on, Social Democrats used Marx’s supposedly scientific
recognition that a society “can neither clear by bold leaps nor remove by
legal enactments the obstacles offered by the successive phases of its normal
development” as a defensive argument. See Ch. VII: 3 for an elaboration.
Cf. Karl Marx, Capital (New York: The Modern Library, 1936), 14 f.
43 On the Verein für Sozialpolitik see the next chapter.
44 Bassermann, February 25, 1907, 32 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

126

tive to the basic unity of interest between workers and employers.45
For the Social Democrats, (a) and (b) were also true of the imperial
government, the personal regime of the Emperor, the Prussian rul­
ing class and the employers. For Biilow, Germany’s continuously
increasing military power was the basis of her economic prosperity
and the best means of preserving peace.46 For Bebel, the naval
armament program was absurd.47 The main argument of its de­
fenders was that Germany’s large overseas trade needed the protec­
tion of a powerful fleet; Bebel argued that Germany traded mainly
with states that it would have to fight on land (France, Russia) or
states whose power would readily defeat Germany (England,
United States).
These perspectives seem irreconcilable, and they largely were.
However, Biilow was not as fierce an opponent of the Social Demo­
crats as his Reichstag speeches seem to indicate. Since he had to
exaggerate, for tactical reasons, the gap between the Social Demo­
crats and the government, he pronounced Revisionism dead48—
this after it had spread widely within the party and the trade
unions. In private, however, he seems to have been well aware of
the differences within the party and somewhat sympathetic toward
the revisionists.49 Outwardly, national solidarity remained BUlow’s
criterion. Therefore, in 1915, he could say about the Social Demo­
crats after their decision of August 1914 to support the govern­
ment:
If the most radical o f the Social Dem ocrats were to com e to me and
offer his help, I should accept it in full confidence, so genuine is their
45 Biilow, February 26, 1907, 67 C: “In the last analysis the interests of the
employers and the workers are identical.”
46 December 9, 1905, 194 ff.
4* December 7, 1905, 156-59.
48 February 26, 1907, 66.
49 See Harry Marks, “The Sources of Reformism in the Social Democratic
Party of Germany, 1890-1914,” Journal of Modern History, XI:3, 348.

The Antagonistic Discourse

127

feeling of national solidarity. But in other quarters, unhappily, how
much there is o f egoism, pettiness, envy and jealousy.50

5. The Fight Against Second-Class Citizenship
in the Reichstag
In the Reichstag the quest for social recognition was addressed to
the ruling powers, while outside, the party tried to awaken in
millions of workers the feeling that the withholding of universal
and equal suffrage was an insult to their dignity as citizens. For the
Social Democrats, social recognition of the workers was a neces­
sary consequence of the evolution of modern society, especially of
democratization. The Lassalleans as well as the Eisenachers at­
tributed paramount importance to equal suffrage as a major means
of achieving political equality. In 1869, for example, Bebel at­
tacked a bill pending before the North German Reichstag that
would deprive, in his words, “a great number of quite honorable
citizens, through no fault of their own, of their highest right,” the
right to vote, if they are, or were during the preceding year, on
poor relief. “Humanity and justice demand that the poor have
the opportunity to exert their influence through voting in order to
change those conditions which most oppress them.” He anticipated
the argument that “most workers will not be interested in exercis­
ing their political rights because they are so apathetic . . . but this
would be for me only one more reason not to exclude them from
the right to vote; if they voluntarily renounce it, then the misuse
and the dangers . . . which some of you fear, will not occur.” 51
The bill was passed.
50 Theodor Wolff, Through Two Decades (London: Heinemann, 1936), 27.
Biilow said this at a time when he entertained plans to regain the chancellor­
ship with the help of the Social Democrats. Thus considerations of expedi­
ency played a role in his positive as well as his negative statements.
81 Reichstag Protocols of the North German Federation, March 19, 1869, 169.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

128

On the LassaUean side, Försterling, a deputy of the splinter
group sponsored by Countess Hatzfeldt, declared that “we, the
workers, want to solve the social question peacefully and legally
on the basis of the general, equal and direct suffrage.” 5253However,
he did not consider the universal, equal and direct suffrage of the
North German Federation general and equal enough since the
labor representatives neither receive daily allowances nor are they
permitted payment by their organizations. Thus the workers are
handicapped in sending their leaders to parliament. The workers,
however, have become conscious of their “general human rights,”
and this must be recognized by the powers-that-be.58 Statements
like this are typical of the tendency of the Social Democratic rep­
resentatives to consider themselves the spokesmen of the working
masses. For a long time, of course, they spoke only for a small
minority. Bebel acknowledged this limitation of representativeness
in 1875, when he distinguished between three groups of workers:
the first is hostile toward the Reich, the second is already distrust­
ful, and the third still has sympathies for the government and puts
hope in legislation.54 He expected that eventually most workers
would belong to the first group.
Bebel put the demand for social recognition in an evolutionary
perspective. He told parliament that the workers fought a battle
similar to that which the bourgeoisie once fought against feudal­
ism.55 In a debate on more repressive controls over workers’ sick­
ness funds, he pointed out that the bourgeois guilds were considered
political at one time and therefore were often outlawed by em­
perors and patricians.56 The evolutionary theme was particularly
emphasized in a speech of 1890, in which Bebel exposed the “his­
torical irony” that no one had done more than the liberals to
52 April 28, 1869, 644.
53 May 5, 1869,815.
54 November 5, 1875,80.
55 December 14, 1905, 304 D.
58 February 3, 1876, 1124 f.

The Antagonistic Discourse

129

awaken a sense for equality among the people, the equality
now refused to the workers. “We have advanced so far in the mean­
time with regard to political education as well as general culture,
that even the lowliest citizen has a strong need for equal rights.” 57
“The whole German working class, as far as it is independent,” has
for twelve years been made to feel that it is made up of “secondclass citizens.” Bebel assured his parliamentary colleagues that the
awareness of being outlawed will be reflected in the attitudes of
the workers toward the existing political and social order. “Noth­
ing can enrage the individual citizen more than to recognize that
he is not treated as someone else who, as a human being, is com­
pletely his equal.” 58
Eventually the Social Democrats developed a pluralistic theory
to press their demand for social recognition. The standard argu­
ment that the workers did not want privileges but freedom and
equality for all was a stepping stone toward such a theory.59 Re­
lated to this was the argument that the ruling groups were con­
demning the Social Democrats and the unions for trying to defend
the economic interests of the workers when they themselves were
protecting their own economic interests. The veteran Social Demo- *
cratic leader Frohme told the Reichstag in 1889 that the dissatis07 At about the same time the prominent law historian Rudolf Sohm attacked
the inconsistency and insufficiency of the liberal attempts to stop the develop­
ment toward democratization initiated by liberalism itself. Sohm then played
a political role as contributor to the Allgemeine Konservative Monatsschrift.
“The ideas which now carry the flaming torch into the masses and incite the
fourth against the third estate originated within the latter. What was written in
the books of the educated and the scholars, this and nothing else is now
preached in the streets. . . . The Bildung of the 19th century preaches its
own downfall. As did the Bildung of the 18th century, the Bildung of the 19th
carries the revolution under its heart. If it gives birth, then the child who was
nourished with the mother’s blood will murder her.” Quoted in Eckart Kehr,
“Das soziale System der Reaktion in Preussen unter Puttkamer,” Die Gesell­
schaft, 1929, 2, 254 ff.
w January 25, 1890, 1227.
60 Cf. Bebel’s speech of February 3, 1876, 1124 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

130

faction of the workers is still interpreted by the governmental press
as the result of agitation.60 Thus the legitimacy of their dissatisfac­
tion, which Frohme felt was primarily caused by rising food and
housing costs, was denied. On the other hand, the ruling groups
considered their dissatisfaction with economic developments legiti­
mate enough to establish high tariffs and to appropriate more
money for the household of the monarch. The attempts of the
unions, however, to improve the economic conditions of the work­
ers are denounced as spurious and “actually” aimed at revolution
{Umsturz). The laws are not only used against “revolutionary”
activities of workers’ associations, as the government maintains,
but against all their activities. Every trade union meeting, every
meeting of executive and strike committees has to be announced in
advance to the police and is subject to surveillance.61
Bebel himself finally elaborated the demand for equal rights into
an explicit pluralist scheme. Employers and workers should have
equal chances to fight for their interests. For example, in 1905, he
compared the pressure of workers on strike breakers with the pres­
sure of employers’ associations on deviant employers. In order to
win approval for the workers’ actions, he conceded to the employ­
ers the right to pressure other employers and to fight the workers—
“C’est la guerre”— but capital and labor should have equal chances,
and the state should set the rules of the game. For the present he
recognized that the employers were more organized than the work­
ers and that they had stronger means of enforcing conformity. For
the rest of his lengthy speech Bebel followed the familiar pattern,
using pending bills or government and employers’ practices as so
many examples of the lack of social recognition. He pointed to the
60 November 4, 1889, 109.
61 These interferences must have contributed considerably to the alienation of
the workers from the government. The workers were continually reminded of
their tutelage by the ubiquitous presence of policemen, usually sitting next to
the chairman or the speaker of a meeting and declaring it closed if something
was said that they considered a violation of the laws.

The Antagonistic Discourse

131

economic hardships of the workers, the lockouts, and the political
inequality and concluded that these strengthened the class con­
sciousness of the workers and would result in the further expansion
of the labor movement. He exclaimed that “the worker will no
longer tolerate his treatment as a pariah.” 62
Bebel and other Social Democrats63 clearly accepted the theory
that social recognition would diminish working-class protest. In
the same speech Bebel explained to the parliament that the Social
Democratic movement had up to now made less progress in Eng­
land than in Germany because “the English bourgeoisie has been
reasonable enough for decades to meet the wishes of the English
workers in every way” and because it has been paying more taxes
than the German bourgeoisie.64
62 December 14, 1905, 303-7. The speech was also typical in its determinaistic parts: Capitalism inevitably strengthens the Social Democrats by en­
larging the proletariat. A revolution will be “a necessary reaction” if the
ruling classes continue their old policies. In his answer to Bebel, Chancellor
Biilow replied with the demand for equal rights for Germany in her compara­
tive position toward England and other countries: “How often have the Social
Democrats declared that our world policy is responsible for ill-feeling, espe­
cially in England. How often have I said that we understand nothing else
under world policy but the demand for the same consideration all other
countries have in regard to trade, industry and shipping and that we want to
stand on a footing of equality with the whole world.” December 14, 1905, 317.
63Frohme, for example, asserted in the speech mentioned above that
recent strikes in Silesia and Westphalia would not have happened if the em­
ployers had been willing to grant equal rights. Loc. cit.
64 Accepting an inverse relationship between social recognition and revolu­
tionary mentality, a number of observers of the German labor movement
such as Jaurès and Sombart suggested that the lack of revolutionary spirit
among German workers had to do with the early granting of universal suf­
frage. See W. Sombart, op. cit., 367, also there on Jaurès. For the late sixties
it seems indeed true that nationalist enthusiasm and the granting of universal
suffrage on a federal level induced in many workers a positive attitude toward
the existing political system, while their predominantly traditionalist atti­
tudes inclined them in the same direction. Even organized workers came to
accept the dominant system, especially because Lassalle’s major demand had
been universal suffrage. See Gustav Mayer, “Trennung,” op. cit., 27. But
the granting of equal suffrage for the Reichstag was soon offset by prosecu-

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

130

faction of the workers is still interpreted by the governmental press
as the result of agitation.60 Thus the legitimacy of their dissatisfac­
tion, which Frohme felt was primarily caused by rising food and
housing costs, was denied. On the other hand, the ruling groups
considered their dissatisfaction with economic developments legiti­
mate enough to establish high tariffs and to appropriate more
money for the household of the monarch. The attempts of the
unions, however, to improve the economic conditions of the work­
ers are denounced as spurious and “actually” aimed at revolution
(Umsturz). The laws are not only used against “revolutionary”
activities of workers’ associations, as the government maintains,
but against all their activities. Every trade union meeting, every
meeting of executive and strike committees has to be announced in
advance to the police and is subject to surveillance.61
Bebel himself finally elaborated the demand for equal rights into
an explicit pluralist scheme. Employers and workers should have
equal chances to fight for their interests. For example, in 1905, he
compared the pressure of workers on strike breakers with the pres­
sure of employers’ associations on deviant employers. In order to
win approval for the workers’ actions, he conceded to the employ­
ers the right to pressure other employers and to fight the workers—
“C’est la guerre”—but capital and labor should have equal chances,
and the state should set the rules of the game. For the present he
recognized that the employers were more organized than the work­
ers and that they had stronger means of enforcing conformity. For
the rest of his lengthy speech Bebel followed the familiar pattern,
using pending bills or government and employers’ practices as so
many examples of the lack of social recognition. He pointed to the
60 November 4, 1889, 109.
61 These interferences must have contributed considerably to the alienation of
the workers from the government. The workers were continually reminded of
their tutelage by the ubiquitous presence of policemen, usually sitting next to
the chairman or the speaker of a meeting and declaring it closed if something
was said that they considered a violation of the laws.

The Antagonistic Discourse

131

economic hardships of the workers, the lockouts, and the political
inequality and concluded that these strengthened the class con­
sciousness of the workers and would result in the further expansion
of the labor movement. He exclaimed that “the worker will no
longer tolerate his treatment as a pariah.” 62
Bebel and other Social Democrats63 clearly accepted the theory
that social recognition would diminish working-class protest. In
the same speech Bebel explained to the parliament that the Social
Democratic movement had up to now made less progress in Eng­
land than in Germany because “the English bourgeoisie has been
reasonable enough for decades to meet the wishes of the English
workers in every way” and because it has been paying more taxes
than the German bourgeoisie.64
62 December 14, 1905, 303-7. The speech was also typical in its determinaistic parts: Capitalism inevitably strengthens the Social Democrats by en­
larging the proletariat. A revolution will be “a necessary reaction” if the
ruling classes continue their old policies. In his answer to Bebel, Chancellor
Biilow replied with the demand for equal rights for Germany in her compara­
tive position toward England and other countries: “How often have the Social
Democrats declared that our world policy is responsible for ill-feeling, espe­
cially in England. How often have I said that we understand nothing else
under world policy but the demand for the same consideration all other
countries have in regard to trade, industry and shipping and that we want to
stand on a footing of equality with the whole world.” December 14, 1905, 317.
63Frohme, for example, asserted in the speech mentioned above that
recent strikes in Silesia and Westphalia would not have happened if the em­
ployers had been willing to grant equal rights. Loc. cit.
64 Accepting an inverse relationship between social recognition and revolu­
tionary mentality, a number of observers of the German labor movement
such as Jaurès and Sombart suggested that the lack of revolutionary spirit
among German workers had to do with the early granting of universal suf­
frage. See W. Sombart, op. cit., 367, also there on Jaurès. For the late sixties
it seems indeed true that nationalist enthusiasm and the granting of universal
suffrage on a federal level induced in many workers a positive attitude toward
the existing political system, while their predominantly traditionalist atti­
tudes inclined them in the same direction. Even organized workers came to
accept the dominant system, especially because Lassalle’s major demand had
been universal suffrage. See Gustav Mayer, “Trennung,” op. cit., 27. But
the granting of equal suffrage for the Reichstag was soon offset by prosecu-

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

132

A logical result of the pluralism acknowledged by Bebel was the
development of the quest for social recognition into a theory of
solid bargaining with the dominant system. The revisionist Richard
Calwer wrote, at the same time that Bebel made his pluralist con­
fession, that
. . . the workers strive for political power and recognition: They are
willing to take responsibilities, but they also want the corresponding
rights. The opponents of the labor m ovement, above all the govern­
ment, show not the slightest intention of compromising with workers*
demands for political equality. In a difficult battle the workers are
forced to advance slowly, step by step. And now it is seriously ex­
pected o f the workers to mobilize their parliamentary influence in the
Reichstag without any compensation, without any guarantees, in order
to expand the army and navy. Perhaps we could talk about this if the
organization o f the army and navy were more in the interests o f the
people, if the purpose o f the army were only to fight the external
enem y, if the costs for the defense of the country were less of a burden
to the workers. But what is the situation at present? The Social D em o­
cratic movement is considered the domestic enemy, the army the bul­
wark against the advance o f the labor movement, and the treatment

tion and persecution and, in the long run, by the government’s refusal or
inability to change the three-class suffrage in Prussia. This was the root of the
opposition spirit of masses of workers against the government, a spirit which
had originally been rather weak in the Lassallean movement. See Schröder,
Geschichte, op. cit., 8. Federal universal and equal suffrage and a precarious
right of combination, which did not apply to agricultural workers, seamen,
state employees in administrations and government industries, could not
“satiate” the workers, contrary to what Jaurès and Sombart suggested. The
three-class suffrage in the two most industrialized states, Prussia and Saxony,
became the symbol for the unwillingness of the dominant system to accord
social recognition. (In Saxony a more liberal suffrage was replaced from 1896
to 1909 by the three-class suffrage, thus eliminating a sizable Social Demo­
cratic activity. The Social Democrats were helpless vis-à-vis this change be­
cause they were committed to election campaigns as their major means of
political action. The suffrage was also changed in order to thwart the Social
Democrats after 1890 in Hamburg, Lübeck and parts of Thuringia.

The Antagonistic Discourse

133

of the common man in the army does not meet in the least the demands
which German workers are entitled to raise.05

Some revisionists equated socialism with the attainment of equal
rights. Thus the revisionist Heinrich Peus told parliament in 1906
that workers become Social Democrats because they want equal
rights. “This is the core of all our aspirations, the rest is mainly a
consequence of automatic economic and technological develop­
ment.” This reliance on automatic development made it possible
for him to say that once “equality is obtained, the Social Demo­
cratic party will be superfluous, and democracy and socialism will
be the dominant principles of society.” 6566 The revisionists could
plead without mental reservations for social recognition and criti­
cize the government with genuine indignation for refusing it.
Despite their conviction that parliamentarism was a step on the
path toward socialism, orthodox Marxist believers were some­
times ambiguous in their attitude toward social recognition of the
workers within the existing system. They vociferously demanded
equality of rights, but they also expected or hoped that this recog­
nition would not be forthcoming. They thought that objective tend­
encies— that is, the continuous growth of the proletariat and the
objectively determined inability of the ruling groups to make genu­
ine concessions—would finally result in a revolutionary situation
and insure ultimate victory. As usual, Bebel expressed both tend­
encies. For decades, he pleaded for the social recognition of the
workers and warned the ruling groups that they would be re­
sponsible for a revolution if they refused equality of rights. And
in his speech to students in 1897, he granted that a multitude of
measures was conceivable to make possible a gradual transforma­
tion of society. However, he thought that these would not be taken
65 Richard Calwer, “Englands Absichten und die deutsche Sozialdemo­
kratie,” Sozialistische Monatshefte, 11:11, November 1905, 921.
öo February 12, 1906, 1226.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

134

by the ruling classes. This refusal would make it inevitable that
the ever growing proletariat would finally act on its own behalf.67
The last plea for political equality was made during the First
World War, when many Social Democrats hoped for decisive con­
cessions from the regime for the postwar period. One year before
the split of the party in 1917, the leader of the right wing, Fried­
rich Ebert, expressed the sentiments and expectations of the
moderate majority of functionaries and perhaps also of the majority
of the rank and file in this forceful plea:
The masses returned from the trenches will be imbued with strong selfconfidence. Theirs will be the resolution that the state for which they
offered their lives must not become again the administrative machinery
of a small privileged class. This new generation of the trench warfare
that faced death and danger for long months, death which knows no
classes and no exceptions—this new generation will not permit itself
to be driven again into the barbed-wire entanglements of the threeclass suffrage. This new generation demands freedom and political
equality and it will know how to gain it by fighting if necessary. There­
fore the hour of peace must be the hour of political equality.68
67 Bebel, Akademiker und Sozialismus, op. cit., 19 ff. Bebel’s mistake was
not so much a false assessment of the mentality of the upper classes in Im­
perial Germany as an underestimation of the political consequences of the
slowly improving standard of living and especially of the rise of the new
middle classes. He emphasized the potentialities of modern technology and
large-scale economic organization, but did not take sufficiently into account
the impact of their ongoing realization. In the 1905 preface to the second
edition of his speech he saw no reason for revising what he had said in 1897.
Also in 1905, von Elm who was slowly moving from the orthodox to the
revisionist side expected that the intransigence and implacability of labor’s
enemies would preserve “the spirit of class solidarity and of socialism.” Dis­
cussing his views, the orthodox Strobel considered it possible that the alle­
giance of the workers might be sought by the employers and the government,
but he relied on the “unchangeable developmental tendencies of capitalism
. . . to create an ever stronger disposition for the understanding of socialism
and, through it, for the proletarian class struggle.” H. Strobel, “Gewerk­
schaften und ‘sozialistischer Geist,’ ” Neue Zeit, 23:2, 1905, 569.
68 Ebert in the Reichstag, April 5, 1916, see Schriften, op. cit., 315.

The Antagonistic Discourse

135

Two years later Imperial Germany was destroyed in the wake
of military collapse. This was largely due to wartime frustra­
tions, but allegiance to the Empire would probably not have reached
the breaking point if millions of workers had not felt a lack of
social and political recognition. The second-class citizenship of the
workers lasted formally until the end of the war, and the lack of
political recognition for the labor movement until 1914.

VI
Counter- Tendencies

Class cleavage pervaded Imperial Germany because the authori­
tarian state and the liberal bourgeoisie were unwilling to integrate
the labor movement into the national community through com­
promises resulting in far-reaching democratization. This has been
my basic thesis. I will show in this chapter that the antagonistic
relationship between the dominant system and the labor movement
was not basically changed, but only ameliorated by various countertendencies. Directly concerned with the amelioration of the class
cleavage, or pursuing policies which had this effect, were: (1) the
Prussian and Imperial conservative officialdom responsible for the
welfare reforms, (2) the academic social reformers (KathederSozia­
listen) and the Verein für Sozialpolitik, (3) the South German gov­
ernments, state diets and the Social Democratic factions in these
diets, and (4) a younger generation of liberals. Furthermore, as
time went on, there was more heterogeneity in the public reactions
to the Social Democratic labor movement, especially after the turn
of the century. I will contrast these counter-tendencies with the
predominant trends.1

1. The Academic Social Reformers
In 1872, about a decade before the beginning of the welfare legis­
lation, the Verein für Sozialpolitik was founded by academicians,
politicians and higher civil servants who were interested in welfare

Counter-Tendendes

137

legislation and in the “Social Question” generally. The Verein be­
came the leading academic vehicle for social reform and published
through the decades a very large number of studies on the social
implications of industrialization and on democratization.1 The
members of the association adhered to quite diverse points of view,
but they shared a strong opposition to laissez-faire liberalism and
a conviction that legislative intervention in the class conflicts of
the industrializing society was necessary. Prominent as founders
and famous as the leading representatives of the two distinct view­
points within the association were the economists Gustav Schmoller
and Lujo Brentano.12 Schmoller wanted the “Social Question”
solved by a monarchy imbued with strong prerogatives and obliga­
tions and by a conscientious and intelligent civil service which
would be independent of the industrial aristocracy. Brentano em­
phasized more strongly the importance of countervailing power
between capital and labor.
At the first meeting of those interested in taking a stand against
laissez-faire liberalism— many of whom were called KathederSozialisten (Socialists of the Chair) by their laissez-faire opponents
— Schmoller explained that most of the participants were motivated
by a grave concern about
. . . the deep cleavage characteristic o f our social conditions, the
struggle between entrepreneurs and workers, between the propertied
and non-propertied classes, and the distinct possibility o f a social revo­
lution in the far-distant future. . . . they never regard the state, as
does natural law and the Manchester school, as a necessary evil which
should be restricted as much as possible; for them the state is the great­
est moral institution for the education of mankind. They are sincerely
for the constitutional system, but they do not want an alternative class
rule by the various antagonistic econom ic classes; they want a strong
1 Cf. Franz Boese, Geschichte des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, 1872-1939,
Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, vol. 188 (Berlin: Duncker, 1939).
2 Cf. Lujo Brentano, Mein Leben im Kampf um die soziale Entwicklung
Deutschlands (Jena: Diederichs, 1931). See also Werner Barich, Lujo
Brentano als Sozialpolitiker, Ph.D. dissertation, Frankfurt University, 1936.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

138

state which legislates above the egoistic class interests, administrates
with justice, protects the weak and elevates the lower classes; they con­
sider the 200-year-old battle which the Prussian civil service and the
Prussian monarchy have waged for equality o f rights, for the abolition
o f all privileges of the higher classes, for the emancipation and eleva­
tion o f the lower classes as our German state’s best heritage to which
we must always be faithful.3

The solution of the problem of class cleavage was vital for
Schmoller since “all higher civilization, like that of the Greeks, the
Romans and other peoples . . . perished in class struggles and
revolutions caused by the inability to reconciliate the higher and
the lower classes.” Schmoller demanded the integration of the lower
classes into the national community in order to prevent the distant
possibility of a social revolution, which could occur “if it proves
impossible on the basis of equality of rights, universal compulsory
education, universal draft and all other reforms contemplated to
elevate the lower classes, to educate and reconciliate them to such
an extent that they fit harmoniously and peacefully into the organ­
ism of society and state.” 4 Schmoller was for constitutional mon­
archism because he considered parliamentary government, and a
democratic republic in particular, more prone to class rule and
class struggle. “Parliamentarism and self-government are the high
goals of every free people, but in the course of history they have
often resulted, after a short period of accomplishments, in a class
rule of the propertied . . . the worst class rule has not existed in
monarchies but in republics.” Schmoller advocated piecemeal re­
forms of the existing conditions and criticized the Social Democrats
for their utopian plans. He could only see in them “the youthful
fervor of the great emergent social movement. Our Social Demo­
crats are somewhat different from but scarcely worse than English
3 Gustav Schmoller, “Rede zur Eröffnung der Besprechung über die soziale
Frage in Eisenach den 6. Oktober 1872,” in Zur Sozial-und Gewerbepolitik
der Gegenwart (Leipzig: Duncker, 1890), 5 and 9.
4 Op. cit., 10 f.

Counter-Tendendes

139

Chartism was in its time.” He condemned the appeal of some Social
Democratic leaders to hatred, envy and covetousness, but he
acknowledged that others were “personally most honorable.” 5
With these views Schmoller expressed the opinions of a small
minority. His 1874 speech on “The Social Question and the Prus­
sian State,” from which the last quotations were taken, was re­
printed by the Lassallean Neue Sodaldemokrat but attacked by
many liberal newspapers; some outraged readers demanded court
action. Great public attention was aroused by Heinrich von
Treitschke’s answer. In his essay “Socialism and Its Patrons” the
prominent National Liberal historian and most famous panegyrist
of Prussian glory and German greatness vigorously attacked the
Kathedersozialisten and the Social Democrats. He was sympathetic
toward state intervention, but the “Social Question” was for him
first of all a “showy term of neo-Napoleonic derivation” and Social
Democracy a French export, bankrupt in its country of origin.
Social Democracy was an expression of noxious ideas and desires:
“The guiding principle of the whole movement is unmistakably
naked sensuality, the fundamental denial of all that raises man
above animal.” 6
Because of his belief in the paramount cultural importance of
the state, Treitschke also directed his venom against laissez-faire
liberals, but he agreed with them that the emergence of the “Social
Question” was due not so much to social development as to polit­
ical factors, such as the introduction of equal suffrage for the
Reichstag. Democrats of the year 1848, like Bamberger, Oppen8 Id., “Die soziale Frage und der preussische Staat,” op. cit., 49 and 53.
6 Heinrich von Treitschke, Der Sozialismus und seine Gönner (Berlin:
Reimer, 1875), 3; first published in the Preussische Jahrbücher, Vol. 34,
1874. Treitschke yielded great influence not as a parliamentary deputy, but
as editor of the Preussische Jahrbücher from 1866 until 1889; before him the
journal was edited by Rudolf Haym (cf. Ch. II, 32) and after him by Hans
Delbrück for three decades (cf. p. 146 of this chapter). On the character, in­
fluence and distribution of the journal, see Annelise Thimme, Hans Del­
brück als Kritiker der Wilhelminischen Epoche (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1955),
12.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

140

heim and von Unruh, who by then belonged to the left wing of the
National Liberals and adhered to laissez-faire, long ago had re­
vised their earlier positive views on universal and equal suffrage.
Bamberger went so far as to consider the problems arising from
industrialization “not a consequence of misery, but of the improve­
ment of the general condition of mankind,” and H. B. Oppenheim,
who had coined the term “Kathedersozialist,” denied that there was
a “Social Question” or even a “housing question”—meaning that
conditions had been worse in earlier times.7 For these laissez-faire
liberals, welfare politics meant socialism. They charged the Verein
für Sozialpolitik with producing an artificial class gap between the
liberal bourgeoisie and the working class. The majority of the edu­
cated and propertied middle classes sided with their position
against the academic social reformers.8
7 Quoted in Gagel, op. cit., 80.
8 Schmoller described in 1897 the changing relationships over 25 years of the
Verein to various political groups and the changing perspectives of the public.
Between 1872 and 1875 the adherents of laissez-faire in business and govern­
ment were the strongest critics, while the conservatives and Bismarck took a
benevolent attitude. In the eighties, after the beginning of the welfare legisla­
tion, the Social Democratic attacks mounted. With the end of the Kultur­
kampf in the second half of the eighties, a rapprochement between the Center
Party and the Verein materialized. Because of the Kulturkampf it could not
be accomplished earlier, despite the fact that both “were friendly towards
labor for similar ethical, religious and humane reasons.” A sympathetic rela­
tionship developed also with the ‘‘Protestant-Social movement . . . since
most of us are Protestants.” From 1892 until 1895 the progress of welfare
legislation was arrested and the Verein’s relationship with the government
was again strained. “Zur 25jährigen Feier des Vereins für Sozialpolitik,”
September 23, 1897, in Zwanzig Jahre Deutscher Politik, op. cit., 31. See
p. 32 for other changes in the attitudes of the parties toward the association.
A few examples of the early Social Democratic attacks on the academic social
reformers may be given. In 1872 the Volksstaat (87) lashed out against their
welfare plans, condemning them as completely insufficient; it spoke of the
intellectual superiority of Western bourgeois thinkers like Sismonde Sismondi and John Stuart Mill. “The Socialists of the Chair labor with a pair of
spectacles and hemorrhoids— this is the way all German scholarly work is
done” (82). In two other Eisenacher journals the academic social reformers

Counter-Tendendes

141

The Protestant Schmoller thought that despite his affirmation of
Prussia’s historical role he had “basically remained a South Ger­
man liberal,” just as Chancellor Prince Hohenlohe believed him­
self to be.*9 Lujo Brentano was, like Hohenlohe, a Catholic and a
liberal, but in contrast to Schmoller and Hohenlohe, he was not a
partisan of Bismarck and Prussia. He looked to England for his
political model. Brentano held the view that the workers were fight­
ing the economic and political order because the state had refused
them the chance to defend their interests within the established
order. Since the workers were considered “insubordinate” when
they fought for their interests, they had come to see themselves as
rebels. Brentano condemned the persecution of beliefs which were
not expressed in action. As usual, he referred to English examples
in order to show that labor leaders allowed to represent labor inter­
ests would act with moderation, although they would still adhere
to their old radical creed. In fact, their adherence to their radical
beliefs made it psychologically possible for them to become moder­
ate in practice. Any attempt at forcing them to abjure their old
beliefs would only radicalize them.10
Neither the government and the employers nor the public were
ready to accept such a view when Brentano made this statement
in 1890. Significant but not decisive changes had occurred since
1874, when Schmoller and Treitschke clashed over the problem
of integrating the labor movement into the nation. In the meantime
were called “Royal Prussian Social Humanists,” timid and incapable of stop­
ping the advance of socialism. The Lassallean Neue Sozialdemokrat stated
simply: “Incurable idiocy . . . the mountains labor, and a mouse is born”
(1872, 119). Quoted in Schuster, op. cit., 104 f, 80, 70. About the turn of
the century, the Social Democratic attitude toward the Verein für Sozial­
politik had become rather conciliatory.
9 Schmoller, “Die preussische Wahlrechtsreform,” op. cit., 65.
10 Cf. Lujo Brentano, “Arbeitseinstellungen und die Fortbildung des Arbeits­
vertrags,” report presented at the proceedings of September 1890, Schriften
des Vereins für Sozialpolitik (Leipzig: Duncker, 1890), Vol. 47, 124 ff.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

142

the great imperial social welfare legislation had been instituted.11
This meant a triumph for the academic social reformers over the
laissez-faire liberals. But the class cleavage that the academic re­
formers wanted to diminish continued unabated because the anti­
socialist law of 1878 preceded the welfare legislation. Then, in
1890, the antisocialist law lapsed, and the public accepted the wel­
fare legislation and for the first time showed some sympathy for
workers during a major strike, the great miners’ strike. Even
William II made a benevolent gesture by receiving a delegation of
striking workers. The basic difficulty of the “positive” attitude of
the Emperor, the reformist bureaucracy, the public and most aca­
demic social reformers was their insistence that, in gratitude for the
welfare legislation and the relaxation of political repression or just
for the demonstration of benevolent paternalism, the workers
should recognize the dominant system explicitly and abandon the
Social Democratic labor movement, unless its leaders radically
changed their intransigence. Therefore, Brentano’s call to accept
the Social Democrats as they were appeared unjustified. The Social
Democrats were at best to be tolerated. At the same meeting where
111 will omit details about the Imperial social welfare legislation; whatever
positive short-range political effect it might have had was cancelled by the
antisocialist legislation. Furthermore, the welfare legislation stopped short
of what was considered most important by many workers: protective laws
which would go beyond accident, disability, sickness and old age insurance.
In the long run the legislation passed helped to prevent an aggravation of the
class cleavage. The literature on the welfare legislation is large. I will cite
only a few outstanding writings by or about those who carried it through:
H. Berlepsch, Sozialpolitische Erfahrungen und Erinnerungen (MünchenGladbach: Volksvereinsverlag, 1925); Hans Rothfels, Theodor Lohmann und
die Kampfjahre der staatlichen Sozialpolitik (Berlin: Mittler, 1927); on the
resumption of welfare legislation after 1900 under Count Posadowsky, see
Johannes Penzler, Graf Posadowsky als Finanz-, Sozial-und Handelspolitiker
(Leipzig: Weber, 1907 and 1908), 2 vols.; Leopold von Wiese, Graf Posa­
dowsky als Sozialpolitiker (Cologne: Christlicher Gewerkschaftsverlag,
1909); on the Social Democratic reactions to the welfare legislation, see
Hertha Wolff, Die Stellung der Sozialdemokratie zur deutschen Arbeiter­
versicherungsgesetzgebung von ihrer Entstehung an bis zur Reichsversiche­
rungsordnung, Ph.D. dissertation, Freiburg University, 1933.

Counter-Tendendes

143

Brentano spoke, Bueck, the secretary general of the powerful Zen­
tralverband Deutscher Industrieller, argued that the requirements
of efficiency and profitableness within the plant and within the capi­
talist economy could not be met if the workers and their organiza­
tions were given equality in relation to the employers. He added
that the employers would not resist the organization of the workers,
but that “they will never, in as far as ‘never’ can be said at all, be
willing to negotiate with representatives of workers’ organizations
on the basis of equality as it is understood here.” 12 Big business
stuck to this policy until 1918 by steadfastly refusing to deal with
unions and thus greatly contributed to the perpetuation of the class
cleavage.

2. Trends and Counter-Trends in the Liberal Parties
Despite the relaxation of political repression after 1890 and de­
spite the gradually increasing cooperation of party and union func­
tionaries in the federal insurance administration, labor courts,
municipal parliaments and agencies, some of the lines drawn
sharply during the antisocialist legislation persisted. One of the
abiding legacies of the antisocialist legislation was the establish­
ment of the liberal parties as mere middle-class parties. The liberals
had always been bourgeois, but believed themselves the representa­
tives of the whole people. This belief was now shattered. The old
belief that education would make the masses more “enlightened,”
meaning moderate, was also abandoned. To many liberals it ap­
peared that the workers had been captured, in Unruh’s words, by
Social Democratic appeals to “selfishness, the desire for other peo­
ple’s property, for the easy life without strain, even for the rule over
the well-to-do and educated people” and that they had been taken
12 Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, op. cit., 151.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

144

in “by the continuous assertion that capital exploited the working
class.” In complete resignation Unruh concluded: “At best, genera­
tions will pass before the most numerous electoral class will see
through the sophisms in the seductive speeches and writings, if it
ever manages to do so.” 13
The loss of working class support had more direct consequences
for the Progressives than for the National Liberals. The Progres­
sives had claimed to be a people’s party. But in 1878 Virchow, the
famous pathologist and a vocal opponent of Bismarck, declared that
. . . in fact we do not want to have the real Social Dem ocrats among
us. The Social Dem ocrat who purposively pursues his aims is our direct
enem y . . . even more than the conservatives. They may com e to us
voluntarily and join us, but we will not woo them. We must be inde­
pendent o f the government above and of the masses below, who threaten
society. . . . Therefore I think that we must look to the right for sup­
port among independent men: the industrious people, the propertied,
the good old German Bürgertum. . . . A particular Social Question
does not exist for us, we are concerned with the totality of all cultural
issues.14

Thus Virchow and Richter, Bismarck’s most intransigent liberal
foe, led the Progressive party to the right and made it explicitly a
middle-class party. The shift was completed when the party fused
in 1884 with the strong faction of laissez-faire liberals who had left
the National Liberal party. The left wing of the Progressives was
either silenced or left the party. The new party was greatly weak­
ened because the bourgeoisie had ceased to be a broad social basis
for progressive liberalism. Progressive judges and higher civil serv­
ants were eliminated during the Puttkamer era (1878-88) or died
13 Quoted in Gagel, op. cit., 87 f. The survivors of the old liberal generation,
with their commitment to an abstract humanism, also felt pessimistic or help­
less toward the population growth and other incisive changes brought about
by industrialization. Cf. letters of Riimelin to Rudolf Haym in 1879 and
of Roggenbach to v. Stosch in 1893, op. cit., 154f.
14 Quoted in Gagel, 97 f.

Counter-Tendendes

145

out. The aristocratic style of life was increasingly imitated in the
bourgeoisie; to be an officer of the reserve was a dominant aspira­
tion, widespread and important for social mobility and civilian self­
esteem.15 Major reasons for these changes can be seen in the con­
servative recognition by the eighties of the constitutional regime and
the Reich as Bismarck had set it up, and in the bourgeois satis­
faction with the achievement of national unification and major
constitutional goals. The way for a rapprochement between aris­
tocracy and bourgeoisie was open and resulted in the lasting, though
sometimes precarious, alliance of Western big business interests
and East Elbian agricultural interests. This alliance formed the core
of what came to be called Miquel’s Sammlungspolitik, a policy of
allying conservative and liberal, Catholic and Protestant, middle
and upper class groups in one great coalition for the defense of
the existing order.16 This alliance dominated the domestic political
scene until the First World War, though it was weakened by the
breakdown of Biilow’s liberal-conservative coalition in 1909.
Johann von Miquel was Prussian Minister of Finance from 1890
until 1901.17 He had been a democrat in 1848. Thirty years later
he was instrumental in leading the National Liberals to the right.
In the early nineties he introduced progressive income tax legisla­
tion, but this attempt at social justice had the political effect of
diminishing the voting power of the lower income groups since the
right to vote in one of the three classes was now dependent on the
income tax paid by an individual. After the great Social Demo15 Cf. Eckart Kehr, “Zur Genesis des Kgl. preussischen Reserveoffiziers,”
Die Gesellschaft, 1928:2, 492-502; Schücking, op. cit., 24-29, and Karl
Demeter for a general appraisal of the impact of the officers’ corps and the
reserve officers on German society, Das deutsche Offizierskorps in seinen
historisch-soziologischen Grundlagen (Berlin: Hobbing, 1930).
10 The alliance of Western big business interests and Eastern agrarian in­
terests led to foreign policies which antagonized England as well as Russia
and contributed to the diplomatic isolation of Imperial Germany. Cf.
G. W. F. Hallgarten, Imperialismus vor 1914 (Munich: Beck, 1951), 2 vols.
17 On Miquel see Hans Herzfeld, Johannes von Miquel (Detmold: Meyer,
1938), 2 vols.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

146

cratic electoral success in 1890, Miquel was the most energetic
National Liberal advocate of a coup d’état, to abolish universal
suffrage for the Reichstag, but within the liberal camp he found
resistance among the Progressives and the South German National
Liberals. His subsequent Sammlungspolitik was successful, but at
the same time new ideological counter-currents arose within
liberalism.
Rudolf von Bennigsen, the leader of the National Liberals from
1866 until 1898, and his South German successor Ernst Bassermann were basically in favor of extending more rights and responsi­
bilities to the working class. However, ideologically more important
for the development of right-wing liberalism was the editorial vic­
tory of Hans Delbrück, a Free Conservative Reichstag member,
over Treitschke, whom he succeeded in 1889 as editor of the very
influential Preussische Jahrbücher. Within his party Delbrück lost
out to Stumm-Halberg, after whom the second half of the nineties
was called the “Era Stumm,” when welfare legislation came to a
virtual standstill.18 Delbrück left the party at the beginning of this
18 The definitive biography on Bennigsen is Hermann Oncken, Rudolf von
Bennigsen (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1910); on Bassermann see
Theodor Eschenburg, Bassermann und die Blockpolitik, Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Berlin, 1929; on Delbrück, see Annelise Thimme, op. cit.;
Stumm-Halberg, who was elevated into peerage, was the most powerful
figure in the Saar industry and dominated its welfare schemes no less than
the area’s political climate; cf. Hellwig, op. cit., on “Era Stumm” esp. 50656. German big business instituted extensive private welfare programs, but
insisted on absolute managerial authority, on being, as the phrase had it,
“master in its own house” {Herr im Hause). On private welfare measures of
industry see Alexander von Brandt, Zur sozialen Entwicklung im Saarge­
biet (Leipzig: Duncker, 1904); Adolf Günther, Die Wohlfahrtseinrichtun­
gen der Arbeitgeber. Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, Vol. 114, 1905;
Julius Post and H. Albrecht, Musterstätten persönlicher Fürsorge von
Arbeitgebern für ihre Geschäftsangehörigen (Berlin: Oppenheim, 1893),
2 vols.; Richard Roesicke, “Über das Verhältnis der Arbeitgeber zu ihren
Arbeitnehmern,” Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung, Vol. 7, 1893, 1-22; Rudolf
Schwenger, “Die betriebliche Sozialpolitik in der westdeutschen Grosseisen­
industrie,” Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, Vol. 186, 1934.
Relevant for the position of the minority of more liberal employers are

Counter-Tendendes

147

era. He was almost as nationalistic and monarchical as Treitschke,
but he advocated a balance between crown and parliament. Del­
brück did not want further democratization, as did his friend Fried­
rich Naumann.
Before turning to Pastor Naumann’s important role in German
liberalism I will deal with Max Weber, who influenced him greatly.
Weber, the son of a National Liberal Reichstag deputy and, at the
time, a brilliant young scholar of law and economics, was to remain
much more of an outsider in German liberal politics than Naumann.
He was very active in the Verein für Sozialpolitik, but he held no
political office and was, moreover, incapacitated for political and
academic activities for half a decade after 1897. From the begin­
ning of his career in the early nineties he was not much concerned
with liberal humanitarian reform, conservative welfare legislation or
the Marxist problem of alienation; decisive for him was the assertion
of the nation’s welfare in a world of power politics. In his 1895
inaugural speech at the University of Freiburg on “Nation State
and Economic Policy,” which greatly impressed Naumann, Weber
argued that economic policy had to serve the power interests of
the nation.*19 The nation state was nothing mystical for Weber; it
Heinrich Freese, Die konstitutionelle Fabrik (Jena: Fischer, 1922) and
Werner von Siemens, Lebenserinnerungen (Berlin: Springer, 1904). For a
debate between a liberal and a paternalist manager, see Heinrich Freese,
“Empfindsame Sozialpolitik,” and J. Vorster, “Die Sozialpolitik des Herrn
Heinrich Freese in Berlin,” Preussische Jahrbücher, Vol. 85, 1896, 135-48,
371-79 and 379-81. The standard textbook in the field was Heinrich Herkner, Die Arbeiterfrage (Berlin: Guttentag, 1908), 5th edition.
19 Cf. Max Weber, “Der Nationalstaat und die Volkswirtschaftspolitik,”
Gesammelte Politische Schriften (Tübingen: Mohr, 1958), 1-25; on the
political significance of this speech, see Arnold Bergsträsser, “Max Webers
Antrittsvorlesung in zeitgeschichtlicher Perspektive,” Vierteljahrshefte für
Zeitgeschichte, 5:3, 1957, 212 ff. A brilliant study of Weber’s political ideas
and activities is Wolfgang J. Mommsen, Max Weber und die deutsche
Politik: 1890-1920 (Tübingen: Mohr, 1959); see esp. Chs. III-V. It super­
sedes J. P. Mayer, Max Weber and German Politics (London: Faber and
Faber, 1943). All quotations from Weber and Mommsen are by permission
of the publisher.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

148

was a concrete entity whose interests had to be safeguarded real­
istically. Affirmation of this kind of raison d'état did not imply
advocacy of systematic state intervention at home or abroad. It also
was not identical with the contemporary Social Darwinist exaltation
of the struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest. Indeed,
Weber criticized the evolutionary fallacy of assuming that eco­
nomically superior classes somehow represented a superior type of
man. Economic power and the capacity for political leadership were
not necessarily identical. Weber’s criterion for evaluating the polit­
ical claims of social classes was their ability to provide political
leadership for the whole nation. Neither the economically declining
Junkers nor the economically rising working class appeared to
qualify for this political leadership; Weber tried to invigorate the
liberal bourgeoisie’s will to power and to national leadership that
had been stunted by the events of 1848 and of 1871.
Weber advocated the “social integration and unification of the
nation, which have been destroyed by modern economic develop­
ments, in order to prepare it for the severe tests of the future.” 20
He was fully in favor of permitting the working class to fight
legally for its economic interests, but he contended its claim to
political power:
Politically the working class is infinitely more immature than a clique
o f journalists, who wants to m onopolize its leadership, would like to
make the workers believe. These circles of declassed bourgeois like to
play with the memories o f a century ago; they have indeed managed
to evoke the impression in timid minds that they are the spiritual heirs
of the men of the Convention. But they are infinitely more harmless
than they appear to themselves. There is not a spark of that Catilinarian energy of the deed in them, and no trace of that tremendous
national passion which permeated the halls of the Convention. They
are miserable political tinkers— they lack the great power instincts of
a class called upon to take over political leadership.21
20 Weber, op. cit., 23.
21 Op. cit., 22.

Counter-Tendendes

149

Given his contempt for the powerlessness of the Social Demo­
crats, Weber did not tire of berating the bourgeois public time and
again for its fear of the “red spectre” and for its resistance toward
integrating them into the political process. He understood well the
ideological and organizational advantages which the Social Demo­
crats derived from their isolation, and he expected that their polit­
ical participation in municipalities and in the state would discredit
them quickly if they followed doctrinaire rather than reformist
lines.22 He was willing to accept a Social Democratic domination
of municipal and other administrations as long as they did not gain
control over the decisive institution: the military.
Weber made Naumann aware of politics as a struggle for power
and made him realize that welfare legislation was not an isolated
problem of domestic politics. Naumann was originally a follower of
the Christian-Social movement of former Court Chaplain Stoecker
and accepted its patriarchal conservatism.23 At first he opposed
parliamentarism and debunked the importance of parties, being in
favor of corporate representation. But under Weber’s influence he
recognized that vocational associations as political bodies were in­
ferior to political parties, which could pursue welfare politics as
22 Cf. Max Weber’s address on the occasion of the 1907 convention of the
Verein für Sozialpolitik; see Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, Vol.
125, 295-300.
23 On conservative Protestantism, see William O. Shanahan, German Protes­
tants Face the Social Question: The Conservative Phase, 1815-1871 (Uni­
versity of Notre Dame Press, 1954), Vol. I. On Naumann, see id., “Fried­
rich Naumann: A Mirror of Wilhelmian Germany,” The Review of Poli­
tics, 13:3, July 1951, 267-301; id., “Friedrich Naumann: A German View
of Power and Nationalism,” in E. M. Earle, ed., Nationalism and Inter­
nationalism (New York: Columbia University Press, 1950), 352-98. The
major biography on Naumann is by his disciple and friend Theodor Heuss,
later the first president of the Federal Republic of Germany: Friedrich
Naumann (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1957). Cf. also Richard
Nürnberger, “Imperialismus, Sozialismus und Christentum bei Friedrich
Naumann,” Historische Zeitschrift, 170:3, 1950, 525^48. Not available to
me was F. Sponsels, Friedrich Naumann und die deutsche Sozialdemokratie.
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Erlangen, 1952.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

150

well as take responsibility for the national interest. Naumann
wanted the progressive bourgeoisie to lead the working class and
to reconstruct socialism to fit the requirements of both welfare
politics and foreign politics. He affirmed liberalism as the protector
of the individual vis-à-vis the state, and socialism as the protector
vis-à-vis any large-scale organization. In 1896 he founded his
own political party, the National-Social Association, which Weber
joined with reservations. In the program discussions Naumann
pushed through a demand for equal suffrage in municipalities in
order to accord full political recognition to the workers and to force
the Social Democrats to take civil responsibilities.
Naumann worked out his position in successive editions of his
book Demokratie und Kaisertum,24 He demanded that Germany
have a government better equipped to cope with the needs of
a rapidly industrializing nation. He hoped that long-run structural
changes in the fast growing population would swell the left-wing
vote and strengthen parliament. However, the Social Democrats
and the left-wing liberals would have to abandon their old stance
of democratic negativism toward the government. He believed that
without sacrificing principle a Social Democratic declaration in
1890 to support the government would have reduced the conserva­
tives and National Liberals to a parliamentary minority and facili­
tated Chancellor Caprivi’s attempt to lean on the left-wing liberals.
He understood well the Social Democratic reasons for remaining
intransigent, but he considered it imperative that the Social Demo­
crats now abandoned their old radical rhetoric and utopianism. A
people’s monarchy was feasible only if the left supported national
defense. Naumann favored a strong fleet capable of protecting Ger­
many’s international trade interests, which were vital for improving
the standard of living. He called William II an “industrial emperor”
(Industriekaiser) because he vociferously supported a large pro24 Friedrich Naumann, Demokratie und Kaisertum (Berlin: Hilfe, 1900). I
used the fourth edition of 1905.

Counter-Tendendes

151

gram of naval expansion. This vision of a fusion of democracy and
monarchy {Kaisertum) did not convince voters either to the right or
left of Naumann. In the 1903 elections his party polled only 30,000
votes compared to the three million votes for the Social Democrats.
Subsequently Naumann and most of his followers joined the Ad­
vanced Liberals; a minority went over to the Social Democrats.
Men like Friedrich Naumann and Max Weber or the industrial­
ist Walther Rathenau— another brilliant outsider—were not free
of biases and misconceptions, but they recognized better than most
contemporary liberals the problems and probable direction of in­
dustrialization and democratization.25 These men were of great im­
portance for the advancement of new ideas in an age of large-scale
and rapid industrialization, but their influence as ideological pioneers
could not be as broad and effective as that of Treitschke and others
before them, who served as mouthpieces for prevailing public
trends. Naumann’s journal, the Hilfe, could not compete with the
Preussische lahrbiicher in terms of public influence. But his ideas
did facilitate an eventual policy revision of the liberal left-wing par­
ties. Such a revision was difficult to accomplish because it was likely
to weaken the parties numerically, at least for some time; any move
toward the left would alienate many bourgeois voters without win­
ning over many workers.
After 1904 Theodor Barth spread Naumann’s new ideas in his
journal, Nation, an advanced liberal magazine. Naumann’s ideas
25 On Naumann’s views on the problem of large-scale economic organization
and his idea of “the constitutional factory,” see Abraham Shuchman: Co­
determination: Labor’s Middle Way in Germany (Washington: Public Affairs
Press, 1957), 15 f. Naumann believed that conflicts over property rights would
be resolved by the emergent split of the functions of management and of
property holders; these conflicts would be replaced by conflicts over internal
control and organization. Naumann envisaged corporations owned and man­
aged by the employees. Such arrangement would pose new problems which
socialism would have to solve. However, such a “constitutional factory” would
be superior to the autocratic factory.—For a synopsis of Naumann, Weber
and Rathenau see Knoll, op. cit., 128 ff.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

152

first found some sympathetic reaction in the Freisinnige Vereini­
gung, one of the two Progressive parties. After the death of the
dogmatic and intransigent Eugen Richter, the three left-wing
liberal parties (the South German People’s party being the third)
could effect a rapprochement. However, the Progressive shift toward
the left was arrested by Billow’s “bloc” of 1907, which established
a parliamentary coalition of conservatives, National Liberals, and
progressives against the Center party and the Social Democrats. The
trend toward the left continued after the “bloc” fell apart in 1909.
The three liberal left-wing parties merged into the Progressive
People’s party in 1910.
Another consequence of the breakup of Biilow’s coalition was
the foundation of the Hansabund, established in 1910 as a rally­
ing center for all forces of industrial society—from big business to
labor— against the East Elbian aristocracy, whose conservative
Reichstag representatives had refused the introduction of inheritance
taxes for armament purposes.26 Characteristic of the rigidity of the
domestic political structure was the fact that labor organizations re­
fused to join the association and big business deserted it within a
year, preferring its old alliance with the big agrarian interests. The
result of the Social Democratic and Progressive alliance in the 1912
Reichstag elections was also indicative of the strength of the class
cleavage. Such an alliance was nothing new; Richter had concluded
it in 1887 and 1890, although he had always remained intransigent
toward the Social Democrats; now the Progressive leadership took
a relatively positive attitude toward the Social Democrats. How­
ever, the run-off results showed that a large part of the Progressive
electorate preferred ultimately to vote for a conservative rather
than for a Social Democrat— except in Bavaria, where the common
26 On the Hansabund see J. Riesser, Der Hansabund (Jena: Diederichs,
1912). A leading figure of the association was Gustav Stresemann, later for
six years foreign minister of the Weimar Republic. Cf. Franz Miethke,
Gustav Stresemann der Wirtschaftpolitiker (Dresden: Sächsische Verlagsan­
stalt, 1919).

Counter-Tendendes

153

antagonism toward the Catholic party united the voters of the two
parties.27
Thus, no decisive realignment of the parties occurred on the
federal level before 1914. However, democratization progressed in
southern Germany and was even viewed favorably by some mem­
bers of the younger generation of National Liberals, especially the
so-called Jungliberalen, who gradually became advocates for the
integration of the Social Democrats. The chairman of the federal
association of National-Liberal youth groups said at its 1910 con­
vention that
. . . our government’s treatment o f the Social Dem ocrats does not ap­
pear to me to be opportune. You do not stop the expansion of Social
Democratic organizations by turning against the individual worker who
follows the Social Democrats. . . . Equal rights for all parties, also
for the Social Democrats, seems to me the best means of fighting the
Social Democrats as a party.28
27 For a detailed analysis of the terms and results of the alliance, see Henry
S. Sloan, The German Social Democrats in the Reichstag Elections of 1912,
M.A. thesis, New York University, May 1952, esp. p. 69. When the secret
terms of the alliance became known to the Social Democratic party mem­
bers, a sharp reaction occurred since it turned out that the Social Demo­
cratic leaders had conceded more to the Progressives than vice versa.
Many Social Democratic workers were no less averse to vote for a Progres­
sive, than Progressive voters were to vote for a Social Democrat. Only some
revisionists were unequivocally in favor of a “great coalition” (Grossblock)
of Social Democrats and liberals. Cf. Ludwig Frank, Aufsätze, Reden und
Briefe, Hedwig Wachenheim, ed. (Berlin: Verlag für Sozialwissenschaft,
1924), 185 f; see also articles by Wolfgang Heine. Wilhelm Kolb and Max
Schippel in the Sozialistische Monatshefte, XV, April 20, 1911, 481-86, Sep­
tember 7, 1911, 1160-64, and December 21, 1911, 1639-44.
28 Address of Dr. Fischer, chairman of the Reichsverband der national­
liberalen Jugendvereine, at the Cologne convention, October 22, 1910, cited
in August Erdmann, ed., Die Sozialdemokratie im Urteile ihrer Gegner
(Berlin: Vorwärts, 1911), 142. Erdmann reprints a series of Catholic, con­
servative, and liberal press statements recognizing the accomplishments of
the Social Democratic labor movement or pleading for the renunciation
of political repression and personal attacks. On the increasing public recog­
nition, see also Tönnies, op. cit., 472.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

154

Even more outspoken was the National Liberal Kölnische Zeitung,
which advocated the adoption of the South German example:
The Social Democrats are such a large party that we must take them
into account; they will not disappear in one day; no Social Dem ocrat will
becom e a conservative or liberal within a short time. Therefore, we
must ask ourselves whether the conditions could not be improved
in Prussia if the East Elbian approach were replaced by one more
similar to the South German. The system does not have to be
changed, we only ask for a less exclusive treatment of persons and
issues. If it is true that the South German conditions are preferable to
the Prussian ones, then the desire to achieve results in Prussia similar
to those achieved in southern Germany is legitimate. Therefore, it
should be made easy for every Social Dem ocrat actively to cooperate
in econom ic affairs; this cooperation should not only be tolerated, but
elicited, in order to weaken the utopian theoretical demands. Such a
consideration does not merely derive from a liberal position, it should
be the viewpoint o f all those parties which realize that, for the time
being, we must accept the existence of a strong Social Dem ocratic
party.29

It was only after the turn of the century that the Social Demo­
crats and the Advanced Liberals sufficiently lessened their ideo­
logical commitments, especially with regard to economic policies,
to cooperate in some South German state parliaments. The Social
Democrats did so under the strong influence of South German re­
visionism, which was more democratic than that in northern Ger­
many, where its spokesmen were more nationalist and imperialist.
This split was partly due to the different historical legacies of the
two regions.30 Bavaria, Württemberg and Baden introduced equal
suffrage in 1904, and in Baden and Bavaria the Social Democrats
even voted for the state budget, in violation of established national
party policy. The historical roots of the ongoing South German
29 Kölnische Zeitung, November 6, 1909, cited in op. cit., 140 f.
30 Cf. Boris Goldenberg, Beiträge zur Soziologie der deutschen Vorkriegs­
sozialdemokratie, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Heidelberg, n.d. (be­
tween 1930-33), 37.

Counter-Tendendes

155

democratization can be traced far into the past. In the 16th and
17th centuries a dualism existed between the territorial princes and
the estates, especially in the cities, in southern Germany. When the
South German state parliaments came into being after 1820, their
members often conceived of them as a loyal opposition to the gov­
ernment and followed the spirit of Montesquieu in their advocacy
of the division of power. The most renowned liberal representative
of this trend before the 1848 revolution, Rotteck, whose Staats­
lexikon was very influential in bourgeois circles, championed a
dualism between government and popular representation. He be­
lieved that an enforced unity created between them would inevitably
produce despotism. After the revolution the great political scientist
Robert von Mohl recommended that the dualism be overcome by
giving parliament institutional predominance.31 Half a century
later the South German states did approach this stage, but the his­
torical decision of 1850 favoring the Prussian principle of
monarchic constitutionalism remained dominant for the Reich as
a whole until its bitter end. Chancellor Hohenlohe’s famous verdict
on the basic weakness of South Germany in relation to the
North was true. The aged prince, South German, Catholic, and
liberal in his own way, wrote in his diary on the occasion of a hunt­
ing visit with high-ranking Junkers at Jagdschloss Springe on
December 15, 1898:
When I sit between the Prussian Excellencies, the contrast between
northern and southern Germany is clearly impressed upon me. South
German liberalism cannot assert itself against the Junkers. They are
too numerous, too powerful, and they have on their side the monarch
and the army. The Center party, too, goes along with them. Every­
thing that I have experienced during these four years [as Chancellor]
can be explained from this opposition. The Germans are right when
they consider my presence in Berlin a guarantee of German unity. A s
I worked for the unification of North and South from 1866 until 1870
[as Prime Minister o f Bavaria], so too must I see that Prussia remains
31 Cf. Hintze, op. cit., 390.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

156

with the Reich, because all of these gentlemen here, including Miquel,
do not care about the Reich and would rather abandon it today than
tomorrow.32

Over the decades, the public image of the Social Democratic
labor movement as represented by the press slowly improved. In
1874 a man like the economist and sociologist Schaffte, a former
Austrian minister of finance, could express the view of a tiny mi­
nority, largely academic, when he credited the Social Democrats
with having
. . . rendered an essential service, namely, by critically and politically
suggesting the “positive social reform” which has been taken in hand
by the government in Germany. . . . To the legitimate demands of
Social Dem ocracy— that there shall be furnished even to the proletariat
o f industry, as a result o f their labor, a position worthy o f m anhood,
and something more than the barely necessary share of the produce of
the national labor community; that the abuse of the superiority of
capital and o f credit shall be averted; that a sense o f joint responsibility
in relation to poverty and misfortune shall be awakened; that a public
econom ic management shall be introduced, in so far as the capitalist
32 Hohenlohe, op. cit., 474. It may be added that neither Bismarck nor
Biilow were typical Junkers and made a point of being different. See Bis­
marck, Reden, Kohl, ed., op. cit., Vol. 13, 107, where he refers to his back­
ground as evidence that he was not verjunkert. After Billow’s downfall in
1909 August Stein, representative of the very influential left wing Frank­
furter Zeitung in Berlin from 1883 until 1920, who had intimate contact
with chancellors, wrote that he had not been a typical Junker even though
he had once characterized himself as an agrarian chancellor. Biilow him­
self expressed a similar qualification in December, 1914, to Theodor Wolff:
“I am a Junker myself, but not the perfect Junker; I have seen other coun­
tries besides Germany. Jagow [secretary of state] has all their pettiness, all
their bad qualities.” However, Biilow characterized himself to Wolff, with­
out qualification, as a Prussian: “Every man has his toquade, his obsession.
Mine is that I am an enthusiastic Prussian. I feel it—every time soldiers
march past, down below.” See Irenaeus (pseudonym for A. Stein), Auf­
sätze (Frankfurt: Frankfurter Societatsdruckerei, 1921), 65-77; Theodor
Wolff, op. cit., 19 and 17. Wolff was another very prominent Berlin news­
paperman.

Counter-Tendendes

157

econom y becomes actually useless— to this demand the most complete
satisfaction can be given in the way of positive gradual reform, with­
out suppressing capital in the shape of private property, but rather by
generalizing it.33

Two decades later such voices were more numerous, though
they still came predominantly from academic circles. In 1897 the
conservative welfare politician Rudolf Meyer acknowledged the
contribution that the Social Democratic workers in Germany,
Austria and Switzerland had made toward the rise of industry. In
their struggle they have developed “the best intellectual qualities,
. . . the really good workers . . . are all Social Democrats.” 34
The relationship between intelligence, efficiency, and Social Demo­
cratic membership was increasingly accepted in the public. Elabo­
rating on this theme the liberal professor Niebergall wrote in 1909
that the Social Democratic labor movement is “now widely recog­
nized as the great liberator of the intellectual life of the people.” 35
In the same year a pastor maintained, on the basis of personal ob­
servations, that the Social Democratic labor movement had notice­
ably bettered the character of the common people wherever it had
exerted its influence and that it had truly become the church of the
poor, as much by its own influence as by the default of the Chris­
tian church.36
The public recognition of the Social Democrats often had tacti­
cal overtones, but even then it could contain genuine admiration.
For example, the old Theodor Mommsen wrote acidly in Barth’s
Nation that the Social Democrats are
33 Albert Schäffle, op. cit., 126 f, my emphasis. The book was originally a
series of articles in a religious magazine. It was the first academic treatise
on Marx’s Capital and received considerable public and academic attention.
34 Rudolf Meyer in Maximilian Harden’s anti-Wilhelminian Zukunft,
March 1897, quoted in Erdmann, ed., op. cit., 49.
35 Professor Niebergall in the monthly, Nord und Süd, August 1909, re­
printed in Erdmann, op. cit., 73 f.
36 See Pastor Liebster, Leipzig, in “Kirche und Sozialdemokraten,” re­
printed in op. cit., 72.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

158

. . . the only great party which has claim to political respect. It is not
necessary to emphasize its talents. Everybody in Germany knows that
with a mind such as Bebel’s, a dozen East Elbian Junkers would be
equipped to shine among their peers. The dedication and the willing­
ness to sacrifice o f the Social Dem ocratic masses impresses even those
persons who do not share their aims. Our liberals should take as a
model the discipline o f the party, which asserts itself despite the tre­
mendous difficulties apparent in the party conventions. On the other
hand, it cannot be denied that the Social Dem ocrats are to a large
extent responsible for the present, nearly desperate political situation.37

Mommsen’s qualification remained decisive for the majority of the
public, while the octagenarian himself came to embrace the demand
of the young generation to effect a rapprochement with the Social
Democrats.38
Thus, the counter-tendencies could not obliterate the character
of the Empire as an authoritarian state nor the political class cleav­
age of German society. However, they mitigated the authoritarian­
ism of the state and ameliorated the class cleavage.
37 Theodor Mommsen in the Nation, Dec. 1902, reprinted in op. cit., 169.
38 On Mommsen’s changing attitudes toward the Social Democrats, see
Alfred Heuss, Theodor Mommsen und das 19. Jahrhundert (Kiel: Hirt,
1956), 212-20; for the text of Mommsen’s moving testament of 1899, in
which he repudiates the historical course of the nation and the uncritical
attitudes of the general public, see p. 282, op. cit.

VII
The Role o f Marxism in the Social
Democratic Subculture1

1. The Labor Movement as a Subculture
After 1890 the Social Democratic labor movement contributed to
the continued national polarization by rapidly expanding into a large
self-contained mass movement and by embracing a Marxist ideology
which was no less aggravating to the public because it was attenu­
ated deterministically. The labor movement came to offer to masses
of workers a way of life which was significantly different from that
of other groups, especially those explicitly supporting the prevail­
ing political and social system. The vehicle for this way of life was
a proliferating network of political, economic and cultural organi­
zations. I will call the complex of Social Democratic beliefs and
organized activities a subculture in order to indicate the separate­
ness of the labor movement from the dominant system and also
their inherent connection.2 As a political subculture, the labor
1 The main arguments of this chapter as far as they pertain to the seeming
paradox of radical ideology and moderate practice were first presented in
my paper on “The Radical Ideology of a Moderate Labor Movement,”
Transactions of the Fourth World Congress of Sociology (Louvain: Inter­
national Sociological Association, 1959), IV, 9-24.
2 In Professor Milton Yinger’s ideal typical terms, the labor movement was
a contraculture as well as a subculture. See his essay on “Contraculture and
Subculture,” American Sociological Review, 25:5, Oct. 1960, 625-35.
Yinger distinguishes between a subculture, as a normative system of sub­
societies, and contraculture, as emergent norms that appear in conflict
situations; he is aware that he is dealing with a continuum. His theoretical
distinction is useful as an orienting perspective. My analysis is concerned
with the intricate interrelationships of both tendencies in most of the activi­
ties of the labor movement.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

160

movement was a permanent factor of instability for the Reich, but
it was unable to transcend major political and nonpolitical values
of the dominant system.
The labor movement before 1890 was, of course, also a sub­
culture, but for convenience the term will refer here to the large
legal mass movement which arose in the nineties. Party historians,
too, like Eduard Bernstein and Eugen Prager, distinguish two
stages in the development of the labor movement, with 1890 as the
dividing mark. Bernstein denotes the development with the phrase
“from sect to party,” which he chose as the title of one of his
writings.3 Prager distinguishes the era of propaganda of a small
party from the era of expansion into a parliamentary mass party,
and relates this distinction also to rapid industrialization which
furthered the rise of the unions and the growth of the party.4 At
the end of the period, in 1914, the party had 4,100 paid function­
aries and 11,000 salaried employees, and its membership rose
between 1906 and 1913 from 384,000 to 982,000.5
The trade union movement, which counted by that time about
two and a half million members, came to occupy an intermediate
position between the dominant system and the Social Democratic
subculture. It was thoroughly reformist, in contrast to the French
and Spanish situation in which anarchist and syndicalist influences
tended to make many unions more radical than the socialist parties.
In contrast to England, where the reformist unions established the
Labour party as their political instrument long after they had
arisen, most German unions were created by Social Democrats who
appealed to the workers primarily by offering concrete economic
benefits. The unions were first of all friendly societies and only
secondarily collective bargaining agencies. Collective bargaining
3 Eduard Bernstein, “Von der Sekte zur Partei,” Zeitschrift für Politik,
Vol. 3, 1910, 498-551.
4 Eugen Prager, Geschichte der USPD (Berlin: Freiheit, 1921), 16.
6 William Maehl, “The Triumph of Nationalism in the German Socialist
Party on the Eve of the First World War,” Journal of Modern History,
XXIV, 1952, 25.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

161

existed in small and medium-sized industries, but not in heavy
industry. The mining industry in the Rhineland tolerated a union
movement, but did not bargain with it. Some big steel manufac­
turers did not even permit the organization of workers in unions.
The Social Democratic unions, customarily called Free unions be­
cause they had no connection with the liberals or the Center party,
had only one major competitor in some industries such as mining:
the much smaller Catholic unions, which differed on many issues
only in their religious emphasis. After the turn of the century, the
Free unions were also “free” from party pressures. In the nineties
many Social Democrats looked with some misgivings at their purely
ameliorative activities. As the economic resources of the unions be­
came stronger than those of the party, the Social Democratic union
leaders quickly moved to establish themselves as the full equals of
the party leaders and soon began to apply pressures on the party to
curb its left-wing radicals.
The Free unions can be considered only in part as a component of
the Social Democratic subculture: many of the rank and file were
not party members and did not even read party papers—the mini­
mum condition for affiliation. Therefore, only limited attention will
be given to them in the subsequent chapters which are concerned
with the relative strength and weakness of the subculture in relation
to the dominant system.6
Facilitating the spectacular growth of the Social Democratic sub­
culture was a permanent organization of extra-parliamentary func­
tionaries who addressed themselves almost exclusively to the work­
ing class, thereby gaining an advantage within their own realm over
0 Basic for the understanding of the unions’ differentiation from the party is
Heinz Josef Varein, Freie Gewerkschaften, Sozialdemokratie und Staat: Die
Politik der Generalkommission unter der Führung Carl Legiens, 18901920 (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1956); for the nineties see also Gerhard Ritter,
Die Arbeiterbewegung im Wilhelminischen Reich: Die Sozialdemokratie und
die Freien Gewerkschaften 1890-1900 (Berlin: Colloquiumverlag, 1959); for
the following period, see Carl Schorske, German Social Democracy 19051917 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1955).

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

162

the parties of notables. The only other party in serious competition
for the labor vote was the Center party because it had the ideo­
logical and organizational support of the Catholic church. These
two parties became the first political mass organization in Imperial
Germany. But in the late eighties and the nineties other mass move­
ments emerged, nationalist, agrarian and anti-Semitic, which per­
manently blocked the Social Democratic expansion into the agrar­
ian and petty-bourgeois strata.7 The Social Democratic failure to
expand significantly into these strata was also due to the inability
of the predominantly urban functionaries to support policies which
appealed to more of the population than the proletarian electorate.
This inability, in turn, was in part conditioned by the official ide­
ology of the Social Democratic subculture, a deterministically
articulated Marxism.
In the following section I will deal with the view that determin­
istic Marxism “corresponded” to the authoritarian structure of the
Reich. However, it also was, paradoxically at first sight, com­
patible with the moderate practice of the labor movement. More­
over, its adoption was not at all inevitable and was, in fact, very
slow. Since this involves the qualification of an older, widespread
view about the Marxist tradition of the Eisenachers and the Marx­
ist character of the united party after 1875, the reasons for and the
quality of the adherence to Marxism will be elaborated in some
7 Cf. Gerhard Ritter, op. cit., Ch. 5, on the rise of these interest groups and
mass movements and on the inherent limitations of the Social Democrats;
Emil Ritter, Die katholisch-soziale Bewegung Deutschlands im 19. Jahr­
hundert und der Volksverein (Cologne: Bachem, 1954); Lothar Werner, Der
Alldeutsche Verband: 1890-1918. Historische Studien, Vol. 278, 1935; Alfred
Kruck, Geschichte des Alldeutschen Verbandes, 1890-1939 (Wiesbaden:
Steiner, 1954); Massing, op. eit.; Wilhelm Treue, Die deutsche Landwirtschaft
zur Zeit Caprivis und ihr Kampf gegen die Handelsverträge, Ph.D. disserta­
tion, University of Berlin, 1933; Alexander Gerschenkron, Bread and Democ­
racy in Germany (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press,
1943), “Peasant and Industrial Labor,” 28-32; this is a study on agricultural
protectionism and the Junkers.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

163

detail (in section 3).8 Once adopted, Marxism had positive as well
as negative consequences for the dynamics of the labor movement.
The rise of right- and left-wing groups will be treated as indicators
of internal strain connected with the adoption of deterministic
Marxism and the pursuit of a reformist practice (section 4).

2. Radical Theory and Moderate Practice
During the first three quarters of the 19th century, there was much
awareness within and without Germany of her “backwardness” in
political, economic and social respect. However, after national uni­
fication had been achieved and especially during the Wilhelminian
period (1890-1918) the image of backwardness rapidly faded in
Germany. In the 1920’s it was a provocative perspective when
Hendrik de Man analyzed Imperial and Weimar Germany in terms
of political and economic underdevelopment. He compared Ger­
many with more democratic Western countries and concluded that
8 In the literature the Eisenachers and the united party of 1875 are often
called Marxist. This view seems to go back to Mehring’s highly ambivalent
1878 history, op. cit.; for him, the Eisenachers were “Communist” because
of their tenuous connection with the First International. Mehring, intellectual
partisan of Lassalle, temporarily turned against the united party because its
class consciousness and internationalism were not balanced by the pro-Prus­
sian legacies of Lassalle and Schweitzer, which the Lassalleans had aban­
doned even before the merger. In his Lassalle biography, Hermann Oncken,
op. cit., 487, recognized that Marx’s theoretical influence among the Eisen­
achers was insignificant. Marxist theory became important only from the
eighties on. Perhaps because of its later undisputed predominance the two
stages of Marxist influence have been blurred by party and academic his­
torians; see, e.g., the party historian Wilhelm Schröder, Geschichte der sozial­
demokratischen Parteiorganisation in Deutschland (Dresden: Kaden, 1912),
22 f; and the academic historians J. H. Clapham, The Economie Develop­
ment of France and Germany: 1815-1914 (Cambridge: University Press,
1936), 327 f, and Kurt F. Reinhardt, Germany: 2000 Years (New York:
Ungar, 1961), rev. ed., II, 559 and 613.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

164

Germany, “politically speaking (current Marxist theory notwith­
standing), appears rather as a young and backward country than as
an advanced country,” and Marxism “as a typical form of pro­
letarian socialism in countries without democracy, or at any rate
without a democratic tradition.” 9 Imperial Germany was “back- •
ward” for two reasons: the dominance of an authoritarian state
and the social and political consequences of a relatively late but
very rapid industrialization. The first factor explained the labor
movement’s fight for political power, the second the mushroom
growth of an industrial ruling class which imitated, in the fashion
of the nouveaux riches, the military values of the Prussian aris­
tocracy rather than traditions of compromise as did the English
bourgeoisie in responding to the legacies of the aristocracy. The gen­
eral impact of rapid economic change and the acquisitive drive
and recklessness of the entrepreneurial class made the workers
receptive to an ideology which maintained the paramount impor­
tance of economic factors. All of these circumstances intensified the
militarization of political and economic conflict and the belief in
the effectiveness of “blood and iron” politics.10
9 Hendrik de Man, The Psychology of Socialism (New York: Holt, 1927), 428.
10 Cf. de Man, op. cit., 436 ff. The belief in power politics was not only
adopted by industrialists, but also by the majority of the educated and prop­
ertied middle classes as the result of historical developments which made for
significant differences between Germany and Western Europe. German ideal­
ism contributed greatly to the exaltation of a “state of power, culture and
law” above religion and society. Marx shared the belief of German idealism
in ultimate cultural values which were largely individualist, and in the use
of power in any form for realizing these ideals. For an excellent discussion
of these developments, see Hajo Holborn, “Der deutsche Idealismus in
sozial geschichtlicher Beleuchtung,” Historische Zeitschrift, Vol. 174, 1952,
359-84. Holborn mentions briefly that the adoption of Marxism was not
at all an inevitable result of industrialization, despite some affinity between
socialist demands and the aspirations of the working class. He argues that
the rise of the German labor movement as a class movement that was
strictly separated from the rest of society consummated the split within the
German people, the product of the long development toward the Obrigkeits-und Machtstaat of the civil servants and the military. This state was

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

165

The turning of the Social Democrats to Marxism can indeed be
considered, as de Man suggests, a response to the rigid power and
class structure of the Empire and the isolation and powerlessness
of the labor movement: “There was hardly any other possibility
open to Social Democracy in the Prussianized Germany of prewar
days.” 11 But this raises the question of the seeming lack of “corre- *
spondence” between the radical ideology of the Social Democrats
and their moderate policies. The answer must be sought in the
mixture of repressive and permissive conditions within Imperial
Germany. Joseph Schumpeter agreed with de Man that the national
cleavage made the adoption and retention of Marxism understand­
able. He pointed out that the leaders, all honorable men, had to
carry on an intransigent opposition in view of the complete isola­
tion of the movement. However, he also emphasized, in contrast
to de Man, the moderate aspects of the Empire. For him, Germany
was in some respects not even “backward” in comparison with
England, especially as far as the government’s response to the social
consequences of industrialization was concerned. He pointed to the
very substantial welfare achievements of the monarchy, the bu­
reaucracy, and the academic social reformers, which seemed to him
superior to the English accomplishments until Lloyd George.1112
On balance, the sheer repressive power of the dominant system, .
stressed by de Man, was great enough to make the labor movement
embrace Marxism and, at the same time, to discourage extremist
activities as long as another way seemed open; because of the at­
tenuated authoritarianism, emphasized by Schumpeter, another way
did seem open.
inherently handicapped in integrating the old and new classes into a com­
mon value system after industrialization had begun. This is in line with the
reasoning presented in this chapter.
11 de Man, op. cit., 429.
12 Cf. Schumpeter, op cit., 341—47. Schumpeter uses here, with some modifi­
cations, Gustav Schmoller’s arguments. Cf. Schmoller, “Die englische Gewerkvereinsentwickelung im Lichte der Webbschen Darstellung,” Jahrbuch
für Gesetzgebung, Vol. 25, 1901, 313.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

166

Before turning to the specific reasons for the seemingly para­
doxical relationship between theory and practice of the labor move­
ment, it is necessary to identify at least briefly the dialectics of
voluntarism and determinism in the “Marxism” of Marx and
Engels. The Marxian theory of the proletarian revolution is deter­
ministic in so far as capitalism is doomed to destruction for in­
herent reasons. The voluntarist element consists in the expectation
that the proletariat will overthrow capitalism in a crisis situation,
after it has fully developed a revolutionary class consciousness. The
communists have the task, according to the Communist Manifesto,
of spreading this class consciousness. They also have to support
all developments leading to the bourgeois revolution which would
establish an unfettered capitalism capable of industrializing a
country and, at the same time, running full course toward its own
destruction. After the failure of the revolution of 1848, Marx toned
down his revolutionary phraseology, since, as he wrote on his in­
augural address to the First International in a letter to Engels on
November 4, 1864, “time is needed until the reawakened move­
ment will allow the old audacity of language. It is necessary to be
fortiter in re, suaviter in modo.” 13 By that time Marx was writing
the first volume of Das Kapital, which embodied his deterministic
search for the proof of the inevitable downfall of capitalism. As
the letter indicates, Marx returned to political life with an aware­
ness of the limitations imposed upon him as the theoretician of the
proletarian revolution. However, he did not like to recognize that
the times were essentially nonrevolutionary. He continued during
most of these years to expect bourgeois revolutions as a precondi­
tion for the fulfillment of his prophecies. However, the second half
of the 19th century was without great revolutionary upheaval, and
central Europe, in particular, was tranquil in this respect.
A number of Marxist writers in the 1920’s and 1930’s applied a
Marxist approach to this situation and concluded that the deter13 Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe, op. cit., I ll: 3, 199.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

167

minist component of Marxism was bound to become more promi­
nent than the activist component. Thus Arthur Rosenberg held that
the absence of a revolutionary situation made it impossible for the
labor movement to adopt Marx’s theories in their revolutionary
intent.14 Karl Korsch expressed in strictly orthodox terms that
“from the standpoint of materialist dialectic, it is very well under­
standable that this first Marxist theory could not exist unchanged
during the long and practically nonrevolutionary epoch of the sec­
ond half of the 19th century in Europe.” 15 These arguments may
explain why Marxism had to become more deterministic, but they
do not explain why deterministic Marxism was adopted.
Its adoption by the German labor movement was actually a
corollary of the power distribution between the labor movement
and the dominant system. The inability of the labor movement to
break out of its isolation, on the one hand, and its seemingly in­
exorable advance within a large isolated realm, on the other, made
a deterministically accentuated Marxism a particularly fitting ide­
ology for the Social Democratic subculture. The labor movement
was committed to the humanitarian goal of a materially and spirit­
ually richer life for the lower classes. Marxism held out the image
of a better world to come. It promised ultimate victory brought
about by the combination of the masses against a system that
seemed inevitably doomed because of its inherent contradictions
and the resulting growth of the labor movement. It gave “scientific”
meaning to the frustrations and resentments of the workers toward
14 Cf. Arthur Rosenberg, A History of Bolshevism (London : Oxford Uni­
versity Press, 1934), 18 f. Rosenberg pointed out that the revolutionary com­
ponent of Marxian theory rooted in the revolutionary communism of 1848
could be utilized theoretically and practically only in one major country,
Russia, because there the middle-class revolution appeared imminent. It
may be added that today variations of Leninism based on a voluntaristic
interpretation of Marxism have, among the traditional left wing ideologies,
the greatest appeal in newly developing countries because of the Bolshevik
example and the good chance of success for small, determined revolutionary
elites.
15 Karl Korsch, Marxismus und Philosophie (Leipzig: Hirschfeld, 1930), 77.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

168

society at large. The belief in the scientific character of their creed
contributed much to the strengthening of the confidence of the
workers. Given the actual stability of Imperial Germany during
more than four decades of peace, Marxism sustained the belief
that the future would belong to the proletariat and provided a great
deal of encouragement for perseverance in the everyday political
operations against the powerful dominant system. Thus, psycho­
logically, the superiority of the opponents and the discrepancy be­
tween theory and practice was often not felt.16 “You hide your
powerlessness behind the intransigence of your theoretical formulae
with which your excellent comrade Kautsky will provide you until
the end of his life,” Jean Jaurès told Bebel at the Amsterdam con­
gress of 1904.17 Indeed, Marxism was a radical creed that did
not demand active preparation for a revolution since it relied on
the “objective” forces of history; it provided a convenient defense
for parliamentary inactivity if this was desired, but it also could be
comfortably combined with a reformist practice. Thus it served as
an aggressive as well as a defensive instrument against the ideologies
of the dominant groups.
Marxism was officially adopted in the theoretical section of the
Erfurt program in 1891. Since the labor movement became more
and more involved in reformist activities from that time on, there is
an apparent paradox to which Karl Korsch pointed when he said
that the Social Democratic party was “volksparteilich democratic,
Lassallean and Diihringian, but only very sporadically Marxist”
during the period before 1890. During this time it came nearest to
being imbued with revolutionary sentiments; while after the relaxa­
tion of repression and the improvement of the economic situation in
16 Cf. Rudolf Hilferding (pseudonym: Richard Kern) “Revolutionärer So­
zialismus,” Zeitschrift für Sozialismus, 1:5, February 1934, 147.
17 Quoted in Sombart, op. cit., 363. Sombart points out, however, that the
leaders, who had to preserve the allegiance of the masses despite the power­
lessness of the movement, sometimes explained the lack of direct success with
the very superiority of the enemy, and they derived from this the necessity
for further exertions (282).

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

169

the nineties, Marxism was adhered to as a “kind of theoretical de­
fense and metaphysical consolation.” 18 For Rosenberg,
Marxism now served, above all else, to enable the proletariat to dif­
ferentiate itself ideologically from the middle class. In other words— to
secure for itself an independent class existence within capitalist society.
. . . Thus Communism changed from a revolutionary doctrine used
by the extreme Radicals among the middle-class intellectuals to drive
the working masses onwards, to a professional ideology with whose
help the class-conscious workman defended and improved his position
within the middle-class order of society.19

This defensive function of Marxism derived from the overwhelm­
ing power of the opponents. The Marxian conception of politics as
a matter of all-out struggle rather than of compromise fitted the
situation of a proletariat that was denied social recognition and
the opportunity to participate meaningfully in the higher decision­
making agencies of the dominant system. The public glorification
of Realpolitik, which characterized the period following Bismarck’s
triumphs, may have contributed to a simplification of the percep­
tion of power relations. To many Social Democrats, “power ap­
peared,” Rudolf Hilferding observed, “concretely embodied in the
army, police, capital.” He related this to Bismarck’s blood and iron
politics and concluded that German Marxism had the tendency to
develop into a kind of “Bismarxism.” This resulted, however, in a
hesitation to fight for major political goals which were supposed
to be attainable only after the final clash of the opposing forces,
18 Karl Korsch, op. cit., 14 f. In Germany the last quarter century before the
First World War was extraordinarily tranquil: “There were no food riots and
street fighting, as in Italy in the ‘terrible year’ 1898; no nationalist convul­
sions, such as shook the Hapsburg empire; no crisis comparable to France’s
Dreyfus affair. There was nothing, of course, to match the Russian revolu­
tion of 1905, no labor struggles of the scope and violence of the Home­
stead or Pullman strikes in the United States, nor even a constitutional crisis
such as that occasioned in England by Lloyd George’s budget of 1909.” Harry
Marks, op. cit., 334.
19 A. Rosenberg, loc. cit.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

170

and “the rigid and at the same time transparent power conditions”
also weakened the will to fight for political objectives which seemed
to have no direct relationship to the long-term goals of the move­
ment.20
In conclusion it may be said that both the deterministic char­
acter of the radical ideology and the moderate practices of the labor
movement were largely shaped by the peculiar combination of re­
pressive and permissive policies in Imperial Germany. Thus the
apparent incongruence between theory and practice becomes less
of a logical inconsistency than it at first appears. It was of great
importance for theory and practice that the authoritarian state did
not completely repress the labor movement, but that it permitted
a parliamentary framework within which the movement could
achieve tangible success. This provided a strong incentive to pur­
sue moderate policies and an equally strong interest in legal status,
though moderation appeared, of course, also advisable in view of
the overwhelming power of the state. In fact, the repressive power
of the state became so great after the establishment of the Empire
that it indefinitely postponed all chances of realizing ultimate social
and democratic goals. Therefore, the most influential leaders of the
labor movement turned to a deterministic theory of history and of
industrialization, which seemed to point a way out by offering
20 R. Hilferding, loc. cit. Between the adherence to a rather abstract set of
long-range goals and the pursuit of cautious moderation and piecemeal re­
form lay an area of political action in which important advances could per­
haps have been made. During the Weimar Republic, the Social Democrats
continued to be plagued by this gap, when they were a pillar of the Republic
as well as an opposition party with the aim of large-scale social recon­
struction. Even the English labor movement was afflicted with this problem
in 1929-30, when its sincerely socialist leaders maintained that nationaliza­
tion could not be carried out because of the slim labor majority; without
nationalization the economy would have to be run along laissez-faire lines,
and no large-scale manipulation of the economy, in whatever form, was con­
sidered feasible. See Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., “Sources of the New Deal:
Reflections on the Temper of a Time,” Columbia University Forum, 11:4,
Fall 1959, 8.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

171

“scientific” proof that the contemporary society was, for inherent
reasons, doomed to destruction, leaving the proletariat to become
the founder of a millennium. Any actively revolutionary version
of this radical ideology appeared unrealistic because it invited com­
plete repression. Conversely, the actual attempts at suppression did
not appear severe enough, especially after 1890, to suggest that the
setting up of a small party of professional revolutionaries was op­
portune, as Lenin came to think in 1903. Thus, the strategic situ­
ation in which the labor movement found itself made it embrace as
well as mitigate the radicalism of Marxist theory.

3. The Gradual Adoption of Marxism by the Leaders
Marxism was adopted by the leaders of the Social Democratic party,
but its adoption was not inevitable. Its reception was dependent on
personal, situational, and organizational factors unrelated or only
indirectly related to the political structure and the economic de­
velopment of society at large. The role of Bebel and Liebknecht
was paramount; if they had been defeated within the party, Marx­
ism probably would not have been adopted. Without the anti-'
socialist legislation Marxism might have found serious ideological
competition. Since these personal and situational factors favored
Marxism, the organizational requirements for safeguarding the sur­
vival and the growth of the labor movement were also defined in
terms favorable to its adoption.
In the early years of the movement the Social Democrats con- •
sidered themselves revolutionary because they wanted a new type of
society, not because they adhered to the Marxian theory of revolu­
tion. Many of Lassalle’s ideas on socialism were unchallenged dur- ■
ing the first decade of the labor movement. Some Marxian ideas
were diffused through Lassalle’s writings, but there was little aware­
ness of their origin or their systematic meaning. When Schweitzer

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

172

retired from politics in the early seventies to become a successful
playwright, it seems that no one among the Lassalleans retained
much understanding of or much interest in Marx’s work. Even for
Liebknecht, who felt personally close to Marx (with whom he had
shared exile in London), and for Bebel the Marxian ideas about
the inevitable breakdown of capitalist society became of great psy­
chological and tactical importance only when they had to realize
that the triumphs of Bismarck and the Prussian army constituted
giant obstacles to their democratic and socialist aspirations. They
retained their own confidence by relying heavily on the “objective”
tendencies of capitalist society. For decades to come, Bebel stressed
those tendencies which, as he used to argue, had created the Social
Democratic labor movement to begin with and which would insure
its ultimate victory by continuously increasing the working class
and strengthening its political organization.21 Liebknecht and Bebel
also embraced Marx and Engels’ conviction that German unifica­
tion would at first enable the full development of capitalism as
well as of the proletariat and then bring about the ruin of the former
and the triumph of the latter. They were encouraged, furthermore,
by Marx and Engels’ anticipation that Germany’s military victory
would result in a shift in the leadership of international socialism
from the French to the German workers and in a victory of Marx­
ian theory over that of Proudhon.
Liebknecht and Bebel accepted a good deal of Marx’s assump­
tion about the mechanisms of capitalist economy and his psycho­
logical assumptions about the reactions of an exploited working
class, which was to develop a class-conscious and revolutionary
mentality. They propagated class consciousness, but they denied
that this would result in revolutionary conspiracy. In an 1869
brochure about the goals of his party Bebel explicitly refused to
make any concrete statement about a future revolution because
21 The theme was, e.g., repeated pointedly in a Reichstag speech which he
used to commemorate the 45th anniversary of the labor movement in 1908.
See Reichstag Protocols, March 27, 1908, 4350.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

173

of the interest of the public prosecutor in this topic, but he added
thoughtfully that “the various forms of state and society generally
came into being through iron force.” 22 Later, he would be even
more restrained about the crucial problem of how the Social Demo­
crats could come to power without a revolutionary upheaval. This
policy was largely due to tactical considerations of self-preserva­
tion, but it furthered a deterministic interpretation of Marxism.
Marxism was still extremely weak when the unification of the
two Social Democratic parties took place at Gotha in 1875.23 In
fact, the first Marxist propaganda drive originated as a defensive
move. Marx and Engels were shocked into action by DUhring’s
success within the party, which threatened their precarious theo­
retical influence. Eugen Diihring (1833-1921) was a Privatdozent
at the University of Berlin who wrote prolifically in the fields of
philosophy, political science, economics, art, literature, mathe­
matics, mechanics and chemistry. He was a positivist and a relent­
less opponent of Christianity, Judaism and Marxism. In 1871 he
published a Critical History of Political Economy and Socialism
and in 1873 a Course of Political and Social Economy. He con­
sidered them a whole, with the first volume providing the historical
dimension to the systematic analysis of the second.24 Diihring
championed a revolutionary socialism which considered political
and not economic factors as primary. Thus he could write that “the
actions of the Commune really pointed in the direction of revolu­
tionary progress.” 25 He regarded economic emancipation as an
appendix to political emancipation, and he opposed the anarchy
of capitalist production, praising Louis Blanc’s idea of the “social
ateliers,” which would be run by workers on their own account
under a public law and with the initial support of state funds.
22 Bebel, Unsere Ziele, 1869, 19 f, quoted in Goldenberg, op. cit., 13 ff.
23 Cf. Bernstein, Sozialdemokratische Lehrjahre, op. cit., 46
24 Eugen Diihring, Kritische Geschichte der Nationalökonomie und des So­
zialismus, 1871, cited after the fourth revised edition (Leipzig: Naumann,
1900); id., Cursus der National-und Socialökonomie (Berlin: Grieben, 1873).
25 Diihring, Geschichte, op. cit., 498.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

174

Diihring placed Louis Blanc and, to a lesser extent, Proudhon above
Lassalle and Marx. He accused Lassalle— always spelling his name
Lassai in order to identify his Jewish ancestry— of having started
his socialist agitation only because he had no role to play among
the Progressives and charged him with having taken Blanc’s pro­
gram without acknowledgment. The only positive aspect of Lassalle’s work he recognized was the demand for universal suffrage,
intended to prepare the way for producers’ cooperatives: “This
bridge of universal suffrage is one of the more positive elements
of the Lassallean program because it implicitly concedes that all
of socialism has political preconditions.” 26 Lassalle and Marx con­
tinued the worst tradition of the French socialists in their ad­
herence to the notion that economic developments are more decisive
than politics proper. Thus, in Germany “the sense for political free­
dom, so powerful in the French Commune, was blunted. . . . The
alienation of socialism from its political origins and from all po­
litical dignity has made it despicable in this [German] form to all
of those who regard the degradation of the goals of mankind, in
favor of the principal predominance of animal instincts, as the
most extreme retrogression of all cultural progress.” 27
Diihring delivered a bristling attack on Marx and his main work,
Das Kapital. He ridiculed his concepts of capital and value, the
dialectical necessity of the transition from private property to com­
munal property through the expropriation of the expropriators, the
blurred Marxian vision of the future state of the working class, and
the idea of the total revolution. Only the Marxian description of
the historical development of exploitation was accorded some posi­
tive comment, whereas the Hegelian dialectic and Marx’s use of it
encountered his utmost contempt.28 Some of Diihring’s arguments
scored well and perceptively exposed some of the basic flaws in
the Marxian construction of the world. But since most Social Demo26 Op. cit., 532.
27 Op. cit., 499.
28 Cf. op. cit., 502 ff.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

175

crats could not judge the intrinsic value of Marxian and antiMarxian arguments, Diihring’s success must be attributed partly
to his emphasis on political activism and partly to his rhetorical
skills. He impressed many Social Democrats with his seemingly
encyclopedic mind, his apodictic stance and the assertion of his
own strictly scientific approach. He repeated this assertion and the
hints of his own superiority on page after page, whereas about
three-fourths of the sections on Lassalle and Marx consist literally
of nothing more than deprecatory statements and vehement invec­
tives. Marx, he said, was a “semi-scholar,” a “Jewish Jesuit,” vain,
confused, dishonest, immoral, etc.; his Kapital consisted of “frag­
ments betraying a lack of ability for concentration and exposi­
tion.” 29
Diihring’s considerable initial success, despite his very strong
attack on Marx both personally and theoretically, is indicative of
the weakness of Marxian influence in the mid-seventies. At first,
Liebknecht, Bracke, Bebel, the young Bernstein, and other promi­
nent Eisenachers welcomed Diihring. In 1872 Bernstein considered
Diihring’s Critical History highly effective propaganda for the so­
cialist movement and sent copies to several persons: among them
were the editorial staff of the Social Democratic Berliner Freie
Presse; Bebel, who reviewed it favorably in Liebknecht’s Volks­
staat in 1874; and Most, one of the most popular leaders in Berlin.
In his memoirs Bebel recalls that most Berlin leaders were greatly
impressed by Diihring, including Fritzsche, who, after Vahlteich,
had been the second proletarian labor leader in the sixties to advo­
cate class-conscious organization.30
Marx and Engels finally complained to Liebknecht and agreed
with him on a counterattack. It was carried on in the AntiDiihring, which Engels wrote for serialized publication in Lieb­
knecht’s Vorwärts, the new official journal of the united party in
1877/78. Engels, who, like Marx, could be no less polemical and
29 Op. cit., 499, 516, 501 and passim.
30 Bebel, Aus meinem Leben, op. cit., II, 317 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

176

vitriolic than Diihring, reciprocated in kind and, in the process,
wrote the first comprehensive exposition of Marxism available to
the public. The Anti-DUhring became the first major Marxist work
to exert significant influence, though at first it met great opposition.
Ex-worker Fritzsche attacked Liebknecht at the Gotha convention
of 1876 for suppressing an article by Most on Diihring only be­
cause the latter had written against Marx.31 At the third Gotha
convention in 1877, Most first won a majority of the delegates for
a motion which would have discontinued Engels’ articles on Diih­
ring in the Vorwärts because they were for most readers without
interest or even offensive. On April 11, 1877, Marx complained to
Bracke that Most was one of those ex-workers who overestimated
their powers of comprehension. And ex-worker Vahlteich, who
was by then, like Most and Fritzsche, also a member of the Reichs­
tag, said at the same convention that the Vorwärts made a mis­
take in publishing Engels’ articles. He termed the theoretical
differences between Marx and Diihring a dispute between pro­
fessors; in a public meeting he pleaded for the coexistence of the
sympathizers of Marx and Diihring. Among Social Democrats the
latter’s cause was temporarily strengthened when he was dismissed
as instructor from the University of Berlin in the spring of 1877.
The Social Democratic press arduously defended him in his con­
flict with the University. His theoretical opponents also sided with
him for tactical reasons. However, he gradually lost most of his
personal and ideological support because his attacks on adherents
of other theories became more and more offensive. Among those
attacked were the Kathedersozialisten, whom he accused of having
31 For the following, see the documentation, especially the letters between
Marx, Engels and their Social Democratic friends, in the editor’s introduc­
tion to the Anti-DUhring in the Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe (Moscow:
Marx-Engels-Verlag, 1935), XIX-XXXII, and Engels’ introduction, 5 ff;
Bebel, loc. cit., Bernstein, Lehrjahre, op. cit., 52 ff; id., Geschichte der Ber­
liner Arbeiterbewegung (Berlin: Vorwärts, 1907), Vol. 2, 336.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

177

stolen his ideas. Bernstein, too, who had personal contact with him
and who had tolerated his rapidly worsening anti-Semitism for
some time, finally turned away.
Although Engels and Liebknecht had barely managed to hold
their ground, their defensive campaign was decisive for the fur­
ther advance of Marxism because the Anti-DUhring convinced
Bebel, Bernstein, Kautsky and a few others of the superiority of
Marxism as a coherent system of ideas. Marxism succeeded partly
because of the personal bonds of Liebknecht and a few other Social
Democrats to Marx and Engels and partly because of Diihring’s
personal inadequacies. Furthermore, its deterministic emphasis
suited the party far better on the eve of the antisocialist legisla­
tion than an ideology of revolutionary activism. From now on the
theoretical interest in Marxism was sustained by a small group
which grew very slowly. The Austrian Karl Kautsky began to study
Das Kapital in 1875.32 In 1881 Bernstein took over the official
party paper in exile, Der Sozialdemokrat; 33 in 1883, Kautsky,
backed by Liebknecht, Bebel and a few theoretically interested
members, started the new theoretical journal of the party, Die Neue
Zeit, in Stuttgart. Soon the advance of Marxism was threatened by
bitter controversies among the few theoreticians of the party. Bern­
stein relates the case of C. A. Schramm, who had the reputation of
32 Cf. Karl Kautsky, “Natur und Gesellschaft,” Gesellschaft, 1929:2, 482.
Fortunately, Karl Kautsky’s early memoirs have now been published, edited
by his late son Benedikt Kautsky: Erinnerungen und Erörterungen (The
Hague: Mouton, 1960), 586 pp. However, they became available only after
this chapter had been written. For the decisive impact of the Anti-Diihring
on Kautsky, see B. Kautsky, ed., Friedrich Engels Briefwechsel mit Karl
Kautsky, 2nd ed. of Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus, enlarged with Kautsky’s
letters (Vienna: Wiener Volksbuchhandlung, 1955), 4.
33 The party paper was published in Zürich and later in London; it appeared
for the first time on September 28, 1879. Its name had been decided upon
by the cautious Reichstag faction which tried repeatedly to get complete
control over the paper and maintain its moderate tone in order to avoid an
embarrassment to the suppressed party.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

178

being “the most competent authority on the Marxian doctrine”
until the early eighties.34 Schramm, a former insurance clerk, had
gained this reputation primarily for his Grundzüge der National­
ökonomie, which was considered an apt popularization of the first
volume of Kapital. In 1883 differences of opinion between
Schramm, on the one hand, and Bebel, Bernstein and Kautsky,
on the other, came to a head. Schramm maintained that Karl
Rodbertus, a prominent conservative welfare economist, had pro­
vided a scientific base for socialism even before Marx. Although
he had been a member of the anti-Lassallean Eisenachers, he
extolled Lassalle as a realistic statesman in contrast to that arm­
chair theorist, Marx. The prominent Social Democratic publisher
of the Neue Zeit and member of the Reichstag J. H. W. Dietz
refused to accept a pamphlet by Schramm on Marx, Rodbertus
und Lassalle. It was, however, accepted by another publisher and
member of parliament, Louis Viereck, the owner of the Süd­
deutsche Post.35 According to Bernstein, Schramm employed in­
34 Bernstein, Lehrjahre, op. cit., 147.
35 Louis Viereck, a former Prussian civil servant (Referendar) headed the
Berlin Mohrenklub, an association promoting socialist theory and engaging
in fund raising. It was founded after Diihring’s initial success in the mid­
seventies when students became interested in socialism. Half of its members
were students, half non-academic Social Democrats with theoretical inter­
ests. On Viereck, see Bernstein, op. cit., 55 ff, 151, on Schramm, 146-52.
Schramm, Viereck, Vahlteich, Most, and Hasselmann eventually left the
party; Schramm went to Switzerland, the others to the United States. A
comparative note on the differential impact of socialism in the United States
and Central Europe may be added. Vahlteich, who was one of at least
four former Social Democratic Reichstag members emigrating to the United
States, complained in his memoirs about the phenomenon of indifference
or contemptuousness of many formerly convinced and loyal German Social
Democrats toward Social Democratic activities in the United States. Since
there was vigorous agitation for socialism in America, in which the former
Reichstag members participated, the differential success of socialism in
America and Central Europe was not due to this factor. The more equalitarian conditions in the United States, especially the absence of a military
aristocracy and the heritage of universal suffrage, may account for much
of the change of attitudes among former German Social Democrats. Be­

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

179

vectives against his party opponents and Marx because of his frus­
tration that others excelled him in their understanding of Marx.36
Prior to the Schramm controversy, Bernstein and Kautsky had
made further progress in their study of Marx by translating to­
gether his treatise against Proudhon, La misère de la Philosophie.
After this, both continued their Marxist studies in London. Engels,
Kautsky and Bernstein and some other Marxist theoreticians slowly
gained the upper hand during the eighties. Some early and some
more recent writings of Marx and Engels were published, and their
theories were popularized for the members by the party workers.
As important as the rise of Marxian theoreticians in the labor
movement was the fact that deterministic Marxism was furthered
because it became tactically relevant for the party leadership dur­
ing the antisocialist legislation. The intensive repression from 1878
to 1890 had the effect of strengthening both the moderate policies
of the labor movement and the contribution of Marxism to the
external and internal defense of the party’s very existence. The
party had to abandon, in popular agitation, its self-identification as
a revolutionary body and to emphasize its character as a parlia­
mentary reform party. In 1878 Liebknecht told the Reichstag that
“if the [anti-]socialist legislation is accepted we will of course
comply with it, because our party is a reform party in the strictest
sense of the word”; he denied “most emphatically that our inten­
yond differentiating factors such as the higher American standard of living
(especially in comparison with the country of origin) and the success of
job-conscious unionism, other factors may have weakened socialist alle­
giance among immigrants: the preoccupation with personal survival and
advancement in a foreign country and the realization that the combination
of ethnic minority and social underdog made political success impossible.
Cf. Vahlteich, op. cit., 47, and Charles Gulick and Melvin Bers, “Insight
and Illusion in Perlman’s Theory of the Labor Movement,” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, XI:4, July 1953, 510-31.
36 This may be indicative of the stress involved for socialist autodidacts
in the study and propagation of Marxian theories. Not only did they have
to overcome a lack of formal education but they were also confronted with
a doctrine which claimed to be both scientific and a guide to political action.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

180

tions are directed toward the overthrow of the existing political
and social order.” 37 The official party journal in exile, Der Sozial­
demokrat, assured the public in 1884 that “we will not be
so tactless as to harass the Reichstag with motions which, under
the given conditions, cannot be acted upon.” 38 In the last year of
the antisocialist legislation, when there was still the possibility of
a renewal, Liebknecht again repeated in the Reichstag the argu­
ment that the Social Democrats were abstaining on principle from
using force. Marx, he said, had shown that “political forms are not
arbitrary, but are the necessary products of economic conditions.”
Therefore, the Social Democrats who act according to this “scien­
tific recognition” cannot be legitimately accused of aiming at the
violent overthrow of the existing society. Marx showed that “to­
day’s economic system” cannot last, but will necessarily become
more and more socialist. “A natural law, an organic law of de­
velopment” can neither be changed by the party nor by the ruling
groups. There will be a revolution: the only question is whether it
will be legal or violent.39
It is important to realize that these were not only tactical argu­
ments used vis-à-vis the government and the public. Bebel, Lieb­
knecht and their followers strove hard to instill these views into
the members in order to diminish the pressures toward radicalization. Among the top leaders, Hasselmann and Most were enraged
enough about the antisocialist legislation— the latter partly because
of a harsh two-year sentence he received in the seventies—to advo­
cate a more aggressive policy toward the government. They also
began to turn to anarchist ideas. The party, without official leader­
ship, no longer formally existed; it had been dissolved by the execu­
tive in October 1878. This was not a tactical maneuver intended
to permit clandestine party operations; rather, the executive hoped
37 Quoted in Kurt Brandis, op. cit., 56.
38 Quoted in Rose Laub, An Analysis of the Early German Socialist M ove­
ment, M.A. thesis, Columbia University, 1951, 26.
39 Reichstag Protocols, November 5, 1889, 136 f.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

181

that compliance would result in the speedy repeal of the antisocial­
ist laws and thereby save the party apparatus.40 In this situation
it was possible that Hasselmann and Most might manage to push
some of the disappointed members, who were accustomed to quasirevolutionary rhetoric and incensed about the repression, into ac­
tions resulting in complete suppression. Bebel and Liebknecht suc­
ceeded in getting the two expelled in 1880, at the secret party con­
vention at Schloss Wyden near Zürich, by appealing to the increased
importance of party discipline and by arguing that a rapprochement
with anarchist doctrines would invite the complete destruction of
the party. It must be remembered that the two lunatic attempts at
the life of William I which had produced hysterical demands for
legislation were indiscriminately associated by the public with
anarchism and the socialist movement. Hasselmann and Most had
been influential in shaping a good deal of the revolutionary rhetoric
of the time. They were popular with the masses, but they lost popu­
larity when they tried to turn the party into a revolutionary action
group. In their fight against the more radical elements, Liebknecht
and Bebel resorted not only to deterministic arguments, but also
claimed the direct support of Marx and Engels, who were dismayed
about the opportunistic course of the party. However, Marx and
Engels sided with them, recognizing that the Bebel-Liebknecht
group made, after all, fewer concessions to tactical expediencies
and petty-bourgeois appeals than did other party groups. It may
also be assumed that they did not want to break with the only group
open to their influence. Indicative of the strength of Bebel’s Marx­
ist convictions is an incident which Bernstein relates in an account
of his trip to London with Bebel to appease the anger of Marx
40 The party apparatus had the following extension in the late seventies:
In 1876, 22 agitators and 46 officials (editors, distributors, etc.) were em­
ployed. In 1877 there was one major newspaper with 12,000 subscribers,
49 smaller newspapers and 14 trade union papers with Social Democratic
tendencies. Most of the newspapers were printed in 14 party printing shops.
Apart from the newspapers, several hundred thousand brochures were dis­
tributed. Cf. Brandis, op. cit., 52 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

182

and Engels about the opportunistic course of the party. Bernstein
recalls that Bebel assured Marx of the good prospects for the break­
down of capitalist economy in Germany in the near future. On his
private business trips, Bebel heard many businessmen complain
about the bad economic conditions and interpreted these complaints
as a confirmation of Marx’s prognosis of capitalism.41
It is true that deterministic Marxism gained importance for the
top leaders as an antidote for pressures toward radicalization, but
its adoption was also directly facilitated by the very process of radi­
calization resulting from the antisocialist legislation. The radicaliza­
tion affected especially the lower-ranking functionaries, who became
for the first time very influential in internal party politics because
they had to rebuild the organizations from the bottom.42 An effi­
cient underground organization was set up to keep the party alive;
illegal distribution of propaganda was the most radical activity in­
volved. Often card and smokers’ clubs were actually Social Demo­
cratic organizations enabling members to sustain contact within
an apparently harmless front. According to the party historian
Schröder, the underground organizations were carried on most
energetically by the geographically mobile workers in the wood,
metal and tobacco industries. By 1883 a few big cities had a
tightly knit network of underground cells. At the end of the eighties
between 5,000 and 6,000 persons may have been secretly organ­
ized in the heavily industrialized area of the Free City of Hamburg,
which was kept under permanent martial law.43
The mood of the lower-ranking functionaries and the rank and
file participating in these activities was, of course, aggressive and
defiant. Bebel, who slowly rose above Liebknecht during these
years, adjusted himself skilfully, if only rhetorically, to the more
radical tendencies. Thus, the period of the antisocialist legislation
41 Cf. Bernstein, op. cit., 133 ff.
42 Cf. Schröder, op. cit., 33.
43 For a detailed description of underground operations and organizations,
see op. cit., 34 ff.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

183

did end in radicalization, in the sense that the antagonism between
the hard core of the labor movement and the government and other
parties was made permanent and that the radical posture was conse­
quently perpetuated. In the seventies, just when the party had be­
come receptive toward reformist tendencies, the antisocialist legisla­
tion greatly strengthened the old feelings of intransigent opposi­
tion.44 Twelve years of police and court interference by a dominant
system committed to the suppression of the labor movement created
a much greater number of intransigent Social Democrats than would
have existed without such a period. This prepared the ground for
the acceptance of a more radical program in 1891.

4. Consequences of the Adoption of Marxism
The Erfurt program of 1891 was adopted because there was gen­
eral agreement that the party needed a more sophisticated program
than the old Gotha program had been. Despite many similarities
between Lassalleans and Eisenachers at the time of their merger
in 1875, the latter had made compromises, especially with regard
to the demand for state-supported producers’ cooperatives. After
the experience of the antisocialist legislation, this demand appeared
outdated even to many former Lassalleans. Though the drafts for
the new program were circulated among the top leadership they
were actually prepared only by Bebel and Liebknecht, with the help
of Kautsky and Bernstein. Finally, a version approved by Engels
was adopted with some modifications. Thus the program had the
blessing of one of the two founders of “scientific socialism.” In its '
theoretical part, the program openly accepted the worsening class
struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie as the political
basis of the labor movement, and it emphasized more than the
44 Cf. Bernstein, “Von der Sekte zur Partei,” op. cit., 524.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

184

Gotha program the international character and commitment of the
movement. In some contrast to this Marxist emphasis was the
change of the party’s name from the “Socialist Workers’ Party of
Germany” to the “Social Democratic Party of Germany”; this
change recognized the new legal status of the movement and indi­
cated the hope of being a “people’s,” no less than a proletarian,
party.
Some party historians date the “complete” victory of Marxism
from this time, without making sufficiently clear the nature of this
victory.45 For the top leadership it meant that a different version
of socialism was no longer acceptable. During the antisocialist
legislation, when the very life of the movement was at stake, the
ideological competition of non-Marxist radicals had been easily
eliminated on organizational and disciplinary grounds. After 1890,
all opposition arising on the right or the left, if it had any theoret­
ical pretensions at all, came to accept Marxism as the common
starting ground. It was strengthened by a sense of the importance
of unity, which the antisocialist legislation had impressed on the
functionaries, both old and young. The conviction of the paramount
importance of a united labor movement kept the party together
until well into the First World War. Therefore, there was no insti­
tutional basis for radically different protest ideologies within the
socialist labor movement.
The adoption of a Marxist program appeared to many members
and to the public as a step toward greater radicalization, but the
moderate practice remained unchanged. During the months before
and after the fall of the antisocialist legislation, the party leaders
moved with particular caution, and through the nineties they con­
sidered its renewal possible. In this sense, the threatening rhetoric
of William II was successful in restraining the leaders, although the
two major attempts to introduce new legislation, the Umsturz­
vorlage of 1894-95 and the Zuchthausvorlage of 1898-99, failed.
45 See, e.g., Kampffmeyer’s introduction to Friedrich Ebert, Schriften, op.
cit., 24.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

185

Another reason for the moderation of the party leadership was that
a continuous over-all increase of votes, which might one day pro­
vide the party with a parliamentary majority, appeared as the only
long-term chance to break through the “iron ring” that fettered the
labor movement. This situation demanded that nothing be done
to jeopardize legal freedom while an aggressive rhetoric was sus­
tained, especially at election times, to appeal to widespread dis­
satisfaction. Many Social Democratic votes were cast by dissatis­
fied voters who were not interested in or even averse to socialist
doctrines proper. There was no clear idea what might happen if a
majority was won, because the government was responsible to the
emperor and not to parliament. Concern about the legal status of
the movement discouraged any specific discussion of solutions for
this problem. The unions, which rose again in the nineties, and the
emergent regional organizations in southern Germany, which de­
veloped around the party representatives in the state diets, were
outright reformist. Furthermore, reformist tendencies were en­
couraged by the slow increase of opportunities for party and union
functionaries to gain influence in municipal parliaments, labor
exchanges, sickness funds and labor courts. Many reformist Social
Democrats did not challenge the prevailing Marxist ideology—
either because they had little interest in theoretical issues, or be­
cause they quite practically did not want to strain the unity of the
party.46
The dualism of theory and practice entailed some lasting ad­
vantages—but also increasing disadvantages. It was bound to
mobilize against the leadership those who wanted either the party’s
46 Typical of such a “practical” reformism were the Bavarian Social Demo­
crats under the very able leadership of Georg von Vollmar, a retired pro­
fessional officer who had been permanently disabled during the FrancoPrussian war. Vollmar was at first a radical, but after 1890 he took skilful
advantage of the community of interests of liberals and Social Democrats
in a predominantly Catholic state and he even managed, for a time, to
invade successfully petty-bourgeois and peasant strata in the industrially
“underdeveloped” country.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

186

policies to conform to its radical creed or its creed to the moderate
policies. Within a few years a permanent right and left wing de­
veloped, which made the top leadership “Centrist” ; this meant
that it continued its attempt to strike a balance between radical
rhetoric and moderate practice. Bebel, Liebknecht, the members
of the Reichstag faction and other prominent leaders had always
been spokesmen before the members as well as before the govern­
ment and the public. After 1890 they had to deal as well with two
articulate wings. This explains much of the contradictory and
ambiguous nature of the views expressed by them.47 The Centrist
policies also contributed to the phenomenon of driving a member
first to the left and then to the right. Bebel used to say that leftwing radicals often would move toward the extreme right within a
short time; but, as Michels writes in his necrology, he failed to
understand how much the discrepancy between his verbal radical­
ism and his cautious practice contributed to making young mem­
bers, especially intellectuals, first radical and then, after their dis­
illusionment, opportunistic.48
47 Indispensable for an understanding of the top leaders’ reactions to the
internal and external strains and pressures is Friedrich Adler (1879-1960)
and the Austrian Socialist party, eds., Victor Adler: Briefwechsel mit
August Bebel und Karl Kautsky (Vienna: Volksbuchhandlung, 1954), 680
pp. The volume includes letters to and from Ignaz Auer, Eduard Bernstein,
Adolf Braun, Heinrich Dietz, Friedrich Ebert, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Hermann
Müller and Paul Singer. Victor Adler (1852-1918), a medical doctor, was
the brilliant and undisputed leader of the Austrian labor movement before
the First World War.
48 See R. Michels, op. cit., 697 f. Michels criticized Bebel’s speeches for
“indecision and unevenness” and detected ominous similarities to the writings
of the “opportunist” Italian professor Enrico Ferri. He quoted Hellmuth von
Gerlach (a Junker who became a left-winger) on Bebel: he always pursued
either “the farthest long-range policy or a policy as nearly oriented towards
the present moment as was possible” (allerfernste Zukunftspolitik oder aller­
nächste Augenblickspolitik). He added: “This is correct. But this shortcom­
ing was no caprice. It was rooted in the character of the man and the char­
acter of the German labor movement after 1870.” Op. cit., 691.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

187

The first Marxist opposition against the leadership may be
briefly described as an illustration of the tendency of believers to
make the party’s policies conform to its radical creed. It arose in
1890, the time when the Erfurt program was prepared. The lowerranking functionaries and active party workers had become more
radical, primarily because of the antisocialist legislation, but also
because of an increasing exposure to Marxist rhetoric. Further­
more, the fall of the antisocialist legislation greatly strengthened
the belief in the imminent breakdown of the capitalist system. The
opposition fully accepted the concept of the class struggle and ex­
plained the moderate policies of the party as the result of the influx
of petty-bourgeois elements and of gradually acquired petty-bour­
geois attitudes on the part of the older leaders. One of the intel­
lectual representatives of the opposition even used a “vulgar”
Marxist argument against the party leaders, pronouncing that
“party programs don’t prove anything about the character of a
party”; 49 the social composition of the party was decisive. He
also maintained that the complex new program was not understood
by party members, that it was the work of the top leaders and was
not derived from the radical mood of the masses. The opposition
insisted that state reform could not help the working class, and it
feared the impact of reform on the fighting spirit of the masses. It
demanded that the party pursue a policy of absolute opposition,
the Reichstag faction limiting itself to purely propagandiste moves.
The opposition hoped for the support of Bebel and Engels and
suffered the bitter disappointment of finding both vigorously against
them. Bebel was willing to speak in a more radical vein, but was
not interested in a further radicalization of urban members. Radicalization of urban districts could not improve the chances of gain­
ing seats in parliament, but might very well induce the govern­
ment and the bourgeois parties to enact new repressive legislation.
49 Hans Müller, Der Klassenkampf in der deutschen Sozialdemokratie
(Zürich: Verlags-Magazin, 1892), 10.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

188

Bebel and the majority of the functionaries fought the opposition
with the argument that the party had become more radical—be­
cause of its new program.50
Although this first organized Marxist opposition was easily,
crushed, the radical sentiments did not subside. In fact, the Centrist
leaders had no interest in suppressing such sentiments because they
provided much of the driving force of the movement. However,
radicalism in the ranks and the parliamentary goals of the party
forced a conflicting pattern upon the leadership which prescribed,
on the one hand, a specific radical rhetoric at the party conven­
tions and, on the other, moderate demands and a more diffuse
rhetoric in parliament and during election campaigns. As a legal
movement the labor movement had to adhere to moderate prac­
tices. Because of the strength of the dominant system, the leaders
used only the possibilities for political action which would not
jeopardize the survival of the movement. On the other hand, con­
siderations of organizational self-maintenance made the leadership
stick to its radical rhetoric which had become “infused with value”
(Selznick) for the members.51 Once Marxism had been accepted
on various levels of comprehension, any sacrifice of principle could
easily have disorganized the followers without improving the stra­
tegic position of the party. And because the external situation of
50 Bebel and Singer used their charisma to fully crush the opposition at meet­
ings, which turned into great demonstrations of the allegiance of the masses
to their long-time leaders. Engels called the opposition “a revolt of literati
and students.” Bernstein, however, makes it clear that the majority of the
opposition indeed consisted of workers and functionaries who rose from the
ranks, and that it was quite natural for writers and university-educated mem­
bers to play a role. While Engels charged them with distorting his views and
ignoring the practical interests of the movement, Bernstein points out that
some passages in Engels’ writings seemed to support the opposition. See
E. Bernstein, Geschichte der Berliner Arbeiterbewegung, op. cit., 325 f.
51 On the concept of self-maintenance and infusion with value, see P. Selznick, Leadership in Administration (Evanston: Row, Peterson, 1957), 20 f.
Cf. also Ch. X, p. 257.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

189

the movement, particularly its isolation within a powerful dominant
system, did not basically change over the years, there was no compelling reason to change the ideology.
The Centrist position of the leadership was, by and large, bol­
stered by a theoretically sophisticated, deterministic interpretation
of Marxism, which became known as orthodox Marxism and which
was elaborated by Kautsky and his group.52 As the caretaker of
Marx and Engels’ literary remains, he did much to make their
work accessible to the party. As a party theoretician he was forced
to pay greater attention to practical problems than they had needed
to. Marx and Engels had purposively refrained from spelling out
concrete solutions for the problems of the transition from capital­
ism to socialism. Kautsky, on the other hand, addressed himself
to these problems, but he did so by fusing radical images with re­
formist meaning. An example is his definition of the dictatorship
of the proletariat; as early as 1893 he wrote to Franz Mehring that
he could think of no better form for the dictatorship of the pro­
letariat than a powerful parliament, after the English pattern, with
a Social Democratic majority and a strong proletariat backing it.53
He considered a violent revolution possible but visualized as its
aim the establishment of parliamentary democracy. Still, this was
only a relative moderation. It continued to antagonize the ruling
groups, but it also left many persons dissatisfied who were opposed
to the dominant system. Although the labor movement was the re­
sult of a rigid class structure, its own radical ideology prevented
it from appealing effectively to other lower-class groups and to
sections of the middle class. While the belief in a unique mission
62 For a detailed analysis of the functions of “Kautskyanism” in the labor
movement before the First World War, see Erich Matthias, “Kautsky und
der Kautskyanismus. Die Funktion der Ideologie in der deutschen Sozial­
demokratie vor dem ersten Weltkrieg,” in Iring Fetscher, ed., Marxismus­
studien (Tübingen: Mohr, 1957), II, 151-97.
63 Cf. letter of July 8, 1893, cited in Boris Goldenberg, op. cit., 15 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

190

was perhaps a response to the lack of social and political recog­
nition, it also helped to prevent such recognition.54
This was clearly understood by many reformists and the revision­
ists.55 Theirs was an attempt to free the party from some of its
ideological impediments and to adjust its ideology to its political
practice. The strength of reformist sentiment was even taken into
account by Engels, shortly before his death, in his preface to the
1895 edition of Marx’s Class Struggle in France. Engels discussed
some strategic changes that had taken place in the more than 40
years since Marx had written his analysis. The advance of indus­
trialization did create a large proletariat, but the latter “must gradu­
ally proceed by hard, tenacious struggle from position to posi­
tion,” since technological military developments make victory
from the barricades increasingly difficult. However, the German
workers have developed “one of the sharpest weapons, by showing
their comrades in all countries how to utilize the general franchise.”
Legal expansion was the road to ultimate triumph, which could only
be blocked if the labor movement gave the governments a pretext
for military repression. Optimistically relying on the numerical in­
crease of votes, Engels predicted that “if this goes on, we shall at
the close of the century win over the greater part of the middle
social layers, petty bourgeoisie as well as small peasants, and we
shall come to be the decisive power in the land, before which all
other powers must bow whether they like it or not.” 56
While the Centrist leaders were quite willing to make ideological
54 Cf. Massing, op. cit., 204. See also H. de Man, Gegen den Strom (Stutt­
gart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1953), 201 f.
55 Revisionism refers to attempts to revise Marxism, not just to reformist
activities.
56 Quoted from a separate printing of the preface under the title, The Revolu­
tionary A ct (New York: Labor News Company [Socialist Labor Party],
1922), 22, 26, 36. The impact of this preface was considerable among Social
Democrats in various countries and strengthened revisionism theoretically.
Its effect could not be obliterated by Kautsky’s later proof that Engels had
meant to make merely a tactical concession. Cf. Robert Michels, Political
Parties (New York: Collier Books, 1962), 336.

Marxism in the Social Democratic Subculture

191

concessions to the exigencies of the party’s situation, Bernstein’s
challenge, three years later, went too far for them. Bernstein re­
turned from his long exile in England, strongly influenced by the
Fabians and by English social and political developments in gen­
eral. He called on the party “to find the courage to free itself from
a phraseology which is indeed outdated; and to appear as what it
really is today— a democratic, socialist reform party.” 57 The execu­
tive quickly moved to keep Bernstein in check, because it feared
that the morale of the faithful and the unity of the movement would
be weakened. The astute Ignaz Auer, who did not rank much
below Bebel, retorted to “Ede” Bernstein in a letter:
D o you really think that a party that has a fifty-year-old literature
and a nearly forty-year-old organization . . . can change so quickly?
The party would be blown to pieces if the leaders would act according
to your demands. My dear Ede, your demands cannot be formally
agreed upon and cannot be talked about, they are just acted upon. Our
whole activity, even under the infamous law [i.e., the antisocialist legis­
lation], was the activity of a Social Dem ocratic reform party. A party
which has to take the masses into account can be nothing else.58

Kautsky and others seized on weaknesses of Bernstein’s revision
of Marx. Bernstein attacked the economic necessity of the break­
down of capitalist society and pointed to the continued importance
of the middle classes. However, he did not effectively attack the
basic Marxist assumption of the falling rate of profit, which was
defended by the new Marxist theory of imperialism. This theory
maintained that the capitalist exploitation of as yet unindustrial­
ized countries temporarily arrested the secular trend of declining
profit and improved the proletarian standard of living, until the
limits of imperialist expansion had been reached. Increasingly
57 Ed. Bernstein, Evolutionary Socialism (New York: Huebsch, 1909), 197.
In 1898 Bernstein published this collection of articles under the title, Die
Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie.
See also Peter Gay, The Dilemma of Democratic Socialism (New York: Co­
lumbia University Press), 1952.
58 Quoted in G. Ritter, op. cit., 201 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

192

severe international conflicts between the imperialist powers would
be inevitable and would hasten the destruction of capitalism. This
theory was embraced by the new radical left, which emerged about
the turn of the century and which advocated mass demonstrations
and mass strikes in order to enforce further democratization, espe­
cially of the Prussian suffrage. Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Lieb­
knecht, the son of Wilhelm Liebknecht, became its renowned
spokesmen.
The isolation of the labor movement and the power of the domi­
nant system strengthened Revisionist as well as radical tendencies.
Revisionism was a response to both the stability of Imperial Ger­
many and the orthodox line of the party, while radicalism was a
response to the same stability as well as to the rise of Revisionism.
Revisionism saw the only solution for the party’s dilemma in a
rapprochement with the left wing of the middle classes; the radicals
were convinced that the ruling groups could not be defeated with
parliamentary methods alone. Each faction could support its case
with strong, but not definitely convincing, reasons.
The existence of a Revisionist wing enabled the Centrist party
leadership to appear radical and provided it with new opportunities
for verbal radicalism, which preserved the allegiance of the ortho­
dox delegates at the conventions as well as of the extreme leftwing minority. However, since both the Revisionists and the Cen­
trists were more genuine supporters of a parliamentary system than
the extreme left was, they ultimately had more in common with
each other than the Centrists had with the left. The major issue
between Revisionists and Centrists was the degree of democratiza­
tion reached in Imperial Germany, with the Centrists arguing that
a nonviolent revolution in one form or another was probably neces­
sary. The orthodox Marxist rhetoric of the Centrists prevented both
sides from fully recognizing their specific similarities. Only the
events of 1918 revealed to all that the Centrist leadership had
actually embraced the theory of “bourgeois revolution,” that is,
the goal of parliamentary democracy.

VIII
The Meaning of the Labor
Movement to Its Members

Inversely corresponding to the class cleavage in Imperial Germany
and the alienation of the Social Democratic workers from the domi­
nant system was the extraordinary personal importance of the labor
movement for many of its members. Therefore, I will now turn
from the level of the explicit democratic and socialist ideology to
the level of the more diffuse meaning of the labor movement for
its members, especially the less articulate grassroots attitudes. This
will also involve a consideration of the understanding of Marxism
by the masses. The major purpose of this chapter is to show that
the labor movement came to mean for many workers the enrich­
ment of a life which offered relatively few satisfactions on the in­
dustrial job and little social recognition by the dominant system.
Equally important is that acceptance of this exalted meaning did
not generally lead to a revolutionary attitude.
The leaders considered themselves the spokesmen for the masses,
and they indeed verbalized a good deal of what the movement
meant to many workers. However, they took the personal meaning
of fighting for the movement so much for granted that they said
little about it. Furthermore, they were not interested in all aspects
of the movement’s significance for the masses of members, espe­
cially those aspects that did not seem to be in the ideological and
tactical interest of the movement. For the functionaries in the
lower and middle echelons, various meanings can be derived from
the emphasis of their activities. Some aspects of the meaning for
the rank and file were verbalized little or not at all, but they can
be deduced from the autobiographies of a few lower-ranking, part-

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

194

time functionaries. There are also a few autobiographies by men
who rose from the ranks of workers to become teachers or writers,
men who had only a temporary connection with the labor move­
ment. And something can be gleaned from the observations of out­
siders. On the whole, the evidence for the meaning of the labor
movement to the rank and file is inevitably fragmentary.

1. Leaders and Followers
At the 1890 party convention Bebel said, “We possess the tre­
mendous following and the trust of the working masses only be­
cause they see that we are working practically for them, that we
do not merely refer them to the indefinite future of the socialist
state.” 1 Two decades later, the interrelationship of ideological ap­
peals and “practical work” was clearly stated by Ludwig Frank,
the most brilliant Revisionist parliamentarian of the years before
the First World War.
The propaganda for our future socialist goals has awakened millions
o f people, orienting them toward goals which transcend their narrow
existence. But at present it is the practical work which we have done
and want to continue to do that makes us great, that gives us a secure
place in the hearts of the masses.12

From the sixties until his death in 1913, Bebel came to sym­
bolize above all others the wishes and ideals of the masses. He was
recognized by them as one of their own and thus belonged, as
Robert Michels pointed out in his necrologue, to the few middleclass persons who attained such a position in the German labor
movement. Social Democratic newspapers even claimed him to be
1 Parteitag Protocols, Halle, 1890, 102.
2 Parteitag Protocols, Leipzig, 1909, 340.

The Meaning of the Movement to Its Members

195

a proletarian genealogically.3 In an un-Marxist fashion, he quali­
fied as a proletarian because in his childhood he had lived in
poverty. The elective affinity between Bebel and his followers went
so far that Franz Mehring applied to him the Swabian phrase about
Ludwig Uhland, the popular poet and liberal members of the 1848
Constituent Assembly: “Every word he ever spoke was right for
us.” 4 Bebel’s apodictic way of stating his views seems to have
helped rather than handicapped his relations with the masses even
when he made a turn-about.5 They liked his rhetoric in so far as
it expressed their aspirations and resentments, but many workers
seem to have had ambivalent feelings toward its radical and utopian
aspects.
When the theologian Paul Göhre went to work in a factory in
the early nineties, he found that for the majority
. . . especially o f the more intelligent, thoughtful, practical, experi­
enced and mature men, neither the official republicanism nor the eco­
nomic communism were really popular. These were things for which
most of them had no real understanding and enthusiasm. They ac­
cepted this, along with so many other things, as part o f the Social
Dem ocratic movement; indifferently they left it to the leaders to deal
with these incomprehensible problems, often secretly convinced or at
least prepared that these prophesies would never be fulfilled. Thus a
relatively well-situated, childless worker, an older, good-natured and
polite man once told me: “Things will never be the way Bebel wants
them to be in the future. He has already changed his mind, and he will
continue to do so.” . . .
3 Cf. Michels, “Bebel,” op. cit., 674. A difference between English and Ger­
man labor spokesmen with middle-class backgrounds seems to be that the
English leaders also remained spokesmen for their own class although they
sometimes emphasized, in their appeal to workers, that they or their ancestors
had risen from the ranks of labor. But they did not completely identify with
the workers as did Bebel, nor were they recognized to the extent he was.
Cf. Reinhard Bendix, Work and Authority, op. cit., 115.
4 Quoted in Pinson, op. cit., 209 f.
5 Cf. Michels, op. cit., 677 and Eduard David, “Die Eroberung der politischen
Macht,” Sozialistische Monatshefte, 1904, 16.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

196

A very intelligent, thoughtful and convinced Social Dem ocrat once
told me in a long conversation: Y ou know, I scarcely ever read a Social
Dem ocratic book and seldom a newspaper. I used to be unconcerned
about politics, but since I have been married and have five big eaters
at home I must be concerned about it— not for myself. I am not in
favor o f red ties, big round hats and similar things. This does not mat­
ter to me. N or do we want to be equal to the rich and distinguished
people. There must always be rich and poor people. This we do not
want to change. But we want a more just and a better order in the fac­
tory and the state. My thoughts about these things I will tell to everyone,
whether he likes it or not. However, I will do nothing unlawful.6

This self-conscious emphasis on moderation and respectability
served a defensive purpose vis-à-vis the government and the public,
but there can be little doubt that it was genuine. The self-made
astronomer and writer of best-sellers, Bruno Bürgel, supports
Göhre’s impressions of the majority of Social Democratic followers
in the early nineties. Their beliefs were largely based on a secular­
ized Christian equalitarianism, as it was expressed in the great
slogans of liberalism and socialism.
It may be o f som e interest for those o f my readers who are not familiar
with the world o f the working masses to learn something about the feel­
ings and thoughts which moved us at the time. I do not speak o f the
leaders, the politically trained functionaries who had more intensively
studied politics and sociology, but of the broad masses as they were at
the time. In no way was there any violent inclination; we were glad
not to be molested by the police; we were afraid to cause the slightest
provocation for police intervention, because every incident was used to
scare the bourgeois public. In a peaceful way the worker hoped to 8
8 Paul Göhre, Drei Monate Fabrikarbeiter (Leipzig: Grunow, 1891), 112 f.
In the early nineties Göhre was secretary of the Evangelisch-Soziale Kon­
gress, a group of Protestant clergymen and academic men brought together
by the former Court Chaplain Stoecker after he was fired in 1890. Later
Göhre and Friedrich Naumann founded the Christian-Social party. After a
clash with Naumann, Göhre joined the Social Democratic party in 1901 and
became a Reichstag member in 1903. After 1918 he was secretary of state in
a federal and a Prussian ministry.

The Meaning of the Movement to Its Members

197

reach his goals. And what were his arguments? Work is the source
of all wealth and o f all culture. We who do the greatest part of the
work share least in the fruits of labor. We are brothers, by birth equal
one to another. The existing cultural differences are due to the un­
favorable social conditions o f the great masses. N obody can or should
be the master o f anybody else. Equal rights, equal duties, equal share
in the material and cultural blessings of work! We merely want the
right to pursue these goals in a peaceful way until the majority o f the
people has joined us and until a transformation o f the capitalist into
the socialist society is possible in a peaceful fashion.78

Another description of grassroots sentiments for the same time
stems from Carl Severing, Prussian Minister of the Interior during
most of the Weimar period. He maintains in his autobiography
that millions of workers joined the labor movement because they
wanted to improve their living conditions and win more freedom,
not because of the activities of a few agitators or the propagandists
appeals of Marxist theories. These were his own reasons for join­
ing the trade union and party about 1890, when he was still very
young: 8 Severing plays down somewhat the role of agitation and
ideology in order to counter the old argument so often hurled
at the labor movement that it arose not from genuine but from
artificial needs of the workers. It is true that the tenacious activi­
ties of a very small number of paid and unpaid functionaries
would have been unsuccessful if in responding to their appeals the
workers had not felt that their own needs were being met. But
eventually the efforts of this nucleus afforded to hundreds of
thousands of workers participation in “great issues” of the work­
ing class and of mankind as well as meaningful everyday activities
7 Bruno Bürgel, Vom Arbeiter zum Astronom (Berlin: Druckhaus Tempel­
hof, 1929), 64. The phrase “Work is the source of all wealth and all culture”
was the first sentence of the Gotha program of 1875.
8 Cf. Carl Severing, Mein Leben (Cologne: Greven, 1950), I, 34. On the
primary interest of many trade union members in concrete economic benefits,
see Adolf Braun, “Realismus und Utopismus in den Gewerkschaften,” Der
Kampf, VIII, 1915, 46.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

198

which provided satisfactions denied by the dominant system. Many
of these activities looked shallow to radicals, but this did not
diminish their importance to those pursuing them. This meaning
and the intensive identification of common members with the lead­
ers were eloquently described by Eugen Prager, after he had left
the old party during the World War to help establish a new one
which would preserve the old spirit:
Have respect for the hundreds of thousands of Social Democrats who
worked indefatigably year after year, nameless and without external
recognition, though the fruits of their labor were to ripen only for the
coming generations. Let us not lightly pass over this period with the as­
sertion that it was a shallow period of the embourgeoisement of the
party. Who does not remember what the party meant to him during the
long or short span of his membership? Not only the hope for a
happier future, but the fulfillment of the present, too: the rescue from
the political depression of the time, the belief in the creativity of the
proletariat, the recognition of the emergence of a new world. In all of
this we shared: in the details of everyday activities as much as in the
great battles; the party newspaper was a part of our self, the organiza­
tion, down to the smallest district and dues meeting, was a living com­
munity. Bebel, Singer, the great and the little men who spoke for the
party: they were not leaders, they were the masses, it was us. Whether
it was a matter of a prison sentence against striking workers, of a
lock-out, a parliamentary action, or an election, we were always in­
volved with heart and soul because it was our cause, the cause of the
party that was at stake. A split was unthinkable at that time.9 .
Göhre, Bürgel, Severing and Prager do not emphasize the con­
siderable appeal of vulgar Marxism which spread after 1890, inter­
ested as they are in pointing to the moderation, respectability, so­
briety and dedication of the workers. Because of its complex
attractions, simplified, vulgar Marxism became a constitutive part
of the labor movement’s meaning to many followers. Some of the
explanations for these attractions are less flattering for the workers
than the preceding accounts of their mentality.
• Prager, op. cit., 14 f.

The Meaning of the Movement to Its Members

199

2. The Appeals of Vulgar Marxism
The deterministic component of Marxist ideology was apparently
meaningful to both moderate and radical active party members, as
well as to the passive followers of the movement. Relating Bebel’s
popularity to his pronounced Marxist phraseology, Michels ex­
plained “the suggestive effect which Marxism in particular exerted
on the masses” as a resultant of their strong desires and their
passive tendencies. The worker “need only pay his party dues and
at election time deliver his Social Democratic ballot. The rest will
be taken care of by the ‘development.’ ” 10 Irrespective of whether
there was a modal proletarian personality characterized by strong
desires and passive tendencies— a theory which Michels took over
from the psychologist and democratic politician Wilhelm Hellpach
(1877-1955)— deterministic Marxism was indeed attractive to
those who were relatively passive supporters.11 However, it could
also motivate many party workers to great exertion in order to
facilitate the “inevitable” development in accordance with Marx’s
dictum that it is possible “to shorten and lessen the birth-pangs of
the new society.” 12
For the workers to understand Marxism, it had to be vulgarized.
The “Austro-Marxist” Otto Bauer, the leading theoretician of the
Austrian party and its leader after the First World War, accepted
this in 1907.
Deterministic Marxism is for the masses o f workers not only a tre­
mendous advance o f knowledge, but also a motive power o f their will
. . . the reception o f a new science by the masses is an historical proc10 Michels, “Bebel,” 692 f.
11 Cf. Wilhelm Hellpach, Nervenleben und Weltanschauung (Wiesbaden:
Bergmann, 1906).
12 Karl Marx, Capital, 15.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

200

ess in the course o f which the masses adapt the thoughts they want to
understand to their capacity for comprehension at a given moment.
From the history o f the natural sciences and of philosophy many ex­
amples could be provided which show that the simplification and vul­
garization of a new doctrine is nothing but a stage o f its victorious ad­
vance, o f its rise to general acceptance.13

The low level of comprehension had advantages as well as dis­
advantages. It handicapped the functionaries and the ordinary party
members when greater knowledge would have made it easier for
them to convince more workers or to defend more aptly the social­
ist position against bourgeois critique. Lack of knowledge com-'
bined with great enthusiasm for the new creed many times re­
sulted in frustrations and antagonisms between the believers and
their fellow workers.14 But the firmness of the naive belief in
vulgar Marxism also afforded protection against the disillusioning
realization of the theoretical difficulties of Marxism and of the
complexity of political and social processes. When Joseph Buttinger, who cooperated and finally clashed with Otto Bauer in the
Austrian underground movement of the nineteen thirties, was ap­
pointed at the age of 24 to the very responsible position of a local
party secretary, he delivered 12 carefully outlined lectures on the
overambitious topic, “From the Primordial Nebula to the State of
the Future”— a farewell address to the youth group he had led.
Marxism, as he understood it, gave him more certainty than Cath­
olic dogma had previously given him, and he set out unhesitatingly
to explain to his audience problems which he himself did not ade­
quately understand.15
13 Otto Bauer, “Die Geschichte eines Buches,” Neue Zeit, 26:1, 1908,
26 f. This article was written on the 40th anniversary of the publication of
the first volume of Das Kapital.
14 Cf. the memoirs of Wenzel Holek, Lebensgang eines Handarbeiters (Jena:
Diederichs, 1930), 212 f. First published in 1909.
15 Cf. Joseph Buttinger, In the Twilight of Socialism (New York: Praeger,
1953), 407 f. This is perhaps the most perceptive extensive description by a
former Social Democrat of the Social Democratic subculture. Buttinger grew

The Meaning of the Movement to Its Members

201

Of what did vulgar Marxism consist? In his memorial article on
Das Kapital, Otto Bauer enumerates the various disjointed com­
ponents of vulgar Marxism separately believed in by the masses,
but considered to have scientific connection beyond their under­
standing:
The mode o f production o f material life determines the social, polit­
ical and cultural process o f life. It is not the consciousness of men
which determines their existence, but their social existence which deter­
mines their consciousness.
The history of all hitherto existing society is a history of class
struggles.
The value o f a commodity is determined by the labor socially neces­
sary for its production.
The wealth of the propertied classes derives from the surplus value
produced by the workers, from the unpaid labor of the working class.
Capitalist society tends to increase more and more the misery o f the
workers.
Small business will be destroyed; the control over the means o f pro­
duction falls into the hands o f a continuously decreasing number of big
capitalists.
M onopoly capitalism has becom e a fetter on the mode o f produc­
tion which arose under it and with it. The centralization of the means
o f production and the socialization of labor will reach a point where
they will be incompatible with the external capitalist form. The final
hour of capitalist private property is approaching. The expropriators
will be expropriated.16

Bauer did not explain the appeal of the disjointed propositions
to the workers. This was done later by de Man, who proposed an
up at the end of the period under investigation. He became a socialist when
the Social Democratic subculture was reaching its peak in the nineteentwenties. Since the basic structure of this subculture emerged long before the
First World War, it seems to be legitimate to consider those of his experiences
pertinent which are not definitely time-bound. Again, as a Social Democratic
subculture, the Austrian labor movement does not appear to be significantly
different from the German.
16 Otto Bauer, loc. cit.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

202

explanation of why and in what fashion key concepts of Marxian
theory changed their original meaning in the process of adoption by
large numbers of people. He contrasted the differential reactions of
workers and of intellectuals to what they considered the iniquitous
effects of industrialization. Their affects are similar, but the intel­
lectuals attempt to arrive at valid theories while the masses trans­
form these theories “by a regressive evolution . . . into symbols
of affects.” 17 He argued that vulgar Marxism was successful be­
cause it corresponded to the everyday feelings and perceptions of
the masses:
For instance, the concept o f exploitation, which Marx based upon
scientific argument, acquires a symbolical significance . . . in the
minds of the masses. M illions o f workers believe that Marx proved that
the employers unjustly appropriate part of the value which they, the
workers, create— namely surplus value. Am ong these millions, you will
hardly find a few hundred who are capable o f understanding Marx’s
arguments. The immense majority never attempt to get acquainted
with them. Besides, the arguments have no bearing upon the symbol­
ical use of the concepts “surplus value” and “exploitation.” The sym ­
bolical use is entirely based upon the feeling the worker has, born out
o f experience, that he is being exploited. . . . the masses regard as
fundamental that which Marx intentionally left in the shade, or tacitly
assumed to be already proved, namely the moral stigma which attaches
to the em ploying class for an unjust appropriation o f surplus value.
. . . Marxism is that which the labor movement, regarded as a totality
o f trends of em otion and will, has made of the theoretical system of
Marx. Nothing else is alive in Marxism, for nothing else is able to
create life, new social life.18

However, de Man was aware that the beliefs of many workers,
even if they seemed to coincide with their everyday experience,
could often easily be disturbed when they had to face members of
17 De Man, op. cit., 414-16.
18Loc. cit. On the transformation of the concepts: expropriation of the ex­
propriators, scientific socialism, class struggle, dictatorship of the proletariat,
revolution, see op. cit., 419 ff.

The Meaning of the Movement to Its Members

203

higher strata and were told, for example, that the top managers
in industry were hard-working men and very important for eco­
nomic progress.19 The class distance of workers from middle-class
persons and especially the political distance of Social Democratic
workers from members of higher strata impeded or made impos­
sible effective political communication. This had advantages for
the labor movement and for vulgar Marxism because it decreased
the competition from the ideas of the dominant system.20
De Man’s thesis that vulgar Marxism lent itself as an expression
of desires, aspirations, resentments and everyday experiences of the
workers may be accepted, but the ideological propositions and pre­
scription alone would not have meant much if the labor move­
ment had not offered the concrete experience of solidarity and of
social recognition within a group of like-minded peers. Of course,
Marxism provided a good rationale for the solidarity of the work­
ing class, but the collective experience was primary.

3. Solidarity and Collective Action
The attractions of solidarity and collective action can be illustrated
in three different contexts: at the time of joining the movement,
while doing lower-level party work, and during extreme political
crises. A few examples, covering the whole period under investiga­
tion, may be mentioned. Anton Weiguny described in his memoirs
the first attempts to organize journeymen tailors and garment work­
ers (Schneidergehilfen) of small businesses in upper Austria in the
19 Cf. loc. cit. For similar observations, see Georg Maercker, Vom Kaiser­
heer zur Reichswehr, 2nded. (Leipzig: Koehler, 1921), 161.
20 Holek’s break with the labor movement was in part due to the continuous
influence of an educated person who enabled him to rise into the lower
middle-class stratum by making him the director of a Protestant youth pro­
gram. See Wenzel Holek, Vom Handarbeiter zum Jugenderzieher: Lebens­
gang eines deutschtschechischen Handarbeiters (Jena: Diederichs, 1921).

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

204

1870’s. The thrill of involvement in “serious” collective action for
one’s own economic group was so strong it enabled a radical break
with past clique behavior and rivalry among different vocational
groups of journeymen. The young workers suddenly became quite
serious at the prospect of responsible group action. Weiguny’s col­
leagues, each in his turn, sacrificed an hour’s wage in order to read
aloud during work hours, a practice previously observed by the
tobacco workers.21
When Buttinger was a 15-year-old boy, forced by his proletarian
family’s poverty to work on a farm, he experienced “the most
sublime feeling” of his young life as 400 workers poured into his
village to demonstrate against the mistreatment of a Social Demo­
cratic health insurance official: “Their appearance . . . awakened
a sense of forces that would lift a man above the personal selfish­
ness that, in the village, had shaped his outlook on life.” 22
The “workers’ poet” Karl Bröger (1886-1944) at first resisted
demands to pay union dues, preferring to be forced off a job.
Finally, he yielded to pressures. The conversion, with the experi­
ence of solidarity and the renunciation of individualism, came when
he listened to the speech of a functionary who threatened a strike
if a fired worker was not rehired:
H e who yelled loudest and applauded most was [Bröger]. H e was
glowing with zeal and conviction. H e nodded again and again and
searched for the reflection o f his own agitation in the faces o f the
others. Everywhere he found it. . . . H e suddenly grasped the value
and power o f com munity and was anxious to support this newly found
recognition. H e began to talk about trade union problems, read what
was worthwhile in this field, although he found it strange at first, and
passionately accepted the socialist doctrine of salvation.
21 Cf. Anton Weiguny, Erinnerungen eines Alten aus den Anfängen der ober­
österreichischen Arbeiterbewegung, 17, quoted in Richard Wagner, Ge­
schichte der Kleiderarbeiter in Österreich im 19. Jahrhundert und im ersten
Viertel des 20. Jahrhunderts (Vienna: Gewerkschaft der Kleiderarbeiter
Österreichs, 1930), 122.
22 Buttinger, op. cit., 403 f. By permission of the publisher.

The Meaning of the Movement to Its Members

205

H e had known that there were the rich and the poor and that there
were more, infinitely more poor people. But he had been satisfied with
this knowledge and derived from it the incentive to become rich him­
self. He had not been concerned with the goals of his own life sphere.
Indeed, he had rejected his world, he had painfully tried again and
again to transcend it spiritually. When he looked back, in the light
o f his socialist wisdom, on his youthful struggles, they appeared to him
like the hopeless fighting o f a soldier who, cut off from his troops,
desperately carried on his own war. He believed the new order of life
would com e for all the poor, not just for one alone. It will com e for
everyone or it will not com e at all. H is difficult attempts during all
those years were bound to end in defeat, for he had desired better­
ment only for himself; he had dreamed o f millions of Marks to give
him the good life in harmony with his tastes and capabilities. H e had
no thoughts for other people or only those o f a rich man handing out
alms. There is no right to personal happiness, there is only the duty
to further the general welfare.23

Sons of Social Democrats were likely to join the labor move­
ment, but not merely because of their fathers’ example. A case in
point is William Bromme.24 He joined after the fall of the anti­
socialist legislation because of the appeal of “serious” collective
pursuits.
At first Bromme did for the party only what his father demanded.
He carried socialist pamphlets and newspapers and shouted slo­
gans during an election campaign. For a while he sympathized, for
reasons not given, with the Advanced Liberals. He also spent much
time with a nonpolitical group of friends who had formed a regu­
lar “table group” (Stammtisch) in 1889, unimaginatively called
Frohsinn, as many of the hundreds of German glee clubs were
named. When he first attended socialist meetings at the age of 16,
he was much impressed. Even the cheerfulness after the meetings
23 Karl Bröger, Der Held im Schatten (Jena: Diederichs, 1930), 135 f. This
autobiographical novel covers the period from the nineties until 1914.
24 Cf. William T. Bromme, Lebensgeschichte eines modernen Fabrikar­
beiters, Paul Göhre, ed. (Jena: Diederichs, 1905). The following refers espe­
cially to 128-32, 233-39, 326 and 334.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

206

appeared to him different from the boisterousness of his glee club
friends. At first, his positive reaction may have been primarily due
to the appeal of seriousness and adulthood. But he gradually came
to understand, as his father had before him, that the combination
of the workers was the only means to improve their conditions. As
isolated individuals they could neither change their immediate nor
their wider social environment. The labor movement offered a solu­
tion. As the father became a victim of his political activity, the
direct and indirect achievements of the labor movement began to
benefit his son. When the son was dismissed for political reasons
and indicted for political blackmail in 1898, the organizations
which the father had helped to build supported the son. Under the
impact of the labor movement’s growth, the state accepted some
responsibility for securing improved working and living conditions.
Bromme’s mother died of tuberculosis; his tubercular condition
was treated under the provisions of the sickness insurance. How­
ever, Bromme was incapable of further physical work at the age
of 33— the year that he finished his autobiography.
When Bromme writes that his political attitude and innermost
conviction made him continue to work for the party, despite his ill
health and his wife’s opposition, he bares only one part of the mean­
ing of the labor movement for him. His memoirs clearly reveal his
personal need for sociability and self-respect. Party work was the
most meaningful activity of his life. To give it up would have made
him just a party member or voter, no longer belonging to the in­
group of the local party organization.
This raises the problem of the meaning of the labor move­
ment for the more active members, the lower-ranking function­
aries in particular. A relevant example here is Adelheid Popp, who
became one of the most prominent women of the Austrian labor
movement. Her case shows that material deprivations alone were
not usually enough to make a worker turn to the labor movement.
Adelheid Popp paints a picture of her youth exposing fully the
physical and psychical mutilation inflicted on many men and women

The Meaning of the Movement to Its Members

207

of the first lower-class generation recruited for large-scale indus­
trialization.25 However, extreme suffering made her no more favor­
able to socialism than it made the thousands of other women at
work in Viennese factories during the eighties. She believed the
anti-Semitic propaganda and the characterization of Social Demo­
crats as anarchists. But when she was without a job for several
weeks her Catholic faith was shaken. Trials of Social Democrats
aroused her compassion and interested her in the labor movement.
After meeting her first Social Democrat in the eighties, she ex­
pected the revolution within a short time. Gradually her grasp of
socialist ideas improved, and the party speakers and newspapers
formulated for her those ideas she was unable to develop on
her own:
I heard clearly and convincingly expressed that which I had instinc­
tively felt but had never been able to think out. . . . The more con­
sciously I became a socialist, the more free and strong I felt to meet all
opponents.26

Reading pulp magazine fiction had kept her for several years in
an imaginary world. Socialism, on the other hand, was concrete in
a double sense: it was a theory explaining her material living con­
ditions and promising a millennium, and a political movement to
which she could belong. The labor movement provided her with
meaningful work and an articulate class consciousness. Absorbed
in everyday party work, she completely identified with the move25 Adelheid Popp, Autobiography of a Working Woman (London: Unwin,
1912). Popp’s family came from Bohemia. As industrialization progressed in
Austria, many non-German citizens of the Doi blc Monarchy migrated to
Vienna, the industrial center of the country. Thus, there was a development
similar to, though not as pronounced as, the development in the United States
where the lowest social group was to a large extent made up of the most
recent wave of immigrants. “Undesirable” workers could be deported from
Vienna to their native villages. For her political activities Popp was threat­
ened with deportation to Bohemia although she could not speak Czech.
26 Op. cit., 99 and 34.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

208

ment. This is what it meant to her to become a full-time func­
tionary:
I was now endlessly happy. I had a sphere o f work which satisfied all
my longings but which I had considered quite unattainable for myself.
It was to me the Promised Land.27

The intense identification with the labor movement and the
great sense of personal satisfaction were shared by both moderate
and radical functionaries. Both groups were equally interested in
efficient organization, but the radicals, such as Buttinger, were also
concerned with the Marxist indoctrination of the workers, particu­
larly those who were already followers. The more radical func­
tionaries could afford such concern because they did not carry the
responsibilities, sustained by the top leaders, for the survival of the
movement and for dealing with the government and the public; they
could operate nearly exclusively within the classbound and isolated
realm of the Social Democratic subculture. Many moderate func­
tionaries, too, immersed themselves completely in this realm.
Typical of them was Bromme. He was very useful as a member of
a party which aimed primarily at increasing the number of its
parliamentary seats and at expanding its organization.28 The con­
siderable material sacrifices he made for the party were partly
borne by his wife and children, who could not share the emotional
gratifications which compensated him. He tried to avoid provoca­
tions, but was not deterred from party work by the ever present
possibility of dismissal for political reasons, criminal prosecution
on ad hoc pretexts or the danger to his health through overexer­
tion. This is no mean record, but he was not the kind of man likely
to impress the more radical functionaries. His absorption in ad­
ministrative work, membership drives and electoral campaigning,
to the more or less tacit exclusion of theoretical interests, placed
27 Op. cit., 120.
28 Cf. Bromme, op. cit., 240 f.

The Meaning of the Movement to Its Members

209

him clearly in the ranks of the moderates, among whom the editor
of his autobiography, Pastor Göhre, was prominent.29
Just as the reasons for joining the labor movement and the
activities to which an individual devoted himself shed light on the
movement’s meaning to each person, so the personal meaning be­
came visible in those moments that threatened the very life of the
movement. The events of 1933 proved that the beliefs of the Social
Democratic and Communist functionaries and rank and file were
not functioning to produce mass resistance against the destruction
of the labor movement in Germany. Both movements collapsed
when they were outlawed and confronted with totalitarian methods
of suppression. But this is no argument against the assumption
that the labor movement was the life center of masses of workers.
Whenever suppression was not totalitarian, the importance of the
labor movement for many members made them try to perpetuate
its organizational life. There is a striking parallel between the events
of 1878 in Germany and 1934 in Austria: Many members refused
to give up what meant so much to them. The leaders, with few
exceptions, lost much prestige and control when the confused mem­
bers turned to them only to be disappointed. The descriptions by
Auer, Vollmar and Mehring of the events after the outlawing of
the German party in 1878 and Buttinger’s account of the suppres­
sion of the Austrian party by the clerical fascists are very similar.
The failure of the German leadership was cautiously acknowledged
in 1889 by Ignaz Auer, who conceded that “the executive com­
29 In his composite portrait of a middle-aged, female proletarian party
worker, Buttinger described one consequence of uncritical immersion into
the Social Democratic subculture, namely, the unrelatedness of routine ac­
tivities to their object: To her “anything written in a book or pamphlet issued
by the party was the Gospel truth, sight unseen. Her job was not to read the
party literature but to circulate it. It did not occur to her to doubt the con­
tents. To do so would have seemed silly and unjust as if the ‘leaders and
theoreticians’ at the top had questioned the accuracy of her accounting for
party buttons and publications. Frau Meier’s faith in the party did not rest
on its doctrines but on its life.” Op. cit., 64. By permission of the publisher.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

210

mittee of the party lost touch with the majority in an exceedingly
short time.” 30 Vollmar and Mehring were more outspoken. Vollmar agreed with those who accused the leaders of having aban­
doned the masses, and Mehring wrote in his history of the party
that the masses and not the leaders saved the movement. The
passage was later eliminated at the insistence of Auer and Bebel.31
After 1878 and 1934 many members were soon rallied by ener­
getic organizers willing to use more radical methods, who estab­
lished an underground movement spreading outward from the big
cities.32 Buttinger’s description of many members’ reactions to the
suppression can probably be accepted for both situations. It clearly
reveals the meaning of the movement for them:
To the faithful members and organizers of Social Dem ocracy, the party
ban amounted to brutal interference with their personal lives even if
it failed to affect their econom ic existence. The possible loss o f a few
shillings a week meant nothing to those who now feared for the essence
of their lives. The flags and symbols, the badges and pictures, the songs
and legends o f the “fight for freedom o f the working class” had served
many as substitutes for a lost religion and for . . . national patriotism.
. . . . For tens o f thousands, party work was a self-evident duty, gladly
performed. The very annoyance attached to all social activities seemed
to tie them to it. Often— in choir singing, at giant rallies of the party,
in admiring their leaders, and under the magic spell of the great incan­
tations of their “world struggle for freedom ”— they had lost their own
sense of insignificance. A wonderful, self-surrendering mood would
seize them and lend them a greater dignity, more self-assurance, more
courage, and a stronger socialist faith. Those were the hours o f their
ultimate bliss— and o f the knowledge that all beauty in their lives
came from the better sentiments that had brought them to the socialist
movement. There, by their unselfish, satisfying endeavors, they were
tied up with greater ends— with the harmony the party preached be­
tween their daily political activities and a higher destination of man. To
30 Ignaz Auer, Nach zehn Jahren (Nuremberg: Fränkische Verlagsanstalt,
1913), 95.
31 Cf. Brandis, op. cit., 56 f.
32 Cf. Ch. VII, 182 and Buttinger, op. cit., 64 ff.

The Meaning of the Movement to Its Members

211

lose the party was nothing less to them than to lose home, fatherland,
and religion.33

The fact that the labor movement became “home, fatherland
and religion” to hundreds of thousands points up their great aliena­
tion from the dominant system. But nearly all of the multitude of
activities that made up the Social Democratic subculture were no
direct threat to the dominant system.
The resurrection of the labor movement in 1878 in Germany
and in 1934 in Austria was largely the result of the refusal of
many members to give up inherently nonrevolutionary activities.
In Austria, these exasperated and hampered the minority, which
aimed at a revolutionary uprising.34 Thus, though the labor move­
ment was the life center of many workers, this exalted meaning did
not in itself constitute a revolutionary force. This was due in part
to the moderating factors previously analyzed, but it was due as
well to the fact that the Social Democratic subculture remained tied
to the dominant culture in relevant respects, despite the depth of
the class cleavage.
33 Buttinger, op. cit., 67 f.
34 Cf. op. cit., 70 ff. See also my Ch. IX, 231 n.

IX
The Social Democratic Subculture
and the Dominant Culture

1. The Impact of the Socializing Agencies
of the Dominant Culture
The influence of elementary education, nonsocialist newspapers and
literature and of service in the military remained pervasive during
the whole period. In contrast, the control of the Protestant state
churches over adult workers was largely formal. Like the Anglican
church in England, the Protestant German state churches did not
energetically fight for the allegiance of the working class; there was
no parallel to Methodism.
The power of the socializing agencies of the dominant system was
acknowledged by Liebknecht in 1872 and again at the end of the
period, in 1915, by Adolf Braun, the perceptive Revisionist labor
editor.1 In between it was often overlooked by Social Democrats,
who were proud of their propagandists and educational efforts.
In his famous speech, “Knowledge Is Power—Power Is Knowl­
edge,” Liebknecht attacked the class differences in education, the
pernicious influence of commercial newspapers on taste and polit­
ical attitudes, and cheap popular literature (Kolportage). He
charged that until very recently German classical literature had
been completely withheld from the people and concluded that what
1 See Wilhelm Liebknecht, Wissen ist Macht—Macht ist Wissen. Address on
the occasion of the anniversary of the Dresden Workingmen’s Educational
Association on February 5, 1872, and of the Leipzig Workingmen’s Educa­
tional Association on February 24, 1872. (Leipzig: Genossenschaftsbuch­
druckerei, 1873); Adolf Braun, “Bildungsprobleme in der Arbeiterbewegung,”
Der Kampf, Vol. 8, 1915, 241 ff.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

213

grammar school and army barracks started was finished by the
bourgeois newspapers. He complained of an increasing preoccu­
pation with military and religious affairs in the newspapers:
Religious questions have not been treated so zealously for 200 years.
One might think we were back in the wildest times o f the Reformation,
but none o f the contending parties is really serious about it— they are
only serious in their efforts to secure exclusive control over the minds
of the benighted masses. . . .
in Prussia, the “leading” state of Ger­
many, the “state o f the intelligentsia,” the budget for elementary edu­
cation is 2 million thalers compared to 60 million for the army and
navy.2

Despite such budgetary proportions, Liebknecht accepted the
popular stereotype that was to persist for decades that the German
workers appeared better trained in the three R ’s than did English
and French workers, but he added, in Lassallean fashion, that the
latter were in his opinion “superior to the German workers on the
average with regard to political and economic comprehension
(Bildung)” 3 He also approvingly quoted Buckle to the effect that
no other nation suffered from such a split between its highly edu­
cated classes and the common people as did Germany; in contrast,
the United States was the country with “the least number of men
of great erudition and the least number of men of great ignorance”
(Buckle).
Even after the end of the Empire, only pupils attending a sec­
ondary school could go on to a university, and scarcely any work­
ing-class child entered secondary school. The early starting age,
2 Liebknecht, op. cit., 13 f.
3 Op. cit., 23 f. In his Frankfurt speech of May, 1863 (the “Arbeiterlese­
buch”) Lassalle had drawn a comparison which became famous and was
used for many years as an exhortation and spur for the workers: “You Ger­
man workers are strange people. Before French and English workers, one
has to plead improvement of their dreary condition, but to you one must
first prove that you are living under sad conditions.” Lassalle, op. cit.,
in , 227 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

214

ten years of age, and the tuition fees were effective deterrents,
besides the other social handicaps and biases involved. This per­
petuated the class cleavage between the working class and the
upper and middle classes, but because elementary education was
used as a means of political and social control, the dominant sys­
tem continued to exert a considerable influence on the disaffected
part of the working class and its offspring. Dual loyalty was a re­
sultant of the contending influences.
When the Austrian chancellor, Count Rottenhan, reorganized
the educational system shortly after 1800, he considered it the
purpose of the elementary school “to make thoroughly pious, good,
tractable, and industrious men of the laboring classes of the
people.” 4 More than 80 years later, the control function of ele­
mentary education was emphasized even more strongly when Bis­
marck said that the primary school should merely teach the three
R ’s and not convey “superficial” knowledge in history, geography
and the natural sciences. This was a critique of the insistence on
more knowledge by the higher civil servants in the Prussian min­
istry of cultural affairs and implicitly a critique of the whole liberal
attempt to encourage more general education. Many liberals hoped
that this would counteract socialist agitation and enable the work­
ers to comprehend the unchangeable laws of economic life.5 These
liberal expectations were, of course, idle, and Bismarck clearly
recognized this. When he instituted the “Era Puttkamer,” educa­
tion and religion were more vigorously and perhaps more effec­
tively used as a means of political control than they had previously
been. “Puttkamer,” explained Eckart Kehr, “was not reactionary
4 Quoted in Charles A. Gulick, Austria from Habsburg to Hitler (Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1948), I, 546.
8 See Bismarck’s conversation with H. R. von Poschinger, in Poschinger,
Fürst Bismarck und die Parlamentarier (Berlin: Trewendt, 1894), 224. For
the liberal and mainly laissez-faire position on education see, e.g., editorials
in the Deutsche Industriezeitung, 1871, 430, and 1877, 262. This was the
weekly of the chambers of commerce and trade in the important industrial
cities of Chemnitz, Dresden, Plauen, and Zittau in Saxony.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

215

in the sense that he handed back elementary education to the
church; rather he used church and religion for his policy of fighting
Socialism.” 6 In reaction to the attempts on the life of William I
school children had to learn more religious texts by heart.7 It was
during this time that William I demanded that “religion must be
preserved for the people.” William II took a personal hand in re­
organizing the teaching of history, first introduced as a separate
subject in Prussian schools in 1872. “For some time now,” he in­
formed the ministry of education, “I have been occupied with the
idea of making the school in its various grades useful in combating
the spread of socialistic and communistic ideas. In the first place,
it will fall upon the school to lay the foundation for a healthy con­
ception of political and social relations, through the cultivation of
fear of God and love of country.” 8
• Eckart Kehr, “Das soziale System der Reaktion in Preussen unter Puttkamer,” Gesellschaft, 1929:2, 255 f. Puttkamer’s religiosity was peculiarly
suited for his job. He seems to have believed sincerely that Prussia was “the
special favorite of God” (letter of May 1859, quoted in Kehr, loc. cit.).
7 Cf. Philipp Scheidemann, Memoiren eines Sozialdemokraten (Dresden:
Reissner, 1928), I, 14. Severing {op. cit., 8 and 12) remembers that he
had only one school book and the Bible and complains that religious instruc­
tion was furthered at the expense of material knowledge.
* Thereupon, the Prussian ministry of cultural and religious affairs issued an
edict in 1890 which explained the new regulations: they “do not need special
justification. German patriots, and in particular citizens of Prussia, are so
fortunate as to have a country and a ruling dynasty of whose history they
may well be proud. . . . It would be a sin against the coming generation if
we were to delay familiarizing it with the blessings which accrue to it by
virtue of its connection with the Prussian state. It would be an equally great
injustice to the state itself if an unpatriotic generation were reared.” Both
quotations are cited in Walter Consuelo Langsam, “Nationalism and History
in the Prussian Elementary Schools under William II,” in Edward Mead
Earle, ed., Nationalism and Internationalism (New York: Columbia Uni­
versity Press, 1950), 242 f.
Bromme describes how such instruction was followed in the class rooms.
One of his highschool teachers explained: “There is now a species of men
who call themselves Social Democrats; they want to destroy marriage and
family life, to abolish the state and the monarchy, and do away with private
property. Therefore, all intelligent propertied people must fear that one day

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

216

Elementary school education succeeded in attaching many work­
ing-class children to nationalist and monarchic institutions. Such
loyalty due to early attachment was an appropriate basis for the
political outlook of middle- and upper-class offspring, but it was an
obstacle for the labor movement. To exemplify the difference, both
Oldenburg-Januschau, who became famous as a prototype of the
Prussian Junker, and the Social Democratic leader Scheidemann
recall their enthusiasm when they saw William I during their child­
hood. The eleven-year-old Oldenburg-Januschau saw the king of
Prussia, with Bismarck, Moltke and Roon, on horseback during
the 1866 victory parade in Berlin: “This sight overwhelmed me.
It made me the Prussian who belongs with body and soul to his
king and his fatherland.” 9* Scheidemann had to overcome his early
attachment and enthusiasm for the crown before he could em­
bark on a career which reached its climax when he declared
Germany a republic in November 1918 and became its first chan­
cellor.101When Severing was 14 “the monarchist attitude inculcated
by the school had not yet been weakened. When I was asked in the
vocational school to recite an appropriate poem on the occasion of
the Emperor’s birthday in 1890, I did not then have the slightest
hesitation to comply with the request.” 11
Another example of the handicaps which childhood impressions
constituted for the later susceptibility to socialist agitation is given
in Adelheid Popp’s autobiography. During her childhood her
parents were not yet followers of the Social Democrats; she was
preoccupied with the Austrian court and the aristocracy. Her
they might be forced to load manure and to push sand carts in the place of
servants, that these uneducated men might take their places.” Bromme,
op. cit., 60.
9 Oldenburg, op. cit., 14.
10 Scheidemann, op. cit., I, 14 f; for his only one-sided conversation with
William II, in 1917, see II, 53.
11 Severing, op. cit., 19. Severing’s attention was first directed to the Social
Democrats as a result of the ambivalent reaction of William II to the miners’
strike of 1889.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

217

poverty was so great she was occasionally helped by a duchess and
other aristocratic ladies, who continued to play an important role
in her daydreams for years.12 As she grew older, her enthusiasm
for the established powers continued. She followed with keen in­
terest the events in royal circles, admired her brother’s three-year
service in the Imperial army, and was deeply impressed by kind
manufacturers. She felt resentment only against the direct oppres­
sors of herself and her working companions: their foremen and
masters.13
Books about, and pictures of, royal persons, military heroes, and
Bismarck were widespread among all social strata and captured
the imagination of the young. Bröger describes the power which a
simple colored print of Bismarck in uniform on horseback exerted
over him during his childhood.14 Göhre found patriotic biographies
of Frederick III and William I, “though in the form of the notori­
ous, mostly inferior Kolportage pulps,” in the libraries of several
families whose heads were openly Social Democratic.15 A rather
picturesque example for the coexistence of opposite symbols in a
working-class home is given by Bromme.16 In his parents’ home
portraits of the following persons hung in one room: several saints,
William I, Field Marshal Moltke, Bismarck, Bebel, Liebknecht,
Marx and Lassalle. Bromme does not make clear who had brought
12 Adelheid Popp, op. cit., 34 ff. Heavy daydreaming became her protective
device since she was compelled to work around the clock at an age when
other children were attending school. She worked illegally from her eighth
to her fourteenth year after which working was allowed. Before she was
fourteen she had been taken to a hospital, a work house, and an insane
asylum. More than ten of her sixteen brothers and sisters died at an early age.
13 Op. cit., 71, 92. Women in a factory where she had to work were forced
into intimate relations by foremen, and they were persecuted or fired if others
were chosen as favorites. Popp considered factory work degrading (67) al­
though she was better off there than she had been in the small-scale enter­
prises of lower middle-class employers.
14 Cf. Bröger, op. cit., 11.
15 Göhre, op. cit., 124 ff.
10 Cf. Bromme, op. cit., 71 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

218

together the exponents of the existing order of society and its most
renowned opponents.17 The saints probably hung there at the
insistence of the mother; the father was not religious. This inci­
dent calls attention to another kind of dual allegiance within the
families of workers: the men were more dedicated to the labor
movement, the women remained committed to, or at least more
influenced by, the dominant culture.
The majority of Social Democrats and certainly of the voters had
an ambivalent attitude toward the Empire and frequently a posi­
tive attitude toward the rulers of the principalities. Military service,
military anniversaries, and military symbols retained many attrac­
tions for the workers. Göhre found in 1890 that the majority of
Social Democratic followers had a positive attitude toward the
Emperor, the king of Saxony and military service, and that only
those influenced by “elite Social Democrats” were torn between
affection and disaffection.18 The positive attitude toward the monarchs was often linked with opposition against Bismarck or with
the idea that the Emperor might do better if only those around
him would not vitiate his good intentions.19 Göhre made his obser­
17 Bromme mentions another typical instance in which the influence of the
dominant culture asserted itself. When he attended his first political meeting
the workers sang songs of the labor movement for hours. But when they
marched home toward morning, carrying improvised red flags through the
darkness, folk and patriotic songs were also sung. The earlier cultural experi­
ence persisted.
is Göhre, op. cit., 117-26, 129 f.
19 This belief was particularly strong among liberals and many common peo­
ple with regard to Crown Prince Frederick III, partly because there was
never a realistic test of his liberal inclinations. For decades he remained in
the role of the crown prince, and he died after 99 days of reign in 1888. On
the reactions of workers to him, see Göhre, op. cit., 125. With regard to the
popularity of William I, it must be remembered that he attained it only
through the unification of 1871. Before that he encountered considerable hos­
tility among the middle and the lower classes. This hostility dated back to his
role as the Kartätschenprinz in 1849, when he used his artillery against the
Republican volunteer army in Baden, and it was aggravated during the Prus­
sian constitutional conflict of the early sixties.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

219

vations at a time when William II attempted to gain popularity
among the workers by pushing social legislation far beyond the
limits considered feasible or desirable by Bismarck. William II
soon suffered disappointement; the workers did not desert the
labor movement, and he antagonized them by calling Social Demo­
crats, among other things, vaterlandslose Gesellen (fellows without
a fatherland) in 1895.20
Despite William’s loss of prestige among the workers in the
nineties, the attitudes toward national interests underwent a gradual
but positive change. In the same decade a slow rapprochement with
the prevailing nationalism actually began. The old guard had been
patriotic in its own way; however, it had been frustrated by the
20 The “sympathetic, popular image” of William II, as depicted by Göhre,
clashes violently with the absolutist self-image of the Emperor, as a letter of
1892 to Chancellor Caprivi reveals in which he spurned popularity, termed
the Social Democrats a “gang,” and hinted obliquely at the eventual use of
military force against external or internal enemies:
“My will is rocklike, and what I have recognized to be right I adhere to,
and no devil, not even Prince Bismarck, can make me abandon it. . . .
Furthermore, we Hohenzollern are used to making slow progress, laboring
under pains, struggles, party cleavages, and want of appreciation. How often
have my ancestors and, as the last one, my grandfather, who rests in God,
been forced to fight against the will of the imprudent multitude for policies
which were first opposed, then criticized, and finally praised. I don’t care for
popularity. The only guide for my conduct is the precept of my duty and my
good conscience in relation to my responsibility toward God. Dear Caprivi,
think that I was prepared for bullets and dynamite when I ascended the
throne, and I am still alive. Yes, even the Socialist thinks that he can get
along with me. You cannot expect more, two years after Bismarck left and
the anti-socialist law disappeared. Our time will come as it comes for every
man. Let us be patient and do our duty steadfastly; whether or not the people
take offense does not matter. Respect will come, it is already ‘advancing’
in view of your distinction and my trust in God. Trust my leadership and
fence courageously where I show the way. Then we will manage to finish the
gang and will succeed later in rebus militariis. Your very affectionate king
William I. R.” The occasion of the letter was William’s rejection of Caprivi’s
proposal to hold a world exhibition in Berlin, which could have been used
to enhance his popularity. Reprinted in Hans Herzfeld, “Berlin als Kaiser­
stadt und Reichshauptstadt, 1871-1945,” Jahrbuch für die Geschichte des
deutschen Ostens (Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1952), I, 168 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

220

political, social and economic backwardness of Germany. The
generation which entered the party after 1890 took pride in the
achievements of German industrialism as well as in the power of
Imperial Germany. The organizational and particularly the finan­
cial strength of the party and the trade unions were greatly en­
hanced by the economic rise of the country. More and more Social
Democrats came to realize that military defeat might prove dis­
astrous for the labor movement and the standard of living of the
workers. This rational consideration was increasingly paralleled by
a more or less conscious desire to break out of the long political
isolation and to reconcile the dualism of loyalties. Furthermore,
the perpetual agitation against the “unpatriotic” position of the
party gained force when international conditions deteriorated at
the turn of the century.21
These developments and the continuous influence of the “popu­
lar institutions of education,” as Liebknecht had called the schools,
the press and the military, combined in 1914 to produce en­
thusiastic support for the war efforts. Then Adolf Braun real­
ized, to his own surprise, that the level of comprehension and the
quality of education of the masses were determined by these powers
of popular education. He considered the pride in the tremendous
Social Democratic efforts to educate the masses justified, but he
concluded that even if all these efforts had been completely success­
ful, they would still weigh lightly in comparison with the mass
impact of the educational agencies of the dominant system.
21 From 1904 on this agitation was reinforced by the “National Association
Against Social Democracy.” In its appeals to the public and the workers in
particular, the association called upon all “bourgeois” or “state-supporting”
parties— to quote one of its favorite phrases—for “united action against the
red enemy.” Cf. Ferdinand Tönnies, op. cit., 479.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

221

2. Cultural Activities: Opportunities and Limitations
As the labor movement grew in sheer size, it also organized more
intellectual, educational and recreational activities which summarily
may be called “cultural.” Such activities were always pursued by
the labor movement; in fact, its beginnings lay in the educational
clubs of the 1860’s. The Social Democratic subculture was small
before 1878, compared with the expansion after 1890, and it did
not reach its peak until after the First World War.22 Still, the
multitude of political and cultural activities seemed startling to
outside observers during the seventies.23 These activities were pur­
sued with such vigor because the party offered to the workers the
only major means of participating in the political process and in
the culture at large.24 To be sure, workers could sometimes join po­
litical and cultural organizations, but they had no influence on their
political and administrative direction. By setting up their own or­
ganizations they could share cultural and social middle-class activi­
ties without being subject to middle-class control. A vicious circle
of boycotts developed among the cultural organizations of the labor
movement and those of its opponents. It was, for example, in­
compatible to belong to both a veterans’ and a Social Democratic
22 Democratization then resulted in economic concessions such as the eighthour day and paid vacations. On the remarkable expansion of the Austrian
Social Democratic subculture after 1918, see C. Gulick, op. cit., Ch. 18.
23 Cf. F. Mehring, op. cit., 163.
24 There is a significant difference between the cultural organizations of the
Social Democrats and what Lipset called the “occupational community” of
the printers of the American International Typographical Union. Cf. S. M.
Lipset et al., Union Democracy (Glencoe: The Free Press, 1956), 102 ff. The
“occupational community” of the Social Democratic workers was not sepa­
rate from the party and the unions. Professor Lipset’s main point is the actual
independence of the printers’ associations from the union. Thus they provide
alternative leadership and support a democratic mechanism within the union.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

222

organization. At the 1893 party convention, a motion of the Berlin
Reichstag District No. 1 was adopted which stipulated that “all
members of the party and Social Democrats in the unions must
participate fully in agitation and should not neglect their party
duties through membership in Landsmannschaften or so-called en­
tertaining associations, clubs, etc.” 25
The whole effort of creating a subculture within the larger cul­
ture presupposed a high degree of self-confidence within the
nucleus of the party. Like the political organizations, the cultural
organizations became vehicles for creating self-confidence and selfrespect among the masses of workers.26 But for the Social Demo­
cratic leaders cultural activities remained secondary to political
activities. Early proletarian leaders such as Vahlteich and Fritzsche
argued from the time that the workers’ educational associations
began for a clear dominance of politics over education. Liebknecht
exhorted his listeners in his 1872 address, “Knowledge Is Power,”
to realize that learning alone would not liberate the workers.27 This
may have been a warning to members of the two workers’ associa­
25 Parteitag Protocol, 1893, 22 and 151; see also Schröder, op. cit., 41. When
in the sixties and seventies the liberals lost control of the workers’ edu­
cational associations, liberal educators tried to compete with them by estab­
lishing a comprehensive neutral adult education program: “For this reason
there was established in 1871 the Society for Adult Education (Gesellschaft
für Volksbildung). The founders, who included Schulze-Delitzsch, bearing
in mind the introduction throughout Germany of universal male suffrage
through the new constitution, were provoked into action, as an inaugural
proclamation stated, by the ‘success which a few unscrupulous men achieved
with their socialistic efforts.* This society developed a wide field of activity
and by 1910 it had more than 7,000 affiliated organizations throughout
Germany.” R. H. Samuel and R. H. Thomas, Education and Society in M od­
ern Germany (London: Routledge, 1949), 135. For policy pronouncements
of church leaders which aimed at the boycott of all Social Democratic
organizations before and after the First World War, see C. Gulick, op. cit.,
649.
20 Cf. Andries Sternheim, “Zum Problem der Freizeitgestaltung,” Zeitschrift
für Sozialforschung, Vol. 1, 1932, 337.
27 Cf. Liebknecht, op. cit., 3.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

223

tions he addressed in Dresden and Leipzig not to overestimate
learning at the expense of political exertion. The leaders hoped
that cultural interests and gratifications would strengthen the ad­
herence of the followers to the political cause of the movement.
They wanted to raise the level of knowledge for political and or­
ganizational purposes. Furthermore, they were ideologically com­
mitted to the fight for a better life.
The leaders’ apprehensions toward the distractive effect of the
involvement in cultural affairs on the part of the masses were
paralleled by radical charges against the functionaries that they
were showing petty-bourgeois traits. With regard to cultural inter­
ests, this meant that they could not transcend the cultural attitudes,
preferences and tastes of the middle-class groups from which they
came or those of the middle-class groups to which they aspired.
Especially older leaders adhered to the traditional middle-class
standards of idealism in art and literature at a time when the bour­
geois avant-garde was naturalist. An example of this cultural
preference of leaders and, apparently also, on a lower level of
comprehension, of many workers was the attitude toward natural­
ist literature which may be taken as an index of cultural tend­
encies within the labor movement. The publication of naturalist
literature in the entertainment magazine of the party encountered
opposition from workers as well as from veteran leaders and ascend­
ing younger leaders. A controversy ensued at the party convention
of 1896.28 The veteran leader Frohme attacked the editor of the
Social Democratic home journal, the twenty-year-old Neue Welt,29
for disregarding the entertainment needs of working people and for
offending their sense of propriety in sexual matters. He and others
asserted that many, if not the majority, of the party members were
28 For the following, see Party Protocol, 1896, 78-85, 93-96, 103, 108-10.
29 The Neue Welt was distributed weekly together with the party papers and
therefore had a distribution of 200,000 copies. It was subsidized in 1896 with
48,000 Marks. In the seventies Höchberg had subsidized it with the substan­
tial sum of 100,000 Marks.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

224

against the kind of naturalism presented in the Neue Welt, espe­
cially the overdrawn description of misery. Less prominent dele­
gates took the floor in order to agree or disagree with the emphasis
on naturalist literature in the Neue Welt. Its editor, Steiger, de­
fended his educational policies with the same pathos exhibited by
his opponents. The “courage to be truthful” which was character­
istic of the “new art,” as naturalism was called, necessitated the
reproduction of the dark as well as the bright sides of life. The
minute descriptions of naturalism, he suggested, were a result of
advances in the natural sciences, especially those introduced by
the microscope.
Our comrades who insist on their Darwinian and materialist world view
[can] now show whether they really believe it. . . . Art has becom e
democratic, w e no longer need kings on the stage, we no longer need
dukes, barons and counts in the novels; now the worker, or whoever
it may be, is an equally interesting object irrespective o f his social
position.

Steiger attacked the old position evident in the arguments of his
opponents that art existed “either for instruction or, in the com­
mon sense, elevation.” He agreed that a pedagogic approach was
necessary because the workers, especially in the countryside, were
not yet able to absorb all of modern art and literature, but he
polemicized in particular against the view that art was only for
women. “When I hear this objection, it seems to me that I listen
to a real bourgeois: ‘Well, for women it is still good enough.’ This
is an insult to the fair sex to whom you always accord equality in
theory.” He ended with a plea to make the working class the
leader “in all fields of life” and emphasized that “we do not want
to accomplish this through the destruction of earlier culture . . .
we do want to take over all the Good and the Beautiful and the
ability to enjoy it . . . so that the working class, the great fighter
for culture of our time, . . . will be prepared for the great tasks
of the future.”

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

225

Frohme replied that he was not against naturalism, but only
against its immoral abuses. He quoted an example from Mutter
Bertha, a novel serialized in the journal, where a young woman is
embarrassed because she has to relieve herself. Exclaimed Frohme:
“If naturalist art believes it can justify the presentation of such
absolute, stinking obscenities in novels, then this tops everything.”
Molkenbuhr, one of the rising administrators in the party, sup­
ported Frohme by asserting that workers who live in misery can­
not be expected to enjoy descriptions of more misery and might be
driven into a suicidal mood. No other journal of the party, he
added, has provoked so many complaints. On the other hand, he
said, many workers like to buy the cheap editions of the classics
and to attend inexpensive performances of classic plays.30 Another
delegate advised Frohme to go into a cloister if he reacted so
strongly, but he also hoped that the Neue Welt would be open from
then on to “moral idealism . . . which elevates us in our hard
struggle.” The Revisionist intellectual and Reichstag member Dr.
Schoenlank called Molkenbuhr’s opinion basically identical with
that “which the petty-bourgeois have of art” and told Frohme that
his praise of art was not different from “the praise of eternal truth
by bourgeois society.”
Frohme, Molkenbuhr and the many working-class readers of the
Neue Welt who were supposedly dissatisfied with this kind of real­
ism were firmly supported by the aging Liebknecht, who himself
was under concealed attack for the editorial weaknesses of the
Vorwärts. He argued that the decline of capitalist society produced
a literary decadence which could morally threaten the children of
proletarian families, to whom the Neue Welt was delivered. Under
applause and opposition he said of Hauptmann, reacting to Steiger’s
uncritical exaltation, that much in his writing was “flat, tactless and
30 According to Göhre, Goethe and Schiller’s works were promoted only
after the late eighties on a wider scale within the labor movement. Cf. op.
cit., 95. According to Severing, Molkenbuhr particularly liked Goethe, Heine,
Reuter, and Hebbel. Cf. Severing, op. cit., 33.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

226

ugly . . . and above all not revolutionary, but rather petty-bour­
geois-reactionary.”
The party members of the Social Democratic strongholds and
Reichstag districts Hamburg I, Hamburg II, Altona and Wandsbeck each submitted a motion to the convention concerning the
Neue Welt. The demands ranged from abolishment of the Neue
Welt as a free supplement to replacement of the contents to pro­
duce “a popular journal of entertainment, rather than an arena
for literary experiments.” 31 The conflict was neutralized by Bebel,
who skilfully took a detached but conciliatory position, which
saved Steiger’s job as editor of the Neue Welt. Bebel turned the
literary policy issue into an administrative one by pushing through
a motion of his own that a committee should study ways of de­
creasing the deficit of the home journal.
This debate at the party convention of 1896 cannot be read to­
day without its bringing to mind the Bolshevist and Nazi cultural
policies. Some of the most “principled” and “idealist” leaders, like
Wilhelm Liebknecht or, within the Russian party, Lenin, also proved
to be rather conservative in cultural affairs and accepted the older
esthetics of bourgeois idealism and realism. However, within the
German Social Democratic subculture, “encircled” as it was by the
dominant culture, no dictatorship of taste could be successfully
exercised without endangering the unity of the movement; further­
more, during the Weimar period fairly pedestrian Social Democrats
who held high municipal and state offices generally had a much
more permissive or even encouraging attitude toward the literary
and artistic avant-garde than office-holders of different political
persuasion.
The culturally progressive wing of the German labor movement
could only advocate the assimilation of the works of the bourgeois
avant-garde. There were simply not enough men of literary and
artistic sophistication in the labor movement to take a more critical
31 Parteitag Protocols, 1896, 14.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

227

approach to the values of the dominant culture or to create new
styles and art forms. Some naturalists briefly affiliated themselves
with the labor movement, but they were soon disappointed by the
strength of conservatism in matters of art. Prominent among them
was Wilhelm Bölsche, the founder of the Freie Volksbühne (Free
People’s Stage) in Berlin in 1890.
Thus, while separate cultural activities were a constitutive part
of the Social Democratic subculture, most of these activities were
not different from those of the culture at large. Since many edu­
cators within the isolated labor movement attempted to impart as
much of recognized Kultur as possible to the workers, this in­
creased the influence of at least parts of the dominant culture among
workers, although these components were not necessarily closely
related to the central values of the dominant political system.32
The relatively uncritical acceptance of Kultur can be seen in the
32 Some generic reasons for the inability of a subculture to transcend the
dominant culture were spelled out by James Baldwin in the context of the
relation of American Negroes to American society: “The oppressed and the
oppressor are bound together within the same society; they accept the same
criteria, they share the same beliefs, they both alike depend on the same
reality.” More often than not the oppressed cannot create a “new society”
even if they win great battles; in reality they fight for a change of the ruling
groups or for “elevation of status, acceptance within the present community.”
See J. Baldwin, Notes of a Native Son (Boston: Beacon Press, 1955), 21.
The Social Democratic press before the First World War and the Negro press
are specific examples for the imitation of the dominant culture as well as for
the preoccupation, on a different level, with the realm of the subculture.
Baldwin shows that Negro newspapers not only imitate other newspapers but
also try to cover “any news, however trivial, concerning any Negro or group
of Negroes who are in any way unusual and/or noteworthy” {op. cit., 62).
Similarly, the Social Democratic provincial newspapers tried to cover as
many events, preferably noncontroversial, within the movement as possible.
The major Social Democratic paper, the Berlin Vorwärts, imitated the tech­
niques which were used by a bourgeois paper to expand its circle of readers.
The theoretical journal of the party, the Neue Zeit, criticized in 1905 the
Vorwärts for having brought its subscription up to 92,000 by modeling it­
self after the Berliner Morgenpost. Cf. Otto Geithner, “Zur Taktik der So­
zialdemokratie,” Neue Zeit, 23:2, 1905, 656.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

228

phraseology used in Liebknecht and Bebel’s program for the Saxonian People’s party of 1866 no less than in that used by the Social
Democratic Program of 1921. The programs speak of “raising the
physical, intellectual and moral education of the people,” of “mak­
ing accessible to everybody the cultural values” (.Allgemeinwerden
der kulturellen Werte), and of the “right of all Volksgenossen to
share the cultural goods.” 33 Even the foremost orthodox Marxist,
Karl Kautsky, exhibited these uncritical tendencies: The “coming
happiness” would be rooted in the “gratifying effects of scientific
work,” the “appreciative enjoyment in the fields of science and
art, in nature, sport, and play.” The “masses shall have at their
disposal all of culture that has been created up to now. To conquer
all of this culture for themselves” is their task.34
Since even Steiger’s programmatic statement at the 1896 con­
vention and Kautsky’s views do not show much critical distance
from the “purer” aspects of the dominant culture and toward the
cultural limitations of the labor movement, the Social Democrats
exposed themselves to the later critique of an esthetically refined
Marxism which held that
. . . the history o f German Social Dem ocracy should be a warning
against such a love o f culture. Instead of a critical attitude toward the
dominant culture, which would have provided the only chance for the
future preservation o f its elements, the endeavor often prevailed to
wear as a showpiece the bourgeois wisdom o f bygone days, just as the
peasants put on the outmoded fashions o f their overlords.35

There was indeed a tendency to split the dominant culture into
two parts, one indissolubly associated with the values of the oppo­
33 Quoted in Herbert Marcuse, “Uber den affirmativen Charakter der Kul­
tur,” Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung, VI, 1937, 90 f.
34 Quoted in Marcuse, loc. cit. The Kautsky phrases are from his book, Die
materialistische Geschichtsauffassung, Berlin, 1927, II, 819, 824 and 837.
35 Max Horkheimer, “Die Philosophie der absoluten Konzentration,” Zeit­
schrift für Sozialforschung, VII, 1938, 380.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

229

nents and one to be appropriated by the masses. The labor move­
ment could, after all, legitimately consider some of the values of
bourgeois culture and their literary expressions as a main spring
of its inspiration. Given the social origin of most Social Democrats
and the educational handicaps under which they had to labor, it
was inevitable that even the most sophisticated among them did not
have much critical detachment from seemingly desirable parts of
the dominant culture. This resulted in relatively indiscriminate
efforts to expand the cultural organizations of the subculture. For
this lack of discrimination the labor movement was also criticized
from a reformist perspective. In his 1915 review of the educational
ambitions and activities of the labor movement, Adolf Braun ac­
knowledged that the movement was “the greatest cultural force of
the late 19th and early 20th century.” 36 But he concluded that it
tried to undertake too much in cultural affairs: history, art, natural
science, philosophy, etc., were offered in an unrealistic way. He
complained that the labor movement was uncritical toward its cul­
tural capabilities vis-à-vis bourgeois society and did not differenti­
ate between what was really of benefit to workers and the movement
and what was only satisfying curiosity and the desire for entertain­
ment, however legitimate these might be. He pointed out that often
persons dedicated themselves to workers’ education who were in­
experienced with regard to pedagogics in general and in dealing
with workers in particular, even if they were themselves of pro­
letarian origin. He went on to say that he never saw any recog­
nition in the labor movement for the difficulty of introducing
knowledge to “a group of adult persons who through their age,
experience, and education differed greatly one from another and
who were burdened by monotonous work and everyday prob­
lems.” 37
A decade after the controversy on naturalism and classics at the
1896 party convention, the sombre reformist Friedrich Ebert drew
36 Braun, op. cit., 242.
37 Loc. cit.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

230

some conclusions from the inherent organizational limitations of
the movement when he became embroiled, along with Hermann
Müller, another of the capable administrators of the party, in a
controversy with the orthodox editor Heinrich Schulz, one of the
educational experts of the labor movement.38 Object of the con­
troversy was the participation of the Social Democratic Verein für
Volkskunstabende in Bremen and of trade unions in the Goethebund, a neutral middle-class institution for adult education. Schulz
maintained that the class struggle would be weakened if the work­
ers satisfied their educational needs indiscriminately. Müller agreed
with him that lectures on Lessing, for example, could not really
offer much to the workers and were mere entertainment. He advo­
cated more vocational and general education (Fortbildung).
Müller was careful to point out that “education for the class struggle
is indeed the major task,” but he immediately added that “we do
not always engage in the class struggle . . . we also want to enjoy
life.” 39 Schulz criticized in particular, in the Bremer Bürger-Zei­
tung (one of the best Social Democratic papers), an invitation ex­
tended by the Goethebund to Werner Sombart. Müller defended
this, arguing that the workers’ convictions could not be shaken by
the address of a bourgeois professor. Ebert disagreed with Müller
on Sombart’s lecture because he considered it a partisan address
before a politically neutral association, but he defended neutral
adult education because intellectually interested comrades had a
right to acquaint themselves with fields of knowledge to which the
party gave them no access except in the biggest cities, such as
Berlin, Hamburg, Munich and Dresden. Therefore, he said, the
38 Soon afterwards they were to take over leading positions in Berlin, Müller
became a secretary of the Berlin Central Workers’ Secretariat in 1905. Ebert
followed in 1906 and reorganized the party headquarters. On the controversy,
see an article of the Social Democratic Bremer Bürger-Zeitung, February 2,
1905, reprinted in F. Ebert, op. cit., 251-56. On the general position of Hein­
rich Schulz, see his official report to the party convention of 1906, “Sozial­
demokratie und Volkserziehung,’’ Protocol, 323-47.
39 Quoted in Ebert, op. cit., 252.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

231

party demanded of the “class state” that it further adult education
by establishing libraries and museums, by arranging music pro­
grams, etc. This did not contradict Vahlteich’s demand of forty-four
years before that the state, and not the labor movement, carry the
burden of general education. It was also compatible with the local
Bremen party program, which was drafted by Schulz; but what was
essentially an aggressive demand and a challenge in the program de­
rived in Ebert’s case from the recognition that the labor movement
was unable to appropriate on a large scale even those parts of the
dominant culture which were considered desirable.
Still, as long as the dominant system was not shaken, the build­
ing of a subculture, with many gratifying cultural and political
activities, was the only way to realize at least some of the goals of
the movement. However, the many organizations set up for a
variety of purposes showed two conflicting tendencies: First, they
could bind the members more closely to the political commitments
of the party. Second, they could divert, by their inherent satisfac­
tions and difficulties, energies and attention from the political goals
of the movement and the crucial problem of power.40 The expan­
40 When the labor movement was outlawed in Austria in 1934, after its sub­
culture had developed far beyond the prewar levels, many Social Democrats
tried to carry on their usual political and cultural activities underground be­
cause they could not imagine the destruction of the content of their lives. A
struggle ensued between the more militant Social Democrats, on the one
side, and the old leadership and the mass of the devoted members, on the
other. The militants, who called themselves Revolutionary Socialists, repudi­
ated many of the old policies of the party. They condemned especially its
reliance on parliamentary forms of government and the rule of law in the
struggle with authoritarian opponents, leading to the final success of these
opponents. The Revolutionary Socialists also criticized the party for having
given too much attention to cultural activities and drew some conclusions
from the insights which Adolf Braun and Robert Danneberg had developed
twenty years before as to the relative ineffectiveness of many of these ac­
tivities. For fifty years, the Revolutionary Socialists argued, the party had
tried to achieve socialism through enlightenment according to the old slogan
that knowledge is power. Now the socialists had the knowledge and the others
the power. The ideals of the “New Men,” as the Revolutionary Socialists

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

232

sion of the Social Democratic subculture offered increasing oppor­
tunities for more and more workers to find social recognition among
their peers and thus reduced their dependence, in this respect, on
society at large. This was true for the rank and file and even more
true for those who utilized the chances of social mobility within
the movement. This resulted in an attenuation of the class struggle,
as some Marxists correctly charged it would.41 By helping the
workers indirectly to adjust to the society at large, the subculture
contributed to the stability of the dominant system.

3. Socialist and Nonsocialist Literature in the
Working Class
The relative strength and weakness of the Social Democratic sub­
culture can also be assessed by looking at the distribution of social­
ist and nonsocialist literature within the working class and the labor
movement. In this section I shall deal with literature in general; in
section 4, with the nature of the Social Democratic press. Most
Social Democratic workers seldom read books, socialist or non­
socialist, but it is worthwhile to review the distribution of literature
within the working class because the labor movement made great
efforts to bring socialist and “good” nonsocialist literature to the
masses. Indicative of the political and nonpolitical reading inter­
ests of workers and of favorable and unfavorable conditions for
were also called, were mostly those of the old party, but they did recognize
that only a successful revolution would accomplish their realization. Cf.
Buttinger, op. cit., 70 f.
41 See, e.g., Goldenberg’s argument that the emergence of the labor move­
ment as a society of its own, a “workers’ society” with many parallel associa­
tions to bourgeois associations, satisfied needs of social recognition and selfrespect and thus reduced the movement’s capacity to carry on the class
struggle. Op. cit., 35 f.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

233

literary receptiveness are the following early examples from the
accounts of socialist writers— or at least writers of lower-class
origin.
Vahlteich recalls that during the political depression of the fifties
scarcely any workers read socialist literature.42 People with revo­
lutionary and democratic sentiments did not dare to associate with
one another for fear of persecution. It was only through a relative
that 15-year-old Vahlteich first heard of socialism. His uncle, a
tailor, knew Weitling personally, but was unable to secure any of
his books in Leipzig. The available socialist literature consisted of
Louis Blanc’s Organization of Labor, Proudhon’s books, Engels’
Conditions of the Working Class in England, and novels by Sue.
But nearly all workers and craftsmen who read at all read only
bourgeois or governmental papers. Vahlteich’s father, a conserva­
tive master-craftsman, read the Königlich Leipziger Zeitung and
the bourgeois Tageblatt. Brockhaus’ Allgemeine was considered
radical, that is, liberal. Workers would share one copy of a news­
paper, reading it two or three days after publication. In 1857
Vahlteich went to Dresden as a shoemaker’s journeyman. He found
dissatisfaction with the prevailing conditions, but no understanding
for the Social Question and no urge to discuss social problems.
Finally he met two old men who had read Weitling; one of them
had copied the 314 pages of his Garantien by hand.
During these decades reading was the primary means of selfeducation for interested workers and lower-middle-class persons.
Bernstein reports of the early seventies that some workers who
lived in the countryside and who were geographically immobile be­
cause of their large families tried to widen their mental scope by
reading, but they were unable to obtain good literature.43 Character­
istic of the literary interests of workers and craftsmen not yet in­
fluenced by the labor movement is Bruno Biirgel’s stepfather, a
shoemaker, whose “favorite book was a history of Don Carlos, pre42 Cf. Vahlteich, op. cit., 7 ff.
43 Bernstein, Lehrjahre, op. cit., 20.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

234

tender to the Spanish crown, and the notorious Carlist revolts.” 44
He was also fascinated by Napoleon I and often described to his
son the retreat over the Beresina. More rare was the case of An­
dreas Scheu, who later became well known through a political trial;
when he began his apprenticeship about 1860 and earned some
money, he bought Schlossers Weltgeschichte and works by Goethe,
Schiller, Börne, Heine, Wieland, Klopstock, Lenau, Uhland and
Platen—the best literature, according to the standards of the
time.45
Carl Severing’s working-class parents read the most popular
bourgeois home journal, Die Gartenlaube, and exchanged with ac­
quaintances copies of the Buch für Alle and the Bibliothek zur
Unterhaltung und des Wissens. The latter was a mixture of enter­
tainment and educational literature, usually read only by young
Severing; it became a “guidepost in a land of knowledge which was
still ahead of me.” 46 Thus, while his parents scarcely read books,
they at least did not discourage him. At the age of 15 and 16
(1890-91) Severing received from the vocational school Hum­
boldt’s Kosmos and Wissmanns Reisen, examples of good science
44 Bürgel, op. cit., 16 ff. Apart from reading, the stepfather’s hobbies were his
glee club and canary birds. Bürgel also describes how he detected, as a young
boy, the discrepancies between the moralistic stories of his school book and
reality. His father with his family had to move into a large proletarian apart­
ment house in Berlin and worked hard at the age of sixty with no prospect of
security in his old age. In contrast, young Bürgel saw on his school outings
elegantly dressed young men walking Unter den Linden, “enjoying doing
nothing.”
45 Andreas Scheu, Umsturzkeime, Erlebnisse eines Kämpfers (Vienna: Wiener
Volksbuchhandlung, 1923), 38 f. Intellectually his famüy background was not
proletarian. His father was a toolmaker who had failed in a small manufac­
turing enterprise. His mother ran a tailor shop which employed female ap­
prentices and sometimes female employees. The parents had been on the side
of the Revolution in 1848. This is another piece of biographical evidence for
the observation that labor leaders partly came from proletarianized homes in
which intellectual standards had been preserved. See also Bromme’s back­
ground, op. cit., passim.
46 Severing, op. cit., 8; cf. 21 f, 26, 33 f.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

235

and travel literature, as reward for outstanding performance. At
the same time and without encouragement from home, he took first
glances at the Metallarbeiterzeitung, the weekly Arbeiterchronik,
and the Volkswacht, all read in the small shop of his master. He
understood little of the content, but greatly sympathized with the
intentions of the labor movement. At the age of 18, when he had
become a Social Democrat, he tried to read and failed to under­
stand Marx’s Lohnarbeit und Kapital. For the vast majority of
workers he considered it as unintelligible in 1847, when it was first
published, as it was in 1893, when he read it.47
Adelheid Popp’s preoccupation with shilling-shockers (Kolportage-Romane) delayed, but did not prevent, her conversion to
socialism. She first read dime novels with characteristic titles:
Rinaldo Rinaldini, Katerina Kornaro, Rosa Sandor, Isabella of
Spain, Eugenie of France, Mary Stuart, The White Lady in the
Imperial Palace, The Heroine of Worth, Emperor*s Son and
Barber’s Daughter. But when she joined the labor movement, she
began to read the classical German literature and the prominent
party literature, Engels’ Conditions of the Working Classes in Eng­
land, Lafargue’s The Right to Idleness, Lassalle’s Science and the
Workers, Liebknecht’s Knowledge Is Power, and Bebel’s Woman
and Socialism.48
Bebel’s book on the misery of women under the system of bour­
geois marriage, the bourgeois institution of prostitution, and
woman’s liberated position in a socialist society was one of the most
47 There was some Social Democratic children’s literature, but it does not
seem to have been widely distributed. When Bromme was five years old in
1878, he received at Christmas the first socialist picture book, King Mammon.
Fairy tales were sometimes rewritten for political purposes, such as the story
of Reinecke Fuchs. Bromme belonged to the first generation of Social Demo­
crats who were brought up in a socialist home. When he was eleven he had to
read socialist pamphlets and newspapers aloud to his family. He understood
little of what he read, nor did he know at that time that his father participated
in the illegal transport and distribution of socialist pamphlets. See Bromme,
op. cit., 32, 51, 60.
48 Cf. Popp, op. cit., 36, 76, 97-106.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

236

popular socialist writings. It was one of the few great pieces of
passionate feminism in German literature. First published in 1879,
it was reprinted in several million copies and translated into more
than a dozen languages. It was widely read by workers and secretly
distributed during the antisocialist legislation. The post-1890 edi­
tions were bought mainly by the bourgeois public, as Bebel asserted
in the 1895 edition.
Bebel paints the orthodox picture of the future socialist society
as characterized by socialized production and consumption and by
the absence of the state and money. Woman liberated from the
legal and material restrictions of bourgeois society will be the equal
of man. Household chores, for example, will be greatly reduced.
Society will care for the children and the aged. Marriage will be a
“private” contract which can be repudiated by both sides at their
discretion. Everyone will be able to choose his occupation. Bebel’s
description is highly speculative and optimistic. He relies heavily
on the spirit of solidarity created under socialist conditions and
does not face the problem of authority in the large-scale organi­
zations of modern industrialized society.
The bourgeois public and many of those workers who read bour­
geois newspapers encountered in the early nineties two pamphlets
by Eugen Richter, the leader of the Progressives, with which he
scored a major polemical hit against Bebel. Richter countered Bebel
first with a pamphlet Die Irrlehren der Sozialdemokratie which ap­
peared first in 1890 with 80,000 copies and then with a parody of
Bebel’s picture of the future socialist society, Sozialdemokratische
Zukunftsbilder ,49 Within two years, from 1891 until 1893, more
than 251,000 copies of this parody were sold. The newspapers of
all nonsocialist parties propagated its distribution, and more than
40 serialized it. Trade and agricultural associations also distributed
it. By 1893 it had been translated into eight languages.
Richter’s parody starts with the seizure of power by the Social
49 Eugen Richter, Sozialdemokratische Zukunftsbilder, frei nach Bebel (Ber­
lin: Verlag Fortschritt, 1893), 48 pp.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

237

Democrats. All parties except the Social Democratic party are
dissolved; the army is disbanded. Money and savings are elimi­
nated. Ration cards replace money. All people must eat in com­
munity kitchens and give up part of their furniture. Children are
separated from their parents, and people over sixty-five are sent
to homes for the aged. Food and dress are standardized. All ad­
ministrative and production positions are elective— as Bebel had
actually propounded. Everyone can apply for a new job. Married
people are frequently separated because they must work in different
cities. Richter gives a vivid description of the psychological stress
and the material deprivations of this situation. Productivity and
efficiency are greatly reduced; the Social Democratic government
has to resort to severe physical repression; the army has to be re­
stored. Relations with the remaining capitalist countries, England
and the United States, as well as with the socialist countries of Eu­
rope— all of Europe succumbed to Social Democracy— are strained
over economic issues. Finally, Russian and French troops invade
Germany, and the Berlin metal workers lead an insurrection against
the crumbling Social Democratic dictatorship.
Among Social Democratic followers the attraction of the image
of the Zukunftsstaat could not be weakened by such polemics. In
fact, the success of Bebel’s Woman and Socialism, probably based
on this attraction, and Edward Bellamy’s Looking Backward, an­
other major piece of literature on future society, was so great that
party leaders became apprehensive lest the workers’ interest in this
topic distract their attention from the immediate problems of the
movement.50 Thus, there was the paradox that Bebel, as a writer,
provided the most successful work on the Zukunftsstaat, and, as a
party leader, could not welcome this aspect of its success. Holek
50 Wilhelm Keil was greatly impressed by the image of the Zukunftsstaat
when he read Woman and Socialism in the eighties. He also read Bellamy’s
novel. See Erlebnisse eines Sozialdemokraten (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags­
anstalt, 1949), I, 102-7. Keil went on in his career to become a revisionist;
he rose to high parliamentary office in the Weimar Republic and again after
1945.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

238

remembers many discussions with fellow workers on the future state
of society and attempts by the most trained Social Democrat in
their work group to squelch them. Holek considered the intellectual
sluggishness and opportunism of his fellow workers as reasons for
their inclination to develop fantasies about the Zukunftsstaat.51
The interest in the Zukunftsstaat was paralleled during the anti­
socialist legislation by an even greater interest in edifying literature,
such as song books. There was little interest in “enlightening litera­
ture.” 52 Many lower-ranking functionaries produced an unending
stream of edifying literature, much consisting of songs using wellknown melodies. Young Severing, for example, was active in provid­
ing his local glee club with appealing songs.53 Andreas Scheu wrote,
among many other things, a cantata A n die Arbeit for a workers’
industrial exhibition and a pacifist version of Uhland’s famous songs
Der gute Kamerad?*
Those members who were predominantly interested in political
and theoretical indoctrination regretted the popularity of edifying
literature and the topic of the Zukunftsstaat. But this popular in­
terest was an important basis for the growing Social Democratic
subculture. Singing songs, listening to poems and indulging in de­
tailed fantasies about the socialist kingdom to come constituted
great emotional gratifications for the workers. Indirectly these ac­
tivities seemed to strengthen the subculture by affirming the alle­
giance of workers to the movement. It is true that these popular
preoccupations did little to further political and theoretical com­
prehension, and that they could easily detract from more arduous
intellectual efforts, but it is also true that the small group of Social
Democrats who studied political and theoretical literature did not
51 Cf. Holek, op. cit., 209 f.
52 Cf. Schröder, op. cit., 37.
53 Cf. Severing, op. cit., 30.
54 Cf. Scheu, op. cit., 141 ff. Buttinger tells a similar story of 1924 when “in
spite of all reverence he found the works of the Socialist bards a bit too ‘high’
for the workers’ [i.e., his] understanding, [and] began to write poems and
speaking-choruses for the local demand.” Buttinger, op. cit., 405.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

239

pursue a course likely to significantly increase the political radical­
ism of the labor movement. The latter group of Social Democrats
pursued two lines of interest: the more or less idealist Lassallean
tradition and a materialism composed of Marxist and Social Dar­
winist elements. For many years there seems to have been more
interest in Lassalle and materialist-scientific writers such as Haeckel
than in Marx and Hegel.55 In his polemical account of the Social
Democratic agitation of the seventies, Reverend Schuster charged
that atheistic-materialist science paved the way for socialism and
that the latter endeavored “to transpose its results into the social
realm and to translate it into practice.” 56 Schuster reprinted an
article from the Volksstaat (1873, 31) in support of this assertion.
Its author suggested that the party give more attention to Darwin­
ism and stop underestimating its power as a weapon. The Volks­
staat printed the article only with reservations because it could not
“side with everything Darwin’s adherents write.” It appears, how­
ever, that then and later most readers were not aware of decisive
theoretical differences between Marxist and evolutionary theories.
The great interest in Darwinism and natural science was a trend
of the period of the late 19th century, shared by the bourgeois as
well as the socialist public. It was accompanied by a de-emphasis
of Marxism as a philosophy, inside and outside the labor move­
ment. The Marxist critic Karl Korsch could later justifiably qualify
Engels’ statement that the German labor movement was “the heir
of German classical philosophy” by pointing out that nearly all
socialist writers, including Mehring, brushed aside philosophical
problems as “immaterial.” 57 Marx’s philosophical presuppositions
were even less well comprehended than his economic theories by
his Social Democratic students because they disdained any fa­
miliarity with Hegel’s philosophy. In 1914 Lenin could, therefore,
65 Cf. W. Huhn, “Etatismus, ‘Kriegssozialismus,’ ‘Nationalsozialismus* in der
Literatur der deutschen Sozialdemokratie,” Aufklärung, 1952, H:3, 178.
56 Schuster, op. cit., 193.
57 Karl Korsch, op. cit., 8 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

240

write with some justification into his notebook that “one cannot
fully understand Marx’s Capital, particularly the first chapter, un­
less one has thoroughly studied and grasped the whole of Hegel’s
logic. Thus it is that after half a century none of the Marxists have
understood Marx.” 58 The point is, however, that Marx’s Kapital
did exert great influence by its mere existence, whether it was ade­
quately understood or not, since many Social Democrats believed
that it provided a scientific explanation of capitalist society and of
its inevitable downfall. This indirect influence of Marx was con­
siderable, but the socialist literature most widely read were Lassalle’s Open Letter of 1863 and Bebel’s Woman and Socialism of
1879. Theirs was a direct and non-Marxian influence and, as far
as popular agitation and comprehension were concerned, the domi­
nant one.59
Few statistics are available on the distribution of socialist and
nonsocialist literature within the labor movement. I will draw, for
their illustrative value, on some Viennese statistics in order to assess
the impact of the Social Democratic subculture at the end of the
prewar period. The Austrian labor movement started later than the
German labor movement and expanded much more slowly, but
Vienna was one of the strongholds of the Second International with
about 150,000 German-speaking male and female members organ­
ized in the unions and the party. Cultural activities flourished. The
lecture system was more extensive than in any other city of the
international Social Democratic movement. Each year about 10,000 persons regularly heard lectures; a smaller number attended lec­
ture courses. Robert Danneberg, who discussed Adolf Braun’s gen68 W. I. Lenin, Extracts and Marginal Notes on Hegel’s Science of Logic
(Moscow: Marx-Engels Institute, 1932), 99; quoted in Karl Korsch, Karl
Marx (London: Chapman, 1938), 225.
89 Overstating his case, F. Darmstaedter even maintained that Das Kapital
was the most influential socialist work because of its indirect impact, i.e., be­
cause of the fact that it was not read, that it was difficult to comprehend.
Cf. F. Darmstaedter, Germany and Europe: Political Tendencies from Fred­
erick the Great to Hitler (London: Methuen, 1945), 95 ff.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

241

eral evaluation of the cultural limitations of the labor movement,
considered this, along with the socialist libraries, a great achieve­
ment.60 But he also showed that three-quarters of the trade union
members did not borrow books from the socialist libraries in
Vienna. Only a fraction of the remaining quarter regularly read
books. Even though in one year about one million books were
borrowed from all socialist libraries in Austria (200,000 of them in
Vienna alone), only two to three per cent were specifically socialist
literature. Most of the socialist literature was decades old. In 1913,
83 per cent of the Viennese loans were classified as belles-lettres,
five per cent as natural science, and 12 per cent as social science.61
The latter were mostly inferior books on history. The high per­
centage of belles-lettres does not indicate the workers’ preferences
but the fulfillment of the requests of wives and daughters. Before
1918 natural science literature was consistently more popular than
socialist literature. Danneberg explains the workers’ greater inter­
est in natural science than in social science by citing their usually
recent emancipation from religion.62 If they read history, they were
more interested in anti-clericalism than in economic issues.
60 See Robert Danneberg, “Die Ergebnisse sozialdemokratischer Bildungs­
arbeit,” Der Kampf, Vienna, Vol. 8, 1915, 279 ff.
61 According to Gulick, op. cit., 657, the percentage for 1931 was 73 per cent
for poetry and fiction, 16 per cent for social science and 10 per cent for the
natural sciences. However, these data are not strictly comparable to those of
1913 because different types of books may have been classified differently
although the overall categories are the same. Thus the data do not permit
definite conclusions as to the change of percentages involved. It seems, how­
ever, that after the First World War the workers’ libraries became even less
of a direct instrument of political propaganda and concentrated even more on
mediating “respectable” literature to workers and their families. The fight
against Kitsch, though, had always been part of the Social Democratic edu­
cational efforts, as Liebknecht’s speech, “Knowledge Is Power,” shows.
62 A striking example in support of this explanation is this passage from Keil’s
autobiography:
“The association owned a little library of natural science works which we
used. One of these books gave me a deep insight into the universe and into
the origin of the celestial bodies and demonstrated to me the abysmal con­
trast between scientific explanations and the biblical Genesis. With that, my

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

242

In 1914 it was apparent that most workers were not familiar with
the socialist theory of imperialism, not even through general agita­
tion.*63 Danneberg observes that interest in socialist literature seems
to have decreased in proportion to the expansion of the labor move­
ment, although the evidence presented above would suggest that it
was always low. The fact that Kautsky’s Erfurt Program, Lassalle’s
writings, and even Bebel’s Woman and Socialism were scarcely
read in 1914 may, however, indicate a further drop of interest in
specifically socialist literature. At the end of the period, therefore,
it became evident that the results of the educational activities within
the subculture fell far short of the intentions and ambitions moti­
vating them. The achievements were, of course, considerable, but
they did not seem relevantly to enhance the political effectiveness
of the labor movement, beyond attaching a minority of workers and
their families more firmly to the educational institutions of the sub­
mind was made up not only about the Genesis, but also about all transcen­
dental world views. For me all of this was a new creed, a new gospel through
which the old creed was completely abandoned; I thought it was merely neces­
sary to make these books available to the unprejudiced person in order to put
him into the same mood.” Keil, op. cit., Vol. I, 80. In some cases interest in
natural science also seems to have been an attempt to escape from the social
reality. This was Biirgel’s motivation when, at the age of thirteen, he resolved
to become an astronomer even before he was familiar with the word astron­
omy. He was overwhelmed by his own proletarian experiences and by what
he learned from a politically conscious boy, one of the first generation born
to a Social Democratic family, whose father was persecuted at the time. Cf.
Bürgel, op. cit., 22.
63 Bauer’s Nationalitätenfrage had scarcely left the libraries, and other per­
tinent literature, such as Bauer’s Der Balkankrieg und die deutsche Welt­
politik, Bernstein’s Die englische Gefahr und das deutsche Volk, Imperia­
lismus oder Sozialismus, Kautsky’s Sozialismus und Kolonialpolitik, Die
Marokkokrise vor dem Reichstag, and Radek’s Der deutsche Imperialismus
und die Arbeiterklasse was not there at all. Hilferding’s Finanzkapital was
available in only one library. Danneberg attributed the lack of recent socialist
literature in part to organizational factors such as the stipulation for local
party wards to buy their own books once they were prosperous enough to do
so. This stipulation was disliked for its demands on the local treasury, which
was presumably used for more “tangible” purposes.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

243

culture. The failure to spread more literature among the working
class was not entirely due to the weakness of the subculture nor to
the strength of the dominant culture. The environmental handicaps
for a reading worker were many. In contrast, it was a failing of
the socialist educators, as Danneberg recognized, that a good deal
of even the popularizing socialist literature simply demanded too
much of the workers’ comprehension.
It is impossible to evaluate the impact of socialist literature
within the working class without considering the party press, which
was more influential than socialist brochures and books; it was the
sole means of socialist education for large numbers of workers.

4. The Party Press
The major purposes of the party press were agitation outside the
party and internal communication. Its function as a mouthpiece of
protest against the dominant system cut across the two purposes.
In the beginning the Social Democratic press was purely a means
of agitation and “enlightenment.” Both the Lassalleans and the
Eisenachers insisted on a doctrinaire line, and the press of the
united party continued, under Liebknecht’s influence, to minimize
for a long time all qualities of entertainment since these were con­
sidered bourgeois. The differences between the Eisenachers and the
Lassalleans referred to tone and strategy, but not to this basic ori­
entation.64 The Eisenachers sometimes attacked the Lassalleans
64 Lassalle did not yet have a newspaper. His most successful successor, von
Schweitzer, ran the Socialdemokrat which was replaced in 1871, after his
resignation, by the Neue Socialdemokrat, edited by Hasselmann. In the first
year it supposedly had 3,000 subscribers, in 1873, 18,000 subscribers. The
Volksstaat, originally a democratic paper under a different name, was the
major organ of the Eisenachers. Edited by Liebknecht it was published in
Leipzig and had by 1875 about 10,000 subscribers. When the two parties
merged in 1875 the labor movement published 29 newspapers and periodicals.
Cf. Schuster, op. cit., 10 and 233 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

244

for the shrill tone of their agitation. The Volksstaat, for example,
rejected as ridiculous an attempt by the Neue Socialdemokrat to
interpret a few cases of typhoid fever in Berlin as a threat to the
whole working class, which would therefore have to flock behind
the “banner of Lassalle.” 65 The Eisenachers favored a decentral­
ized strategy rather than a concentration on one major newspaper
as did the Lassalleans. The Volksstaat took an evolutionary per­
spective in arguing that a Social Democratic paper be founded only
at a place which already had a newspaper because “the parties we
fight are our predecessors; the people have to go through their
school and arrive at their level before they will be able to under­
stand the conflict between these other and their own interests.” 66
In contrast to this decentralized approach of the Eisenachers,
the Lassallean Hasselmann seems to have hoped that one big paper
could achieve an influence similar to that of “the great Marat’s
weekly,” Uami du peuple of 1790 and 1791, which had “more
influence on the development of the French Revolution than all
the pompous phrases of the deputies and the most refined intrigues
of those at the helm of the state.” 67 This was certainly revolu­
tionary rhetoric, but no more—precisely because it did not go be­
yond writing à la Marat.
The revolutionary rhetoric and the doctrinaire line of the Las­
salleans and the Eisenachers were accompanied by a vagueness
about the concrete tenets of Socialism. To contemporary bour­
geois observers like Reverend Schuster, this appeared as a device
to trap innocent workers. However, this vagueness was genuine as
well as tactical. First of all, there was no common agreement on the
65 See Volksstaat, 1873, 21 and Der Neue Socialdemokrat, 1873, 28, quoted
in op. cit., 9 ff.
66 Volksstaat, 1874, 81, quoted in op. cit., 13.
67 Hasselmann in a programmatic article on the purpose of the Social Demo­
cratic press, “Was soli the Presse leisten?” Der Neue Socialdemokrat, 1872,
100, quoted in op. cit., 144.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

245

tenets of socialism among the leaders in the early seventies.68 Sec­
ondly, in spite of a doctrinaire inclination, the Social Democratic
agitation adapted itself to the prevailing mentality of workers in a
given region and relied heavily on appeals which were not specifi­
cally socialist or which carried only socialistic overtones. And
thirdly, caution had to be observed because of the danger of police
and court action.69
The intra-party function of the press was related from the be­
ginning to the need for self-esteem in view of the frustrated demand
for social recognition. “We want to have an organ for critique and
complaints,” wrote Carl Hirsch in the Volksstaat in 1874, “in
order to quickly expose mistreatments and excesses on the part of
the bourgeoisie and the authorities, to encourage one another, and
probably also to amuse ourselves with the stupidity of our oppo­
nents. We want to spare ourselves the annoyance of being calumni­
ated in every newspaper we pick up or, what hurts even more, of
being paternally advised or held in tutelage.” 70
When the Social Democratic subculture expanded rapidly after
1890, the party press developed into a pure intra-party organ, as
can be seen from the fact that its expansion was in no way com­
parable to the increase in votes. Since many votes were just an
expression of opposition against the existing regime, those who cast
them were often disinterested in socialist doctrines and internal
68 Theoretical statements on socialism were infrequent in the newspapers of
the two socialist parties during the early seventies. The Volksstaat carried
quarterly the party program on its front page. This was more an expression
of a doctrinaire attitude than of theoretical ambitions. Cf. op. cit., 15. Rather
rare seems to have been the kind of sketch of a socialist planned economy as
it was presented in the Neue Socialdemokrat in 1872, cf. op. cit., 53 f and
75 ff.
69 See the reply of the Volksstaat, 1874, 33, to Diihring’s charge of insuffi­
cient clarity of the socialist position, quoted in op. cit., 16.
70 Quoted in Ludwig Kantorowicz, Die sozialdemokratische Presse Deutsch­
lands (Tübingen: Mohr, 1922), 33. See also Carl Hirsch, Die Parteipresse,
ihre Bedeutung und Organization (Leipzig, 1876), 3.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

246

party events and hence did not read the party press. The party press
remained an organ for the declaration of faith and for intra-party
communications. Gradually more space was given to daily news
coverage, although intra-party events still dominated, and enter­
tainment needs were also increasingly considered. But the party
press remained unable to attract those readers who fell under the
influence of the Generalanzeiger press, or to interest intellectuals
who were looking for good news coverage.71 Since newspapers were
the only source of printed information for many workers, it mat­
tered a great deal which press they read.
The intra-party orientation of the party press was the subject of
a prolonged debate which reached a climax at the party conven­
tion of 1913. At the time the party executive wrote in a report
to the convention that “our press obviously addresses itself almost
exclusively to the organized and trained party member, in relation
to whom it can take for granted many things which are still com­
pletely unknown to those yet to be won.” 72 The failure to appeal
beyond the party members to the proletarian or even the middleclass public was partly due to the old fear that the attention of the
workers might be diverted if the papers did not focus on party
theory and party affairs, and it was partly due to the social com­
position of the staff of the papers. As late as 1914, 80 per cent of
the 241 editors were of working-class origin, and only 28 had aca­
demic, though mostly unfinished, training.73 The social and cul71 The Generalanzeiger press gained importance after the turn of the century.
These papers, which were usually published by smaller publishing houses,
represented the lower middle classes. They were read by many workers and
especially their wives who disliked the political character of the party press and
its emphasis on the class struggle in articles as well as in novels. Thus these
newspapers were a great competition to the party press. However, party func­
tionaries sometimes managed to influence local papers by suggesting that they
print specific statements on domestic events.
72 Protocol, Jena, 1913, 8. For Scheidemann’s defense of the report, see p. 226.
Cf. Kantorowicz, op. cit., 36. For further details on this debate over the years,
see id., 10 ff.
73 For a detailed breakdown of the vocational background, see op. cit., 104 f.

The Subculture and the Dominant Culture

247

tural background of these editors was generally too limited, even
if they had been typographers and printers, to qualify them for
more than the coverage of intra-party affairs and the political
critique of local events. The doctrinaire tendencies were often re­
enforced by more knowledgeable persons among the editors and
contributors—belonging to the species of would-be professors
(verhinderte Privatdozenten)—who had academic or at least schol­
arly ambitions but who had been unable to get a higher education
or to enter the academic community.
Although the party press could not compete in quality with larger
bourgeois journals, it appears to have compared favorably at times
with the quality of bourgeois small-town papers. When Göhre
worked as a factory worker about 1890, he found that all active
Social Democrats read party papers, especially the local party
paper which was “quite somberly and, most of the time, better
edited than the small-town local press.” 74 Quantitatively the Social
Democratic press remained dwarfed by the many other papers,
neutral and partisan, until the end of the period. Out of about
3,000 dailies, only 79 were Social Democratic,75 circulating in
1909 about one million copies. Still, they were considered a power­
ful force by friend and foe because they were an integral part of
the Social Democratic subculture, contributing to the cohesion of
the labor movement. But the very emphasis of the party press on
indoctrination and intra-party information diminished its appeal to
a wider public and thus furthered the self-containment of the labor
movement. The party press shared this limitation with the best
writers of the party, who addressed themselves nearly exclusively
to the labor movement. This limitation was partly self-imposed—
party members were not permitted to work for the nonparty press
74 Cf. Göhre, op. cit., 94 f.
75 About half of them were non-partisan, 275 conservative, 214 National
(i.e., supporting the government), 216 National Liberal, 400 Center, 277 Pro­
gressive, 23 Polish, four Danish. See W. Nicolai, Nachrichtendienst (Berlin:
Mittler, 1920), 168.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

248

— and partly imposed by the general public, which defined these
writers as partisan. Thus, it is another index for the depth of the
class cleavage in Imperial Germany and the containment of the
labor movement.76
76 This is in sharp contrast with the English development where one of the
reasons for the success of the Labor Party seems to have been the existence
of independent writers like the Fabians who were not isolated from the gen­
eral public. Cf. Anne Fremantle, This Little Band of Prophets: The British
Fabians (New York: Mentor Book, 1960).

X
Organizational Strength and
Weakness of the Labor Movement

1. Excursus: Robert Michels and Max Weber
on Socialist Party Organization
As the Social Democratic subculture expanded, problems of bu­
reaucratization, especially of vested organizational interests, were
bound to intensify. A connection between increasing size, bureau-cratization and opportunist strategy was suggested by Robert
Michels, who illustrated his famous “iron law of oligarchy” with
many examples from the German labor movement. In 1911 he
published his book, On the Sociology of Parties in Modern Democ­
racy.1 I will deal with Michels’ work because his “iron law” and
his image of the German labor movement have been very influen­
tial in the literature.12 I will relate it to Max Weber’s views, which
1 Robert Michels, Zur Soziologie des Parteiwesens in der modernen Demo­
kratie, Werner Conze, ed. (Stuttgart: Kroner, 1957); this is the second revised
edition of 1925. The English edition is from the Italian translation of the first
German edition; see Political Parties, op. cit.; first published in 1915. In the
latest German edition Werner Conze has attempted to correct Michels’ biblio­
graphical references, many of which turned out to be faulty.
2 For an excellent up-to-date account of Michels’ academic influence and of
political reactions to his work, see S. M. Lipset’s introduction to Political
Parties, op. cit., 15-39. Gerhard A. Ritter, op. cit., 48 f cites recent German
and English literature perpetuating or criticizing Michels’ interpretations.
Ritter’s Ch. II on the organizational and financial practices of the Social
Democratic party provides basic information for a qualification of Michels*
analysis.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

250

were similar to a degree but which also provided an alternative
interpretation; while the friendship of the two men is well known,
the nature of their intellectual relationship is not.3
Michels’ “iron law of oligarchy” maintains that all large-scale
organizations inevitably develop oligarchic controls. This is a spe­
cial dilemma for democratic and socialist organizations. They
strive for the emancipation of the masses, but their leaders tend to
perpetuate themselves through skill monopoly, control of communi­
cation channels and the very gratitude of the masses. Even worse,
professional leaders of a democratic party or a labor union ulti­
mately tend to fail the masses by developing an overriding concern
with organizational survival. Michels wrote his book from the per- •
spective of Rousseau’s ideal democracy, which rejected the prin­
ciple of popular representation because it involved a diminution,
if not a destruction, of popular sovereignty and freedom.
Michels asserted his “iron law” in an apodictic fashion which
hid an underlying ambivalence. His career was vacillating. To begin
with, his family background was very heterogeneous. His grand­
father was a Catholic textile merchant from Cologne, wealthy
enough to make each of his nine children a millionaire. His grand­
mother’s first language was French, her family relations French,
Dutch and Spanish. By the time Robert Michels had grown up, the
family had begun to intermarry with Protestant financiers and
aristocratic officers. He was the second member of the family to
become an active officer, but he soon quit service in the Prussian
army. Rejecting his upper-class background and a military career,
3 The closeness which Michels felt for Weber was expressed in the dedication
of his Political Parties (first German edition) “to his dear friend Max Weber,
that upright man who does not shy away from vivisection if it is in the interest
of science, with greetings from a kindred soul.” In the foreword to the second
edition, Michels again acknowledged Weber’s influence and mentioned that
for its revision he took into consideration a lengthy critique by Weber; he
added that he did not learn much that was new from Weber’s posthumously
published treatment of parties in Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft. Cf. Zur So­
ziologie des Parteiwesens, op. cit., xxviii f.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

251

he became a socialist with syndicalist and anarchist predilections.4
However, he retained his family’s Franco-German orientation and
traveled often to France and Italy, becoming well acquainted with
George Sorel. His upper-class origin, syndicalist inclinations and
“objective” scholarly work impaired his relations with the German
Social Democrats. In 1906/7 he engaged in socialist agitation in
the university town of Marburg; this made impossible a regular
academic career in Germany. He chose Italy as his Wahlheimat
(elective country) and became a lecturer at the University of Turin
in 1907. He joined the syndicalist wing of the Italian labor move­
ment, but soon withdrew from it. In 1914 he accepted a chair at
the University of Basle in Switzerland, from which he observed the
seeming triumph of the “iron law of oligarchy” in the First World
War. A disappointed idealist, who despaired about his own “iron
law” and about the permanent political crisis in Italy, France and
Germany, he came to consider authoritarian regimes historically
inevitable and finally accepted a professorship from Mussolini in
1928.5
When Michels’ book appeared, the radical socialist left benefited
from its arguments, often built on its own testimony. Yet it was also
part of the academic critique of the Marxist belief that administra­
tive and political problems of large-scale organization would be eas­
ily manageable under socialism. A major representative of this cri­
tique was Max Weber, who tried to save Michels’ academic career
in Germany and who made him coeditor of the famous Archiv für
Sozialwissenschaft. The two men agreed that the German labor
movement as it was could not offer a radically different form of
social organization; it constituted no revolutionary threat; the move­
ment tended to become an end in itself and its leaders “conserva­
tive.” However, their basic premises and final evaluations differed.
4 Compare his own pertinent description of the young bourgeois enthusiast
turning to socialism in Political Parties, op. cit., 241.
5 These biographical details rely on Werner Conze’s thoughtful postscript to
the 1957vGerman edition of Michels, op. cit., 384 ff.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

252

For Weber the basic premise was the national welfare, for Michels,
an internationalist syndicalism which Weber called an “apolitical
ethos of brotherhood.”
Since the nineties, Weber had been strongly under the influence
of M. Ostrogorski’s monumental volumes on Democracy and the
Organization of Political Parties, which analyzed the rise of mod­
ern party organization in England and the United States.6 Ostrogorski showed in detail how mass suffrage and industrialization re­
sulted in the creation of party machines mobilizing the masses in
quasi-military fashion. Oligarchic controls and mass manipulation
were the inevitable outcome. Ideological differences between par­
ties tended to become blurred under the identical pressures of
organizational requirements. Weber pointed out to Michels that the
German Social Democratic party was, “outside the Anglo-Saxon
realm, the only one which is technically fully developed,” although
it has “by contrast . . . something like a Weltanschauung” and thus
is “not just a technical machine,” as are the parties in the United
States.7 In a similar vein he explained to a distinguished audience
at the 1905 convention of the Verein für Sozialpolitik what would
happen to the Social Democratic party
under the pressure o f com pelling conditions, particularly under the
pressure of the feeling o f powerlessness which predominates in the
ruling circles . . . , as everybody knows who looks behind the scenes.
Of course, its representatives would deny this, but this does not change
matters. The party cannot becom e anything else but a party o f the
American genre, committed . . . to a few slogans . . . , a party which
exists for its own sake and that of its office-holders. Just as the workers
in the factories are supposed to knuckle under according to the theory
6 M. Ostrogorski, Democracy and the Organization of Political Parties (Lon­
don: Macmillan, 1902), 2 vols. The book was first published in French in
1893.
7 Letter of March 26, 1906, quoted in W. Mommsen, op. cit., 124. As is the
case with all other correspondence, Michels’ letters were not preserved in
Weber’s Nachlass. Mommsen tried unsuccessfully to get hold of them else­
where.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

253

of the lords o f the big business syndicates, and just as these gentlemen
and all o f us are supposed to bow before the State, everybody in the
party is supposed to do so before the ruling bosses. The workers have
acquired this lack o f character in our State . . . and in our quasimilitary factories.8

Weber urged the empirical study of basic problems of leadership,
organizational structure, social composition and ideology. Michels
was understandably interested at first in the role of the intellectuals
and especially of the reformists, but eventually he took up these
broader problems, at least in part under Weber’s influence.9 How8 Verhandlungen, Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, Vol. 116, 1906,
389 f. Weber purposively exaggerated such statements. He replied to Michels’
protests against his similar address at the 1907 convention that he had ad­
dressed “the cowards of his own class as a ‘class-conscious bourgeois.’ ” He
wanted to diminish their fears of the Social Democrats. Cf. letter of Nov. 6,
1907, quoted in Mommsen, op. cit., 123.
9 In the 1905 issue of the Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft, in which he pub­
lished the first part of the “Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism,”
Weber outlined some research topics as a postscript to R. Blank’s “Die soziale
Zusammensetzung der sozialdemokratischen Wählerschaft Deutschlands,”
Vol. 20, 1905, 507-50, a study which received widespread attention as one
of the first empirical studies, including comments from Bebel. Cf. Michels,
Political Parties, op. cit., 256. Weber published Michels’ studies from 1906 on.
Weber’s catalogue of research topics (550-53) included:
1. The relationship between the organized elite of the labor movement and
the masses of followers; 2. The impact of non-proletarian groups within the
party versus the necessity to appeal to non-proletarian groups outside the party
during election campaigns; 3. The character and the background of the ele­
ments controlling the local organizations and the party newspapers; 4. The
professional politicians who live “off” or for the party— explicit comparisons
to be made with American parties despite the ideological differences; 5. Dif­
ference between academically trained members and those who, due to the
class barriers, could not acquire higher education; 6. Universal tendencies
of parties to become an end in themselves for their followers; 7. Resulting
tendency of Social Democratic office-holders (Parteipfründner) to oppose a
radical course no less than a clearly reformist one— comparisons to be made
with the conflicts of liberal and orthodox theologians on Apostolic writings;
8. Interest of the trade unions in “conservative” party tactics; trade union
dependence on the party, due to the need for having the voice of a large party
in parliament to fight the chicaneries of the officials and the police—the

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

254

ever, he did not link his analyses directly with Ostrogorski’s work,
to which he refers only occasionally. His Sociology of Parties in
Modern Democracy supplemented Ostrogorski’s study of liberal
and conservative parties in the Anglo-Saxon democracies with an
analysis of labor movements in semi-authoritarian Germany; in
Italy, which did not have a genuine parliamentary monarchy; and
in the French Third Republic, which suffered from a persistent
crisis of legitimacy.*101 However, in contrast to Ostrogorski and
Weber, Michels did not pay much attention to the political systems
under which these movements operated; given his premises of the
“iron law,” such differences appeared fairly immaterial— a perspec­
tive which influenced until recently the French, German and Amer­
ican literature on the sociology of parties.
Similarly to Michels’ wavering between the affirmation of syn­
dicalist ideals and the skeptical recognition of organizational reali­
ties, Weber—to use his own distinctions—vacillated in his evalua­
tion of the Social Democrats between an “ethic of absolute values”
{Gesinnungsethik) and an “ethic of responsibility” {Verantwor­
tungsethik— i.e., a pragmatic ethic. Weber well understood the
organizational dilemma of the Social Democrats, but he had little
sympathy for the Social Democratic dualism of radical rhetoric and
moderate practice. He criticized the party’s lack of revolutionary
enthusiasm no less than its refusal to declare itself openly a re­
form party ;11 for him this dualism was “petty-bourgeois” timidity.
real cause of the proletarian class consciousness; drawback of this depend­
ence: other parties not interested in wooing labor; relatively small material
gains for labor are the result; 9. Extent to which the trade unions are likely
to take over the party; possible irrelevance of trade union domination in view
of strategic position of the party, especially the need to appeal to unorgan­
ized masses; 10. Importance of everyday operations and tactical questions,
such as the mass strike, over program demands and theoretical issues.
10 It may be speculated that the misnomer of Michels’ book was perhaps due
to its being a parallel to Ostrogorski’s broad title.
11 Cf. letter to Michels of Feb. 1, 1907, quoted in Mommsen, op. cit., 122
and 149.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

255

Weber attended the important 1906 party convention in Mannheim
and reported to Michels in disgust:
Mannheim was a miserable affair. . . . Ten times at least I heard
Bebel and Legien emphasize “our weakness” [i.e., the movement’s
weakness]. On top of it, there were all the extremely petty-bourgeois
attitudes, the self-satisfied physiognomies o f innkeepers, the lack of
élan, and the inability to m ove to the right if the road to the left is
blocked or appears to be so— these gentlemen no longer scare anyone.12

While Michels still believed in 1907 that the political emancipa­
tion of the working class could be derived from its economic in­
dispensability, Weber argued:
Indispensability in the econom ic process means nothing, absolutely
nothing for the power position and power chances o f a class. A t a
time when no “citizen” worked, the slaves were ten times, nay a thou­
sand times as necessary as is the proletariat today. What does that mat­
ter? The medieval peasant, the N egro o f the American South, they
were all absolutely “indispensable.” . . . The phrase contains a dan­
gerous illusion. . . . Political democratization is the only thing which
can perhaps be achieved in the foreseeable future, and that would be
no mean achievement. . . . I cannot prevent you from believing in
more, but I cannot force m yself to do so.13

Michels did not deny that the German labor movement was a
vehicle of democratization, but this was not enough for him. For
Weber democratization held out the promise that the coalition be­
tween big business and the Junkers might be destroyed, enhancing
Germany’s prestige and power in the world. The basic difference
between Michels and Weber eventually came to be the interpreta­
tion of the very organizational phenomena on whose existence they
agreed. For Michels the “iron law of oligarchy” left no way out.
Weber overcame his original exasperation with the bureaucratiza­
12 Letter of Oct. 8, 1906, quoted in Mommsen, op. cit., 122.
13 Letter of Nov. 6/7, quoted in Mommsen, op. cit., 97 and 121.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

256

tion of political parties and recognized positive consequences. He
believed that bureaucratization resulted in a lessening of radical
ideology and revolutionary spirit. Party machines with a system of
patronage and cooptation could devote themselves realistically to
problems of party and national leadership. In his discussion of
charismatic authority he compared English and German party de­
velopments and concluded that
in a certain respect the chances o f charisma are greatest in “unprin­
cipled” parties [G efolgschaftsparteien\ made up o f a loyal mass fol­
lowing and patronage seekers. These parties make it easier, ceteris
paribus, for impressive personalities to win the necessary follow ing than
do the petty-bourgeois organizations o f notables o f the German parties,
particularly the liberal ones with their “programs” and “Weltanschau­
ungen” which are forever the sam e.14

Although Weber did not foresee the Fascist and Communist
combination of bureaucracy and extremist ideology and was by no
means detached about the Social Democrats, his general approach
to party organization appears to me superior to Michels’ because
it was more concerned with alternatives rather than “iron laws.”
In later decades, however, Michels’ book became more influential
than Ostrogorski’s stout volumes and Weber’s massive fragments;
paradoxically, Ostrogorski was eclipsed in the United States de­
spite the fact that Michels did not focus on the Anglo-Saxon realm.
American social scientists were stimulated as well as handicapped
by the pessimistic orientation of Michels’ thesis, which produced
much repetitive confirmation and some incisive qualification; the
latter contributed fruitfully to the development of theories of in­
stitutionalization.
14 In contrast to Michels’ tendency to absolutize generalizations, Weber added
cautiously: “But it is probably impossible to generalize successfully. The in­
ternal dynamics of party techniques and the social and economic conditions
of each concrete case are all too intimately interwoven in any given situa­
tion.” Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (Tübingen: Mohr, 1956), Vol. 2,
678.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

257

In the following account of the Social Democratic party organi­
zation I will use, for the purpose of broad classification, Philip
Selznick’s categories of institutionalization, which refer to four re­
current processes in the life history of associations: formalization,
self-maintenance, development of a distinctive social composition
and social base, and infusion with value.151 will deal in some detail
with Michels’ interpretations and in particular with the extent to
which bureaucratization weakened the labor movement beyond its
inherent strategic limitations.

2. Social Composition and Social Base
The German labor movement had from its very beginnings a de­
limited social composition and base: the nominally Protestant, rela­
tively skilled working class supplemented by a small number of
middle-class intellectuals. There are no representative national
statistics, but there is enough evidence to establish the point.16 The
prevalence of these workers was in part due to the fact that a large
sector of German industry, especially the manufacturing industry,
was of moderate size and required relatively skilled labor. Further­
more, skilled workers have traditionally tended to have a higher
level of self-confidence and aspirations as well as of defensive
power than unskilled workers have. The organization of masses of
151 will not employ the latter category since much of Chs. VII and VIII can
be subsumed under it. Cf. P. Selznick, Leadership . . . , op. cit., 20 f, and
L. Broom and P. Selznick, Sociology (Evanston: Row, Peterson, 1955), 237 ff.
On the persistence of pessimistic value assumptions in organizational analysis
from Michels to Selznick, see Alvin Gouldner, “Metaphysical Pathos and
the Theory of Bureaucracy,” American Political Science Review, Vol. 49,
1955, 496-507.
16 Cf. Michels, op. cit., 255 f; id., “Die deutsche Sozialdemokratie: Partei­
mitgliedschaft und soziale Zusammensetzung,” Archiv für Sozialwissen­
schaft, Vol. 23, 1906, 471-556; on working-class elites, 514-18.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

258

unskilled and semi-skilled workers was held back because big busi­
ness extensively blacklisted Social Democratic workers and refused
to deal with established unions.17 Big business also effectively con­
trolled foremen and skilled workers by making long service man­
datory for securing supervisory jobs.
Industrialization had a twofold influence on the labor move­
ment, positively by increasing the number of blue-collar workers,
negatively by proliferating white-collar jobs. Many working-class
parents, even if unionized, often seem to have discouraged thensons and daughters from joining labor organizations so as not
to interfere with their chances for occupational mobility.18 Such
mobility was particularly pronounced in the case of printers, who
were considered the aristocrats of labor and whose union was the
most reformist.19
Much has been made of the embourgeoisement of the labor
movement. It is true that the party had many lower-middle-class
17 Cf. Gustav Schmoller, “Der Weltkrieg und die deutsche Sozialdemokratie,”
Schmollers Jahrbuch, XXXIV, 1915, 1111. On the persistence of the elabo­
rate system of supervision of skilled and unskilled workers, see Theo Pirker
et al., Arbeiter, Management, Mitbestimmung (Stuttgart: Ring-Verlag, 1955),
Part III: 1. Religious and ethnic differences within the work force handicapped
the Social Democratic labor movement in the heavy industry areas of the
Ruhr and Silesia. Immigrants from the East Elbian provinces, whose numbers
substantially increased late in the period, were hard to organize because of
their economic insecurity, their religious affiliation (if they were Catholic),
and perhaps also because of their “authoritarian heritage.”
18 Cf. Toni Sender, The Autobiography of a German Rebel (New York: Van­
guard, 1939), 25.
19 Cf. S. M. Lipset and R. Bendix, Social Mobility in Industrial Society
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1959), 35. On
the expansion of the new middle classes and the personnel problems of both
Social Democrats and bourgeois parties, see Adolf Braun, “Die Intellektuellen
und die Politik,” Neue Zeit, 27:2, 1909, 847-53. Industry offered more and
more opportunities to the social groups from which the bourgeois parties
recruited their parliamentarians and journalists. For the old middle classes,
it gradually became socially acceptable to join the administrative and tech­
nological hierarchies of commerce and industry.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

259

voters and that its strategy had to take them into account. However,
Michels correctly rejected the charges of “anarchizing socialists”
and “bourgeois radicals,” who decried the role of petty-bourgeois
businessmen within the party.20 He attributed the embourgeoise­
ment to the social and psychological effects of becoming a salaried
functionary, although he acknowledged that the latter was usually
not much better off than the skilled worker and, in fact, often com­
pletely overburdened with work. The functionary, however, was
no longer engaged in manual work and had a great job stability,
secured at the price of his dependence on party or union. Michels
conceded that as “ideologues” the thinking of ex-workers did not
necessarily correspond to their social position, but he believed that
in the passage of generations the families of ex-proletarian func­
tionaries would be absorbed by the middle classes.21
The issue of the embourgeoisement of the functionaries was ex­
aggerated, inasmuch as the majority of the Social Democratic work­
ers had themselves many petty-bourgeois traits. In fact, Michels
used this phenomenon, on the occasion of Bebel’s death in 1913,
in order to explain the elective affinity between the Social Demo­
cratic workers and Bebel, the radical petty-bourgeois politician.22
Michels did not spell out the historical legacies which produced
these characteristics. They were the “semi-feudal” but also “semi­
bourgeois” institutions and traditions of Germany. The growth of
the grand bourgeoisie was slow, but the petty-bourgeoisie, made
up of shopkeepers, craft masters, teachers and lower-ranking civil
servants, was large and exerted a pervasive influence downward.
Many skilled workers retained the two petty-bourgeois strains of
moral restraint: a sense of the painstaking fulfillment of duty, work
discipline, habits of frugality and “good citizenship” on the one
hand, and a tendency toward abstract moralism, “principled” po20 Michels, op. cit., 256.
21 Cf. op. cit., 264 f.
22 Michels, “Bebel,” op. cit., 674.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

260

iitical affirmation or opposition, and cultural conservatism on the
other.23
Michels’ analysis of the petty-bourgeois transformations of the
functionaries, beyond the petty-bourgeois tendencies of the skilled
workers, remains politically inconclusive. The only concrete ex­
ample of political influence provided by Michels is that exerted by
innkeepers, by definition petty-bourgeois businessmen, who were
party members and often persecuted ex-proletarians. The privately
owned party restaurants were a mainstay of local organization in
many small communities until after 1900. Frequently, the inn­
keepers were informal local party leaders; their role had been par­
ticularly important during the antisocialist legislation. Michels
charges this petty-bourgeois group with retarding the temperance
23 A striking example of the adherence to the older bourgeois values of the
German middle classes is the following remark by the trained saddler, Fried­
rich Ebert, then President of the Weimar Republic, on the occasion of his
daughter’s marriage: “If our young married couple always accepts the prin­
ciple of the devotion to duty (Pflichttreue) and the straight-forward and
simple spirit of the burgher {den geraden schlichten Bürgersinn) just as they
learned it in their parents’ home, then it is my belief that they will be pre­
pared to face the storms of life.” Ebert, Schriften, op. cit., 356.
When the strains of industrialization were first felt within petty-bourgeois
strata, the insecurity and resulting protest often took the direction either of
pervasive negativism or of assertive over-identification with the dominant
system. Anti-Semitism was one of the results. While the larger part of the
non-Catholic working class was attracted to the Social Democrats, a large
part of the lower middle class became nationalist, völkisch and anti-Semitic.
The weakness of anti-Semitism in the labor movement was extraordinary,
but there was considerable vote fluctuation between the Social Democrats
and other opposition groups. Many Social Democratic votes were a protest
against specific elements of the prevailing system, without being cast by ad­
herents of socialist ideas. “Petty-bourgeois negativism strongly influenced the
attitudes of the masses,” wrote Eckart Kehr in his analysis of the Social Demo­
cratic opposition to naval armament {op. cit., 332). He referred also to
figures calculated by G. Decker which showed that after 1918 about 20 per
cent of the vote in the big cities shifted from the Social Democrats to the
Deutschnationale Partei, the largest right-wing party. Cf. Georg Decker,
“Krise des deutschen Parteisystems,” Gesellschaft, 1926:1, 12 f.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

261

movement within the party.24 However, it is probably realistic to
assume that masses of rank and file members lacked enthusiasm
for this movement of largely younger members, just as the small
number of innkeepers did.
Thus, there seems to be no significant evidence that the em­
bourgeoisement of the leaders created any mass conflict between
leaders and led. In contrast, there was sometimes conflict between
proletarian functionaries and Social Democratic intellectuals. The
intellectuals were often as doctrinaire as they were unsuited for the
routine tasks of lower-ranking positions; but they were needed for
expert functions. Because of their generally superior rhetorical and
journalistic abilities and their higher education, intellectuals were
met with a mixture of admiration and resentment. Often the resent­
ment was justified, considering their overbearing sense of superi­
ority, their theoretical preoccupations, or simply their middle-class
manners; but often they were also believed to have superior wisdom
in every field. Consequently, young students were sometimes elected
into positions for which older proletarian functionaries with greater
practical experience were much better qualified. More often, how­
ever, intellectuals were lost to the movement because their job
chances were too precarious; they were forced to accept profes­
sional careers occupying most of their time or positions which
allowed no open profession of sympathy for the movement. Out­
side the movement they could earn an adequate bourgeois living,
but within the movement only a few could do so.
There was an undercurrent of anti-intellectualism, ethnocentrism,
and anti-Semitism among the body of lower-ranking and, even
more rarely, higher-ranking functionaries. But apart from some
expression of it in the last years of the Lassallean party, antiSemitism was not a part of the ideology or practice of the move­
ment. Given the rise of political anti-Semitism in the eighties and
2* Cf. Michels, op. c i t 266-70.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

260

litical affirmation or opposition, and cultural conservatism on the
other.23
Michels’ analysis of the petty-bourgeois transformations of the
functionaries, beyond the petty-bourgeois tendencies of the skilled
workers, remains politically inconclusive. The only concrete ex­
ample of political influence provided by Michels is that exerted by
innkeepers, by definition petty-bourgeois businessmen, who were
party members and often persecuted ex-proletarians. The privately
owned party restaurants were a mainstay of local organization in
many small communities until after 1900. Frequently, the inn­
keepers were informal local party leaders; their role had been par­
ticularly important during the antisocialist legislation. Michels
charges this petty-bourgeois group with retarding the temperance
23 A striking example of the adherence to the older bourgeois values of the
German middle classes is the following remark by the trained saddler, Fried­
rich Ebert, then President of the Weimar Republic, on the occasion of his
daughter’s marriage: “If our young married couple always accepts the prin­
ciple of the devotion to duty (Pflichttreue) and the straight-forward and
simple spirit of the burgher (den geraden schlichten Bürgersinn) just as they
learned it in their parents’ home, then it is my belief that they will be pre­
pared to face the storms of life.” Ebert, Schriften, op. cit., 356.
When the strains of industrialization were first felt within petty-bourgeois
strata, the insecurity and resulting protest often took the direction either of
pervasive negativism or of assertive over-identification with the dominant
system. Anti-Semitism was one of the results. While the larger part of the
non-Catholic working class was attracted to the Social Democrats, a large
part of the lower middle class became nationalist, völkisch and anti-Semitic.
The weakness of anti-Semitism in the labor movement was extraordinary,
but there was considerable vote fluctuation between the Social Democrats
and other opposition groups. Many Social Democratic votes were a protest
against specific elements of the prevailing system, without being cast by ad­
herents of socialist ideas. “Petty-bourgeois negativism strongly influenced the
attitudes of the masses,” wrote Eckart Kehr in his analysis of the Social Demo­
cratic opposition to naval armament (op. cit., 332). He referred also to
figures calculated by G. Decker which showed that after 1918 about 20 per
cent of the vote in the big cities shifted from the Social Democrats to the
Deutschnationale Partei, the largest right-wing party. Cf. Georg Decker,
“Krise des deutschen Parteisystems,” Gesellschaft, 1926:1, 12 f.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

261

movement within the party.24 However, it is probably realistic to
assume that masses of rank and file members lacked enthusiasm
for this movement of largely younger members, just as the small
number of innkeepers did.
Thus, there seems to be no significant evidence that the em­
bourgeoisement of the leaders created any mass conflict between
leaders and led. In contrast, there was sometimes conflict between
proletarian functionaries and Social Democratic intellectuals. The
intellectuals were often as doctrinaire as they were unsuited for the
routine tasks of lower-ranking positions; but they were needed for
expert functions. Because of their generally superior rhetorical and
journalistic abilities and their higher education, intellectuals were
met with a mixture of admiration and resentment. Often the resent­
ment was justified, considering their overbearing sense of superi­
ority, their theoretical preoccupations, or simply their middle-class
manners; but often they were also believed to have superior wisdom
in every field. Consequently, young students were sometimes elected
into positions for which older proletarian functionaries with greater
practical experience were much better qualified. More often, how­
ever, intellectuals were lost to the movement because their job
chances were too precarious; they were forced to accept profes­
sional careers occupying most of their time or positions which
allowed no open profession of sympathy for the movement. Out­
side the movement they could earn an adequate bourgeois living,
but within the movement only a few could do so.
There was an undercurrent of anti-intellectualism, ethnocentrism,
and anti-Semitism among the body of lower-ranking and, even
more rarely, higher-ranking functionaries. But apart from some
expression of it in the last years of the Lassallean party, antiSemitism was not a part of the ideology or practice of the move­
ment. Given the rise of political anti-Semitism in the eighties and
24 Cf. Michels, op. cit., 266-70.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

262

nineties and considering what is known today about lower-class
attitudes toward minorities and civil liberties, this is a remarkable
record.25
An example of a clash between proletarian functionaries and in­
tellectuals that was to some extent also a controversy between
party and union may be given in order to illustrate the extremes
of such controversies and at the same time their basically rhetorical
character. In 1905 the unions took a negative stand during the de­
bates on the feasibility, under German conditions, of political mass
strikes in favor of democratization.26 Such strikes had recently oc­
curred in some European countries, especially during the Russian
revolution. Some delegates at the 1905 union convention repre­
senting the more militant interests criticized the majority. One of
them said about the prevailing mentality:

The union executive committees which are represented here have above
all an interest in tight control of the funds. The result is a decline of the
dynamics of the movement. Their concern is not shared by the masses
25 Even the anti-Semitism within the Lassallean movement was not yet pro­
grammatic. But anti-Semitism grew progressively more vulgar as it descended
from Lassalle (and Marx) to J. Baptist von Schweitzer and finally to Hasselmann. Despite this, there were many Jews among the Lassalleans, although
many of them went over to the Eisenachers in 1869. Bernstein who described
these early events makes it clear that “it would be wrong to attribute this
split to the stand taken by the old party on the Jewish question. At that time
there was as yet no Jewish question in the modern sense of the word.” See
Ed. Bernstein, “Jews and German Social Democracy,” translated from the
Yiddish, Di Tsukunft, XXVI, New York, March 1921, 146 f, reprinted in
Massing, op. cit., 324. Massing’s work is an excellent analysis of antiSemitism in Imperial Germany and of the Social Democratic and Marxist
attitudes toward anti-Semitism, as well as toward Zionism.
For a retrospective statement of a representative of anti-intellectual and
anti-Semitic undercurrents, see August Winnig, Das Reich als Republik (Stutt­
gart: Cotta, 1928), 97 f; cf. H. Heidegger, Die deutsche Sozialdemokratie
und der nationale Staat: 1879-1920 (Göttingen: Musterschmitt, 1956), 59 f.
26 See p. 278 below.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

263

o f members. It would be enlightening to establish the percentage o f
salaried officials at this congress.27

Orthodox Marxist writers shared this criticism, and a lively con­
troversy ensued between the party and the union papers.28 The
miners’ paper protested against the attack on the “personal honor”
of the union officials. The “appeal to the callous fist” of the work­
ers, it wrote, was endangering “union discipline” and was no dif­
ferent from bourgeois attacks on “party bureaucrats.” The Social
Democratic literati would have to stop such insinuations; other­
wise it would be made clear to them what was meant by the idea
that the liberation of the working class could only be the work of
the workers. The newspapers of the woodworkers and of the sculp­
tors agreed with this reply. The papers of the hat and feltware
workers and of the painters attacked Kautsky as a man who did
not understand the techniques of trade union activities. The hat
workers’ paper declared that it would be a mistake to consider the
political movement as something better than the trade union move­
ment. The paper of the printers, who had the most reformist and
Revisionist union, went so far as to threaten union rejection of the
party if the “incapable policy of the Jacobin system” was not
abandoned, a policy from which even the “fossil Professor” Bern­
stein had not freed himself; and it demanded a “positive policy” of
turning the party into a reformist force. These were certainly angry
outbursts from unionists who were also party members, but they
did not indicate irreconcilable differences or even serious antiintellectualism within the party.
On the whole, in Germany, the proletarian functionaries and in­
tellectuals cooperated quite successfully, despite some sporadic
27 Protokoll der Verhandlungen des fünften Kongresses der Gewerkschaften
Deutschlands (Cologne, May 22-27, 1905), (Berlin: Verlag der Generalkom­
mission der Gewerkschaften Deutschlands, 1905), 239.
28 The following samples of the newspaper controversy are taken from the
summary of an orthodox Marxist writer, Heinrich Strobel, “Gewerkschaften
und ‘sozialistischer Geist,’ ” Neue Zeit, 23:2, 1905, 564 ff.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

264

friction, as they also did in England and Scandinavia. The opposite
was true in France and Italy, where a lack of balance between in­
tellectuals and proletarian functionaries within the same movement
seems to have been one source of anti-intellectualism.29 Relations in
Germany were apparently relatively smooth because the intellec­
tuals who performed staff functions could not, as a group, strongly
influence the attitudes and policies of the proletarian functionaries
of the line. They were affiliated with the party center as well as with
both wings, and only the radical left-wing intellectuals were ex­
pressly engaged in the ideological articulation of revolutionary po­
tentialities.30
The proletarian women were less inclined to participate in the
labor movement than were the men, partly because of their posi­
tion within a patriarchic family structure and partly because they
were fettered to the household and often to solitary labor in the
house industry. They were prone to resent their husbands’ spending
time and money for politico-social activities.31 For many proletarian
families political activity of the husbands involved not only real
material sacrifices for the wives, but also prevented them from any
political participation of their own, since there was seldom enough
income for both to be politically active. In exceptional cases, men
withdrew from party activities to allow their more talented wives
to work for the party.
There was much resentment among workers against women be­
cause they were cheaper labor. Furthermore, Social Democrats for
a long time considered them inaccessible to political organization.
By 1890, when Adelheid Popp became active as a speaker in
Vienna, the Social Democrats had not yet addressed the working
women.32 Popp’s success was due to her call for the help of men
29 Cf. Landauer, op. cit., 489.
30 Cf. Michels, op. cit., 298.
31 Cf. Bromme, op. cit., 222 and 240 f, and Holek, op. cit., 212 and 239.
32 On the Austrian Social Democratic women’s movement, see Adelheid
Popp, Der Weg zur Höhe (Vienna: Frauenzentralkomitee der Sozialdemo­
kratischen Arbeiterpartei Deutschösterreichs, 1929).

Organizational Strength and Weakness

265

to organize women. She herself was proof what a woman could
achieve within and for the labor movement. The class conscious­
ness of Social Democrats was made more consistent as they learned
to see women as objects of an exploitation similar to or worse than
their own. In Germany the Social Democratic women’s organiza­
tion, which flourished after the turn of the century, became part of
the most class-conscious and Marxist wing of labor; by 1913
the party had 141,000 female members compared to 841,000 male
members. The radicalism of the women’s organizations may have
had something to do with the fact that Imperial Germany and
Austria refused the suffrage to women; in several states women .
could not even be members of political associations. However,
their radicalism seems to have been brought about largely by a
self-selective mechanism. Radical women like Clara Zetkin fought
hard to expand their organizations and managed to isolate them
to a considerable extent from the male reformist bureaucracy.33
Similarly radical was the socialist youth movement, which sud- ’
denly emerged outside the party in 1904. Since political associa­
tions of young people were not legal in northern Germany, the
youth movement became the first socialist group after 1900 to em­
ploy underground tactics. In southern Germany it was legal until
1908; there it was guided by the young lawyer Ludwig Frank, who
fought for reformist goals with radical means. The youth movement
attempted to combine trade union and party functions; its major
political activity was the fight against militarism. Government and
33 On the women’s movement, see the party executive’s report in Party Proto­
cols, 1913, 14-17. Clara Zetkin, a former teacher from a lower-middle class
family, later became one of the most famous figures of the Communist Inter­
national. Cf. the memorial volume on Clara Zetkin (Moscow: Verlags­
genossenschaft ausländischer Arbeiter, 1934). On the strains between re­
formist upper- and middle-class and radical lower-class women within the
old Social Democratic party and especially the clashes between the aristo­
cratic Lily Braun and Clara Zetkin, see Julie Vogelstein, “Lily Braun: ein
Lebensbild,” in Lily Braun, Gesammelte Werke (Berlin: Klemm, 1923),
Vol. I, LVX, and id., Memoiren einer Sozialistin (Munich: Langen, 1909
and 1911), 2 vols.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

266

party and union leadership all turned against it—the former by
suppressing the independent movement with old and new statutes
and the latter by incorporating it legally. Party radicals patronized
it and party conservatives like Ebert fettered it. During the war the
youth movement again broke away from the party.34

3. Formalization: Increasing Complexity and Control
As associations develop they tend to formalize their operations. In­
creasing size typically leads to more division of labor, hierarchical
differentiation and formal controls. Specific historical factors, how­
ever, can retard or propel such a development. The mushrooming
of the labor movement after 1890 made large-scale organization
technically necessary, but formalization proceeded faster in the
unions, which were primarily administrative bodies, than in the
party, which was not “rationalized” until after 1905. Michels wrote
his Political Parties during these years without making it clear that
from a purely technical viewpoint the party’s organization was
relatively “outmoded.”
The reorganization was rather belated, but it was a major change
from the tradition of formally loose organization. The Lassalleans
had emphasized tight-knit organization and strict discipline, but
despite their class consciousness they were troubled by discord
and splits. The Eisenachers, too, did not excel in well-kept disci­
pline and efficient financial management.35 In the three decades
after the merger, the party was financially unstable; its correspond­
ence and bookkeeping techniques were rudimentary, originally be­
cause of the antisocialist legislation, later because of ingrained
habit. During the repressive period legal opportunities of organiza34 Cf. Schorske, op. cit., 97-108, and Karl Korn, Die Arbeiterjugendbewe­
gung (Berlin: Arbeiterjugend-Verlag, 1922).
35 Cf. Schröder, op. cit., 17 f.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

267

tion were limited to some mutual funds of the outlawed unions and,
in the more lenient second half of the eighties, to some occupa­
tional associations; the only really important legal opportunity was
provided by the temporary electoral district organizations. Much
ingenuity went into the organization of an underground network
whose most radical activity was the distribution of the imported
party newspaper, the only means of communication from the lead­
ers to the followers. The remarkable feature of these activities was
that they were accomplished without any possibility of enforcing
decisions from above. The party was led by the Reichstag faction’s
executive; election campaigns were directed by a committee of
the Reichstag faction.
Between 1890 and 1900 the party remained decentralized be- .
cause of laws forbidding the national organization of local political
associations. For legal reasons, a party member was defined as any­
one who affirmed the principles of the program and supported the
party according to his abilities. Not until 1909 did party dues be­
come mandatory. A consequence of decentralization was the party
executive’s lack of knowledge of the size of local membership; for
30 years no census was taken. This condition was corrected only,
after 1906.
The electoral district organization was the major unit; until
1900 it was not a party, but a public institution in the sense that
its leadership had to be elected by public assembly. The func­
tionary closest to the rank and file, the Vertrauensmann, also was
elected annually at nonparty public meetings as the man in
whom the assembly was willing to put its trust, an arrangement
instituted during the reorganization of the party in 1891 in order
to avoid legal obstacles. The Vertrauensmänner had to establish
contact with the party executive and be responsible to it.36 Loyalty
and dedication substituted for formal controls. In literal translation
Vertrauensmann means “confidence man,” but the English mean­
36 Cf. op. cit., 39.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

268

ing is the opposite of the German one. These “confidence men”
proved to be very trustworthy; corruption, whether embezzlement,
bribery, or similar temptations, was extremely rare.
Only in 1905 was the local party organization, with elected and
salaried officials, introduced by statute as the normal form of or­
ganization. Until the end of the period there was great local and
regional variation, largely due to differences in legislation. Centrali­
zation, however, was greatly furthered by the right, accorded to
the party executive in 1904, to appoint salaried regional and local
party secretaries. Such rights could be granted by the annual party
congress, the highest formal party authority, which had para­
mount importance in approving policies and resolving differences.
Throughout the nineties, delegates to the congresses, too, had to
be elected in public assemblies, which were exposed to the vagaries
of accidental attendance. The centralized regional organizations in
southern Germany developed earlier than those of Prussia and
Saxony, the main centers of Social Democracy and also of state
resistance to it.
When the unions were legally able to reestablish themselves in •
the nineties, they soon took a stand against the party’s claim of
being the dominant leader of the class-conscious proletariat and
especially against its inclination to overestimate the effectiveness of
agitation. At the party convention of 1896 the leader of the unions,
Legien, considered it wrong to make the workers believe that mere
agitation could bring about the eight-hour day: “Meetings, agita­
tion, protests are of no avail. Organization is everything.” 37 He
drew this conclusion from the isolation of the party and from the
uncompromising attitude of the ruling groups: “In our society,
everything is a matter of naked force. The power of the workers
lies in their organization. If they strengthen their organization, they
increase their power.” 38 Legien’s rationale was a strong one. Since
the centers of national decision-making remained inaccessible, con37 Party Protocols, 1896, 157.
38 Legien in his Correspondenzblatt, 1898,270; quoted in Varein, op. cit., 38 f.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

269

centration of energies on sheer organizational strength was a rea­
sonable alternative for the unions.
In contrast, the party’s only hope of overcoming its isolation was
the ballot box, and this meant continued attention to agitation. This
tactical consideration also led the party to strengthen small-town
and rural districts rather than big cities; the latter were underrepre­
sented at the party conventions, in the state organizations and in
the Reichstag. The rise of the new bureaucratic institutions some­
times benefited left-wing groups in the cities, but more often it
worked in favor of reformists in city, town and village. This em­
bittered the extreme left in the last years before the war. However,
in the absence of a body of local and regional studies— a major
task, still to be accomplished by students of the German labor
movement—it is difficult to decide definitely how much grassroots
support the radical resurgence had in the cities; indications are
that it had very little mass support until the latter part of the war.39
This certainly was the belief of the party majority, as it was ex­
pressed by a delegate at the 1913 convention:
Comrade Luxemburg said that the party executive does not know any­
thing about the dissatisfaction which is expressed in countless party
meetings. If Comrade Luxemburg would not merely read reports, but
frequently attend such meetings, she would know that these “revolu­
tionary” meetings are often only attended by a hundred men or wom en
in districts with thousands o f members. There a small number o f phrase­
mongers, who are not taken seriously by the party, make their speeches.
[Strong agreement in the audience.] . . . This is just about how the
spirits look who are intoxicated by Luxemburgian revolutionary phrase­
ology. They are not the masses.40
3®Schorske presents a detailed analysis of the party’s reorganization after
1900 in the context of the conflict between radicals and reformists (op. cit.,
Chs. V and X). These conflicts were mainly carried on among a very small
number of functionaries. We may assume that both groups had their publics,
but the subsequent radicalization of urban masses of workers during and
after the war is probably not a good measure of their prewar involvement
in these conflicts.
40 Party Protocols, 1913, 298.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

270

The rapid expansion of the Social Democratic subculture, which
called for an enlargement of the organizational apparatus, accentu­
ated recruitment problems after the turn of the century. A con­
spicuous age gap appeared among the functionaries: the higherranking leaders were advanced in age, while many lower-ranking
functionaries were very young. The mere persistence of older lead­
ers simply indicated the increasing age of the labor movement and
the workings of some of the oligarchic mechanisms described by
Michels, who made at this point one of his rare positive proposals:
The practice of choosing an entirely new set of leaders every two years
ought long ago to have become general in the socialist party, as proto­
type of all democratic parties. Yet, as far as the German socialists are
concerned, not merely does no such practice exist, but any attempt to
introduce it provokes great discontent among the rank and file.41
The age gap itself was partly due to external factors, such as the
preoccupations of members between the ages of 24 and 30 with
raising their families; partly it was due to internal reasons.42 Many
young Social Democrats who had seemed to be embarking on
promising or even brilliant careers either disappointed their su­
periors or withdrew on their own in disappointment. A major reason
seems to have been the overburdening of many a promising man
with administrative work that left him no time to get more educa­
tion and political experience. In view of this shortage of manpower,
Michels’ proposed system would have created even more difficul­
ties, although it may perhaps be argued that the rotation of suitable
positions might have alleviated some pressure on younger function­
aries.
41 Michels, op. cit., 121. By permission of the publisher.— Michels makes it
clear that he is not concerned with practical suggestions in his book (368).
To my knowledge, he never addressed himself to practical proposals in any
of his writings.
42 The following draws on Braun, “Die Intellektuellen . . . ,” op. cit., 247 f,
and Danneberg, op. cit., 285 f. Braun also maintains that not only at con­
gresses, but also at general workers’ meetings all over Germany older work­
ers were predominant.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

271

One effect of the increasing organizational burdens seems to
have been the limitation of active grassroots participation in ideo­
logical discussions. The Viennese party organization was one of
the best in the Second International, but its mere maintenance,
Danneberg explained, absorbed the energies of the lower-ranking
functionaries and made even higher-ranking functionaries primarily
administrators. “Work, don’t twaddle” was the motto; consequently
many lower-ranking functionaries did no more to educate newly
recruited members politically than to deliver the Volkstribüne to
them and to hold meetings including them. This state of affairs
promoted the tendency to debunk political and intellectual interests
in favor of efficient organization work and thus accentuated re­
formist to the detriment of radical tendencies.43
Since the lower-ranking functionaries were responsible for effi­
cient operations, or simply because they were best at it, many came
to regard major policy changes and ideological revisions or even in­
tense political debate as unwelcome disturbances. At first a general
tendency seems to have developed to discourage discussion after
lectures and speeches as being just a nuisance; this tendency was
more specifically directed toward political discussion as the labor
movement’s difficulties mounted just before and during the war.44
Important party declarations were often forgotten by members, al­
43 Many Vertrauensmänner looked down upon those “who were only active
as lecturers.” Danneberg suggested to the party that some workers, instead of
burdening themselves with the function of a Vertrauensmann, might be
much more useful as socialist literature teachers to their class comrades.
Loc. cit.
44 Göhre and Braun remember a more democratic atmosphere in the fort­
nightly meetings of the electoral district association about 1890. Participation
in discussion was elicited with the assurance that no one would be ridiculed for
rhetorical inadequacy. Göhre found much ignorance and narrow-mindedness,
but also— for him— a surprising amount of intelligence and prudence. He
concluded that quite a few workers were on a par or superior to the average
educated man with regard to poise and clarity of thinking, but he does not say
to what extent a discussion of basic premises was really tolerated. Cf. Göhre,
op. cit., 89 ff and Braun, op. cit., 245.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

272

though they appeared in the newspapers, because they were not
discussed at party meetings. Reviewing prewar trends, an anony­
mous member wrote in a letter from the front in 1917:
The great mass o f Austrian workers is indifferent to basic questions
(Prinzipienfragen)\ this is perhaps even more valid for . . . the Ver­
trauensmänner, the “practitioners” of the organization. For them any
discussion on basic questions always appears as a disturbance. Many
Vertrauensm änner argue that the workers will turn away from the or­
ganizations if they see that the members and even the leaders do not
agree, that they fight among themselves. They consider it their task to
tirelessly build their organizations, unconcerned about theoretical quar­
rels; it is the task o f the leaders “higher up” to resolve conflicts about
basic problems.45

This attitude of the lower-ranking functionaries should not be
mistaken for subservience. The intermediary position of the lowerranking functionaries made the top leaders greatly dependent on
them. First of all, it was the responsibility of the functionaries in
the lower and middle echelons to realize much of what the labor
movement could achieve in the short run; then, the leaders needed
the subleaders to make the followers accept the party line, espe­
cially major policy changes. As Carl Landauer, a one-time par­
ticipant, suggests, Michels did not sufficiently take into account the
control over the party leaders that the lower-ranking functionaries
exercised by virtue of being their most important link with the
rank and file.
W henever political strategy required steps contrary to tradition, the na­
tional party executive and the socialist members in parliament would
take the subleaders into their confidence, either by way o f a conference
or through consultations between the deputies and the local party
officers o f their districts. The subleaders would critically examine the
proposed course o f action, and if they approved o f it, they would ac­
45 H. H., “Parteibetrachtungen eines Frontsoldaten,” Der Kampf, Vol. 10,
1917, 165.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

273

cept the task of assuring the membership that the interests of the party
were well served by the change. In an extreme case, when they could
not see through the intricacies of political strategy, the subleaders might
accept the word o f somebody in whom they had special confidence—
not necessarily a Bebel or a Jaurès, but more often a man of far lesser
renown, whose devotion and good judgment they had learned to re­
spect. The party members were, as a rule, willing to rely on the opinion
o f their section leaders and of their local executives— not without
grumbling, however, and not without asserting their right of criticism,
so that the party machine did not run without many minor jerks. Only
in very rare cases, however, did the chain o f confidence which con­
nected leaders, subleaders, and members suffer a real break.46

The party conventions of 1894 and 1895 were major examples
of the inability of the top leaders to impose their policies upon the
subleaders. Bebel’s centralists conceptions did not prevail in his
great clash with the Bavarian leader Georg von Vollmar at the
Frankfurt convention of 1894. A majority of the delegates was un­
willing to really dispute the right of the Social Democratic factions
in the state diets to follow their own policies. One year later, in
Breslau, a majority of the delegates destroyed any future chance of
adopting an agrarian program which would have included the
advocacy of the interests of small farmers, although Bebel this
time strongly supported the reformists. The ideological inclina­
tions of the urban proletarian functionaries, who were vigorously
supported by Kautsky’s Marxist argument about the inevitable de­
cline of small business and the small peasant, predominated over
the executive’s and the reformists’ attempt to appeal to other social
strata.47 These incidents demonstrated the persistent effects of
ideology and social composition in relation to organizational tenden­
cies of centralization and expansion.
Michels analyzed the struggles among the leaders (see his Part
II, ch. 6) in acid terms of “human, all too human” antagonisms
46 Landauer, op. cit., 486. By permission of the publisher.
47 Cf. G. Ritter, op. cit., Ch. V.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

274

incidental to the struggle for personal advancement and power. He
played down the influence of the masses no less than that of the
subleaders. He went to great length to illustrate the apathy and in­
competence of the masses; they were radical only in crisis situations
precipitated by a failure of the dominant system. He mentioned in
passing that the leaders must always keep in touch with the atti­
tudes and sentiments of the masses, but he did not admit that this
could be an effective check.48 He discounted the “rule of antici­
pated reactions,” to use Carl Friedrich’s phrase.49 The democratic
structure of the labor movement meant that, despite the tendencies
toward the perpetuation of the leaders and despite the gradual
bureaucratization, the social composition of the party and, with
that, the direct needs of the workers had to be taken into account
by the leaders.50 Again, Michels strongly tended to neglect the
operational level of checks and balances by juxtaposing the ex­
tremes of ideal and real. In contrast to the relatively democratic
German party, the organizational setup of the Bolshevik party made
it easier for the Communist leaders to impose policies without close
consideration of the everyday needs of the masses. In fact, from a
Leninist perspective, Michels’ thesis was countered with the argu­
ment that the German party was not oligarchical enough to resist
grassroots pressures, as witnessed by the party’s policy at the be­
ginning of the First World War.51
48 Michels, op. cit., 172.
49 Cf. Carl J. Friedrich, Constitutional Government and Democracy (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1941), 589 ff.
50 R. Blank, op. cit., argued in 1905 that the Social Democratic party more
than any other party was influenced, because of its democratic constitution, by
its social composition rather than by the theories and ideals of individuals.
The social composition could make itself felt in two ways: In industrial dis­
tricts it could radicalize some locals; elsewhere it was more likely to favor
the moderates.
61 See the perspective of Karl Ackermann, Organisatorische Streitigkeiten in
der deutschen Sozialdemokratie. Ein Beitrag zur Soziologie des 4. August
1914. Ph.D. dissertation, Heidelberg, 1946, 2 f and 29 f, as mentioned in
G. Ritter, op. cit., 49.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

275

In conclusion, it may be said that the increasing organizational
complexity of the party—i.e., its “formalization”—had definite
consequences for the relationship between leaders and led: it in­
creased bureaucratic controls, vested organizational interests devel­
oped, and grassroots revolts were made more difficult. The latter,
however, had not been easy, at least since the seventies, because the
repressive legislation and its legacies put such a great value on unity.
Furthermore, grassroots sentiment had to be taken into account by
the party as a legal opposition facing a powerful dominant system
and as a mass movement aiming at strengthening parliamentarism.
In fact, the “conservatism” of the leaders, Michels and Weber
recognized, was not just a consequence of internal bureaucratiza­
tion, of increasing “red tape”—it was basic to the movement’s
strategy under the given conditions of legality and political isola­
tion.52 The reorganization of the party in the first decade of this
century strengthened the movement considerably, but not deci­
sively, since the leaders could do little more than expand it and
try to protect it against all-out attack. It is here that the principle
of “self-maintenance” can be observed.

4. Self-Maintenance
Associations tend to intensify their concern with self-preservation
in the course of formalization and infusion with value, the latter
referring to the change of meaning of activities which originally
were mainly instrumental. Eventually, concern with self-mainte­
nance may deflect from original goals and commitments, especially
from ideological prescriptions. It may be suggested that this aspect
of institutionalization is a particularly critical problem for a radical
political movement. By definition such movements aim at large62 Cf. Michels, op. cit., 336 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

276

scale social reconstruction and usually encounter strong resistance
from the dominant system. The leaders must face the possibility of
severe restrictions or total suppression.
Michels charged that the labor movement had “suddenly” be­
come “responsible” in its stage of maturity and compared Bebel’s
rhetoric on the Paris Commune in 1871 with the later “conserv­
atism” of the leaders.53 There was certainly a difference in tone
and mood, but Bebel and Liebknecht were always careful to safe­
guard the survival interests of their party. They became centrist
after 1890 not so much through a change of views but because of
the rise of a right and left wing. The right-wing reformists and
Marxist Revisionists devoted themselves to the expansion of the
organizations and to the piecemeal representation of material inter­
ests in state and municipal parliaments, labor courts, and public
welfare agencies. The centrist leaders did not give up their in­
transigent opposition to the dominant system because the isolation
of the movement on the national level and in Prussia continued,
but they recognized that such a representation of material interests
was the only opportunity for positive reformist activity. Perfecting
their art of adhering to a radical rhetoric and a moderate practice,
they adamantly opposed the reformists only to the extent that they
feared for the unity of the movement. The left-wing functionaries,
many of whom were very capable organizers and administrators,
wanted mass actions such as political strikes in addition to election
campaigns and general propaganda. Even Bernstein and Ludwig
Frank advocated political strikes, although with firm reformist
rather than radical intentions.
As long as the party grew and industrialization seemed to favor
the labor movement over its opponents, the Centrist leaders could
keep the right and the left within the fold. Radicals and reformists
could develop a division of labor.54 Furthermore, the party could
control its internal dissensions because, unlike the French socialist
03 Loc. cit.; for Bebel’s speech see Ch. IV, 87 above.
54 Cf. Massing, op. cit., 191.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

277

party, it was never confronted with the decision whether to accept
or reject governmental responsibility.55
In the last decade prior to the First World War, the labor move­
ment continued to grow in votes and members and substantially
improved its organizational and financial condition, but it also
suffered a number of important defeats at the hand of the govern­
ments, the government parties and big business. It is true that the
party triumphed in the Reichstag elections of 1903, a victory which
seemed to vindicate the centrist executive’s policy of radical rhet­
oric and moderate practice. Three million votes were cast for the
party and 82 seats taken by it. One out of every four voters had
cast his vote for the party. It had again shown a vote-getting power
which could not be matched by all foreign socialist parties together,
and it was only this achievement that counterbalanced the criticism
of the party’s nonrevolutionary attitudes, a criticism which was
widespread among socialist parties of other countries.56
The election results of 1903 spurred the government and big
business to check the progress of the party and the unions. Al­
though the Social Democrats trusted the general development to
work automatically to their advantage, a view seemingly confirmed
by the election of 1903, their opponents changed the “inevitable”
course of history. The power of big business increased faster than
that of the Social Democratic unions and of the other unions,
85 The first time a socialist entered a national government was in 1899 when
the French deputy Alexandre Millerand became Minister of Commerce in
the cabinet of Waldeck-Rousseau. This was the cause of prolonged disputes
within socialist parties in various countries. The French situation was different
from that in Germany in that there was not just one united socialist party
with one firmly entrenched credo, but several groups embracing different
beliefs. Millerand’s group exposed itself to the pressures inherent in the shar­
ing of responsibility within a bourgeois coalition government, while the
French Marxists faced sharp competition from other socialist and workingclass ideologies. See Emst H. Posse, Der Marxismus in Frankreich 18711905 (Berlin: Prager, 1930), 82 ff.
56 Cf. Robert Michels, “Die deutsche Sozialdemokratie im internationalen
Verbände,” Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft, Vol. 25, 1907, 218 ff.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

278

which altogether had organized about one third of the industrial
work force by 1906; by comparison, about two thirds of the em­
ployers were organized in employers’ associations, which greatly
improved the individual employer’s ability to fight the unions. The
Saxonian textile workers lost a costly strike in 1903. During the
1905 miners’ strike, as well as in later years, the mining companies
successfully adhered to their established policy of refusing to deal
with the unions. In 1905 the government tried to mediate but failed.
The employers’ intransigence forced the government to introduce
legislation in order to remedy some of the misuses of which the
miners had complained. But the very fact of government interven­
tion allowed the employers to remain intransigent and to refuse
recognition to the unions.57
When the Russian revolution of 1905 broke out, the left stepped
up its campaign for mass demonstrations and a political mass strike
against the Prussian three-class suffrage, but the centrist leaders
and the unions were much more impressed by the internal domestic
situation than by the Russian example. The set-backs of the labor
movement strengthened the position of the unions vis-à-vis the
party and of the Revisionists within the party.58 The unions acted
first by repressing discussion of the general strike within their or­
ganizations and by openly disavowing it at the Fifth Congress of
the Trade Unions, held at Cologne in May 1905. Their spokesman,
Bömelburg, made a statement which was to become famous— that
even if the unions were outlawed, the cause would not be lost:
Tremendous sacrifices were made to arrive at the present state o f or­
ganization, and tremendous sacrifices will be necessary to reach a still
higher stage. In order to expand and solidify our organizations, we need
peace and calm in the labor movement. Our literati sit down and write
87 Cf. Max Koch, Die Bergarbeiterbewegung im Ruhrgebiet zur Zeit Wil­
helms II (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1954), 108. On the textile workers’ strike, see
Massing, op. cit., 192.
88 For a detailed analysis of this interrelationship, see Schorske, op. cit.,
108 ff.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

279

and write. [Interjection: Very true.] The literati may do what they
will, but they render a disservice to the labor movement. . . . The
strengthening and expansion o f the organization is the best weapon
against Reaction. The stronger the trade union organizations becom e
and the more we educate the workers to be class-conscious, the more
we sharpen our arms against the Reaction. N obody wishes more than
I that the [Prussian] suffrage be improved . . . but even if the Reac­
tion takes away the suffrage . . . and the right o f coalition, we are
not y e t through. [Interjection: Very true.] Today the idea is rooted
in the working class that an injustice has been done to it; the workers
know what human rights [M enschenrechte] they have, and no Reaction
is capable o f suppressing this idea in the people.59

In February 1906 the party executive reached a secret agree­
ment with the unions in which it pledged to squelch enthusiasm for
the political mass strike as much as possible. But news of the agree­
ment leaked out, and at the convention of 1906 the party execu­
tive was forced to consent, against its will, to a new discussion of
the general strike in order to secure equal suffrage. The centrist
leaders continued to accept the general strike in principle, in order
to prevent a further alienation of the left wing, but made the strike
dependent on the consent of the unions which had rejected it.
In the “bloc” Reichstag of 1907 the Social Democrats held only
half of their previous seats, even though they received more votes
than in 1903; a “bloc” of liberal and conservative parties united
to defeat Social Democratic candidates in the run-off elections.
This defeat reemphasized the ability of the dominant system to
successfully manipulate nationalist sentiments in an all-out cam­
paign. The party reacted by pushing its reorganization ahead and
by modifying its stand on nationalism. Since its major weapon was
59 Union Protocol, op. cit., 221 f, my emphasis. The protocol is much less
colorful than is that of the party conventions. The discussions are more
openly controlled by the executive. They concern the interests of the unions
versus the employers, the state and the Social Democratic party. Lip service is
paid to the close relationship with the party, but the specific interests of the
unions are emphasized.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

280

the increase of its vote, it was forced to adjust to the stronger
nationalist trends in public opinion. At the beginning of the new
“bloc” Reichstag the Revisionist agrarian expert Dr. David, in­
voking the authority of the humanist philosopher Eduard Zeller,
still adhered to the old abstract-humanitarian position— the nation’s
moral obligation to humanity— as his party’s “national creed.” 80
A few weeks later, however, Gustav Noske, who later was to be­
come the first Reichswehr Minister of the Weimar Republic, created
a public sensation and a major clash at the 1907 party convention
with his first speech in the Reichstag. The speech did not deviate
substantively from the older Social Democratic position, especially
Bebel’s affirmation of a defensive war and his demand for the best
possible military equipment; however, the particularly emphatic en­
dorsement of every German’s military duties made the difference.61
The Reichstag elections of 1912 were the last triumph of the
Social Democrats, who emerged as the largest faction in parlia­
ment. But at the same time the labor movement reached a critical
stage, and the end of its expansion within its large isolated realm
seemed to be in sight. The unions continued to be on the defensive
against the employers, and there was no prospect of collective bar­
gaining in the heavy industries. The increase of the party’s votes
had brought it no nearer to forcing the government into an aban­
donment of the Prussian three-class suffrage. Internal problems
mounted as the differences between right and left wing became more
acute. The left proposed the general strike again during the last
convention of the united party in Jena in 1913. Scheidemann spoke
on behalf of the majority against Rosa Luxemburg’s resolution.62
He maintained that the necessary conditions were not given, and
co Reichstag Protocols, March 4, 1907, 231.
Cf. Noske’s own account in his autobiography, Erlebtes aus Aufstieg und
Niedergang einer Demokratie (Offenbach: Bollwerk-Verlag, 1947), 26 ff. See
also William Maehl, “The Triumph of Nationalism in the German Socialist
Party on the Eve of the First World War,” Journal of Modern History,
XXIV, 1952, 15-41.
C2 Party Protocols, Jena, 1913, 230-35.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

281

he warned against the attempt to play the masses off against the
leaders and to glorify spontaneous mass action. Bernstein’s concern
for the welfare of the movement became so great that he came near
to embracing Bömelburg’s position of 1905. Said Bernstein:
We have erected organizations in the most diverse areas, which through
toilsome work have made o f our movement a state within a state. This
has turned out to be much more uncomfortable for our foes than if
we had run the risk o f a gamble. We dare not hazard the destiny o f
the movement; we have built too much, and what has been built is
too valuable.63

The centrist leadership concentrated increasingly on the preser­
vation of the unity of the party and thus tried to forestall the split
which was predicted to be inevitable by a writer whose observation
received much attention at the time.64 In his last years, Bebel
63 Op. cit., 286. This statement can also be considered an application of his
famous credo: “That which is usually called the ultimate goal of socialism
means nothing to me, the movement means everything.” Bernstein did not
take the movement literally as an end in itself, but he understood movement
to mean “the general movement of society, in other words, social progress,
as well as the political and economic agitation and organization necessary
to bring about this progress.” Ed. Bernstein, “Zusammenbruchstheorie und
Kolonialpolitik,” Neue Zeit, XVI, I, 1897-98, 548 ff. See also Bernstein, Die
Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie,
op. cit., 169. Bernstein’s statement of 1913 should be understood in the same
way. His position was not as unorthodox as it might appear when it is com­
pared to the following Marx quote: “Communism for us is not a condition
that is to be established nor an ideal to which reality must adjust itself. We
call communism the actual movement which abolishes present conditions.”
Quoted in Karl Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia (New York: Harcourt, a
Harvest Book, n.d.), 126.
64 See Robert Brunhuber, Die heutige Sozialdemokratie: Eine kritische Wer­
tung ihrer wissenschaftlichen Grundlagen und eine soziologische Untersuch­
ung ihrer praktischen Parteigestaltung (Jena: Fischer, 1906), 208-12. Brun­
huber, a member of the editorial staff of the Kölnische Zeitung and lecturer
at the Business University of Cologne, was an ethical socialist but not a party
member.
During peacetime a split would probably not have increased the revolu­
tionary threat to the dominant system because the moderate majority would

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

282

fought with all his skills for the salvation of the work of his life,
the united party, and sided with the right or the left, whichever
appeared necessary in order to preserve the unity of the party or
to forestall governmental interference. At the 1903 party conven­
tion in Dresden, he made his famous attack on the Revisionists,
but a few months later he sided with them. At the Jena convention
of 1905, he praised the general strike, and at the Mannheim con­
vention of 1906, he denounced it because he had probably realized
in the meantime, as Michels suggests, that
even a declaration o f sympathy for the general strike would strongly
irritate the government. . . . A hundred times Bebel— not unlike
William II— threatened his enemies with disaster and death. He de­
clared that he would crush the Revisionists and made the state afraid
o f its overthrow . . . [but] the welfare o f the party, understood
primarily in organizational terms, was the center of his concern.*65

For Michels this implied an opprobrium, although he understood
that the “conservatism” of the leaders was identical with the longrange strategy of the isolated and militarily outclassed movement.
Given his value premises, Michels had to disapprove of this identity
at the same time that he tried to explain its “inevitability.” Ambiv­
alent as he was, he granted to the leaders in 1911 that
they have not yet lost contact with the masses . . . and that the execu­
tive com mittee of the party, and also (perhaps less perfectly) the parlia­
mentary socialist group, still represent the average opinion of the com ­
rades throughout the country. . . . The manner in which the masses
entrust their interests to the leaders is, historically at least, legitimate
and explicable.66
have become even more reformist and the radical minority would have been
even more isolated. But in case of a military catastrophe of the dominant
system, the revolutionary intentions of a very radical minority party, even if
suppressed, might perhaps have been turned into a more serious threat than
that which occurred in 1918.
65 Michels, “Bebel,” op. cit., 688.
66 Id., Political Parties, op. cit., 133, my emphasis.

Organizational Strength and Weakness

283

In the given historical context this appears to me a significant at­
tenuation of Michels’ thesis. The movement’s crisis was not due
to any betrayal of the masses through the strategy of “self-mainte­
nance.” The movement’s dilemma was, in essence, due to the fact
that the proposals of the two wings could not really improve upon
the center’s strategy and that no strategy or tactic appeared capable
of facilitating democratization in the near future.
The dilemma o f Social Dem ocracy lay in the fact that the tactic re­
quired for winning middle-class support was in contradiction with the
tactic required to extract concessions from the conversatives. The
demonstrations and mass actions o f the Social Dem ocrats would
frighten the middle classes back into the arms of the Junkers; but with­
out strong action supported by the middle class as well as the workers
the Junkers could not be moved to make concessions. . . . There was
in fact no right tactic for Social Dem ocracy to pursue in terms o f the
constitutional issue alone. The constitutional issue was one which, in
the long run, was solved only by the revolution; and it is difficult to
see how, whatever the tactic o f Social Dem ocracy, it could have been
otherwise.67

I agree substantially with Schorske’s reasoning, but I will leave
it to my conclusions to assess the argument that only a revolution
could solve the constitutional issue. It was certainly true that only
through a military defeat of Imperial Germany could a revolution­
ary change of the constitution be accomplished. Such a defeat was
either feared or not anticipated by most Social Democratic leaders.
Only Rosa Luxemburg and a few others included the possibility
of military defeat in their strategy.
When the Empire was founded in 1871 all the rhetoric of Lieb­
knecht and Bebel could not turn the movement into a revolutionary
threat. On the eve of the First World War the vast Social Demo­
cratic subculture constituted the most important domestic, even if
“dormant,” problem for the government. The centrist leaders’ basic
67 Schorske, op. cit., 168. By permission of the publisher.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

284

strategy and their moderating role between the right and the left
wings at least succeeded in perpetuating a massive class opposition
by maintaining the unity of the movement. Unexpectedly, the war
became the great test for Social Democracy and the Empire.

XI
The Unanticipated Showdown

1. The Split of the Labor Movement and the
Downfall of the Empire
Imperial Germany approached the First World War with an im­
pressive record of internal stability despite her rapid and spectacu­
lar industrialization: No constitutional change had occurred in the
Reich and Prussia; there had been crises of personnel and prestige,
but none of them had seriously shaken the constitutional defenses
of the Emperor, his government, his army and “his” conservatives,
who affirmed their monarchist loyalty at the same time that they
put their own political and economic interests over national inter­
ests. Democratization had made some advance primarily in south­
ern Germany, but on the federal level it was not more than a tend­
ency and in Prussia not more than a possibility for the future. When
Otto Hintze wrote his analysis of monarchic constitutionalism in
1911 he was aware that
a tendency toward the transition from the monarchic to the parlia­
mentary system is noticeable in Germany, although it cannot be con­
sidered to be strong; it extends from the radical left far into the ranks
o f the moderate liberals and the Center. . . . After Billow’s resigna­
tion [in 1909], the new chancellor energetically opposed the interpre­
tation that Germany was in the process o f m oving toward a parlia­
mentary system o f government.1
1 Hintze, op. cit., 382.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

286

Hintze was in favor of making the system of monarchic constitution­
alism unequivocal in the constitution and seems to have had some
very cautiously expressed apprehensions about the tendency of Wil­
liam II toward personal government.2 The majority of public opinion
remained in favor of monarchic constitutionalism, and the belliger­
ent rhetoric and personal regime of the Emperor were also popular.
Yet there were some countertrends. In 1913 a Prussian colonel
arrested a few civilians in Zabern, a little community in AlsaceLorraine, and locked them up for a night. This illegal action pro­
voked an extraordinary public protest and resulted in a remarkable
condemnation of the government by the Reichstag majority. Liber­
als, Center and Social Democrats voted 293 to 54, with four absten­
tions, criticizing the government’s self-conscious defense of the
colonel’s action. The army absolved the officer. The Reichstag was
powerless to do more than express its displeasure* but in the same
year its budgetary power slightly increased and a very slow de­
velopment toward a stronger parliament appeared possible. No
one, however, knew when and how it would come about.3
2 Hintze observed a certain regularity in the phenomenon that self-governing
monarchs have a tendency to appear after the great self-governing ministers:
Louis XIV after Richelieu and Mazarin, the Great Elector (Frederick William
of Brandenburg) after Count Schwarzenberg, Emperor Ferdinand II after
Cardinal Klesl, and Georg III after the elder Pitt. But, Hintze added, the last
example also shows that the attempt of a monarch to rule personally is not
always successful. Cf. op. cit., 407.
3 The late Ludwig Bergstrasser, the author of the Geschichte der politischen
Parteien in Deutschland, op. cit., who was a member of the Young National
Liberals before the First World War and a federal parliamentary deputy after
the First and the Second World War, told me in 1959 that he believed then
and now that parliament would have continued to grow stronger even if the
war had not come and the Empire had not fallen. More questionable is the be­
lief of Arthur Rosenberg, a Communist Reichstag member in the nineteen
twenties, that even without the war the polarization between government and
Reichstag would eventually have created a revolutionary situation; however,
he did not underestimate the military power of the state in peacetime. Cf.
Rosenberg, The Birth of the German Republic, op. cit., 58. Rosenberg’s book
which first appeared in 1928 provides a brilliant description of the major
underlying reasons and the specific chain of events which resulted in the dis-

The Unanticipated Showdown

287

Since the Social Democratic party was dependent on further
democratization, its sense of malaise over the impasse was par­
ticularly acute when the limits of its own organizational expan­
sion seemed to be approaching. The party had polled 34 per cent of
the votes for the Reichstag in 1912 and had a million members by
1914; it held 110 of the 396 seats in the Reichstag, more than 220
in the state diets, more than 2,800 in the city parliaments and coun­
cils and more than 9,000 in rural communities.*4
The outbreak of the war confronted the leaders suddenly with
the direct integration of the movement into the national community.
Up to the last days before the declarations of war, the party carried
on a peace campaign and tried to arrange some common action
with socialist parties abroad. When the mobilization began, the party
had to face its utter inability to influence either the government or
the masses. The radical posture of the labor movement dissolved
overnight. At first fears of repression were so great that at the end
of July no less a man than Ebert was sent to Switzerland to save
party funds. As a legal mass organization, the party was nearly
defenseless against the government’s possible raiding of its organi­
zations and funds: twenty million Marks, for example, were tied up
in business investments, making the party a nation-wide corpora­
tion.5
Many members were afraid of the foreign military threat, in par­
ticular of the Russian “steamroller.” Some radicals, like Paul
Lensch in the important left-wing Leipziger Volkszeitung, took
the Marxist theory of imperialism to mean that Germany’s eco­
nomic interests on the world market had to be defended against
Britain’s capitalist predominance, for the benefit of the German
integration of the Empire. For a case study of the Social Democrats during
the war and its aftermath, see A. J. Berlau, The German Social Democratic
Party: 1914-1921 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1949).
4 Cf. Ernst Drahn, “Sozialdemokratie,” Handwörterbuch der Staatswissen­
schaften, Vol. 7, 1926, 533.
5 Cf. Maehl, op. cit., 25.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

288

working class. More important was the hope of the right wing and
of many centrists that through the support of the war efforts the
labor movement could break out of its isolation and exact major
concessions from the government in the postwar period. Even be­
fore the war, Chancellor Biilow and Bethmann-Hollweg, his suc­
cessor, had been in favor of some modification of the Prussian
suffrage, but they had done nothing about it in view of the deter­
mined conservative resistance in the Prussian Lower House.
Most important, however, for the Reichstag faction’s famous vote
for the war credits on August 4, 1914, was the frenzied enthusiasm
and the urge of fraternization which overcame many a Social
Democratic functionary and masses of workers.6 This emotional
outburst was indicative of the strength of national sentiment and
of pent-up political frustration, although the simple thrill of in­
volvement in “great affairs” and of getting a break from everyday
routines was also a part of the elation.7 To many members the
cleavage between the labor movement and the nation seemed to
have vanished. They experienced a feeling of liberation; the class
barriers seemed to have fallen and the working class to be recognized
as part of the nation. A striking example for the change that could
overcome even an avowed radical was provided by the labor editor
Konrad Hänisch:
6 Michels interpreted the attitude of the Social Democratic leaders at the
beginning of the war as definite proof of his thesis; however, he also acknowl­
edged in 1915 that the masses had not rebelled against their leaders. Cf.
Michels, op. cit., 357. Put in positive terms, this means that the leaders did
not act against the wishes of the masses. Indeed, the enthusiasm of the masses
was one of the major factors that limited the freedom of action on the part
of the leaders. It remains true, of course, that the leaders’ attitude was also
influenced by survival interests. Although Bebel, who died in 1913, had been
willing to defend the country, he considered the party’s position hopeless in
the event of war. The incumbent leaders, however, could not be expected
to abandon the movement in such an event.
7 A good description of the atmosphere of August 1914 and of the fraterniza­
tion of Social Democratic functionaries and workers with opponents is given
by Emst Gläser in his famous novel, Jahrgang 1902 (1928).

The Unanticipated Showdown

289

In this war we have learned anew what we had almost completely for­
gotten: that apart from the class conflicts within a nation there is som e­
thing com mon to all classes o f this nation. W e German Social D em o­
crats have learned to consider ourselves in this war as part, and truly
not the worst part, o f the German nation. W e do not want to be robbed
again by anyone, from the right or the left, o f this feeling of belonging
to the German people. . . . W e have becom e aware in this war that
the German idea o f the state has stood the test politically, organiza­
tionally and militarily despite its more superficial and its more serious
faults. We have given up this inner resistance, which for decades domi­
nated us, consciously or unconsciously, against the German idea of the
state because we could no longer honestly maintain it.8

Hänisch claimed to speak for the workers, but he was, like
David on the right and Lensch on the left, an intellectual with a
middle-class background and may have suffered more from the
national cleavage than workers did.9 It may be assumed that few
workers perceived, as he did, an “intimate relationship between the
best aspects of the German idea of the state and the best character­
istics of the labor movement.” 10 But an insistence on discipline
and fulfillment of duty was indeed shared by Prussian and Social
Democratic ideals and habits.11 Soon numerous writings which fused
nationalism and socialism and pitted German collectivist and so­
cialist ideas against Western individualism received much public
attention.12 This facilitated the ideological integration of the labor
8 Konrad Hänisch, Die deutsche Sozialdemokratie in und nach dem Welt­
kriege (Berlin: Schwetschke, 1916), cf. Schorske’s quotation, op. cit., 290.
9 Hänisch came from an officer’s family, David had a Ph.D., and Lensch
an M.D.
10 Hänisch, loc. cit.
11 The rise of a Communist party state after the Second World War amid
the ruins of Brandenburg-Prussia has continued this historical parallel in
certain striking respects, which deserve more scholarly attention.
12 Cf. Eduard David, Die Sozialdemokratie im Weltkriege (Berlin: Vorwärts,
1915); for a joint publication of Social Democrats and university professors,
see Friedrich Thimme and Carl Legien, eds., Die Arbeiterschaft im neuen
Deutschland (Leipzig: Hirzel, 1915). For a later analysis, see Karl Pribram,
“Deutscher Nationalismus und deutscher Sozialismus,” Archiv für Sozial­
wissenschaft, Vol. 49, 1922, 371 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

290

movement into the national community. Many Social Democratic
workers, however, combined the two loyalties in a relatively un­
complicated fashion. A leader of proletarian origin such as Sever­
ing implicitly denied the loyalty conflict altogether. His view was
similar to the view of older spokesmen that socialists were as
patriotic as or even more patriotic than their adversaries. How­
ever, for him this was no abstract declaration; it was the basis of
cooperation with the Imperial government during the war, of fight­
ing for the preservation of “order”— that is, much of the old social
order— during the revolution of 1918, and of suppressing Socialist
left-wing opponents.13
At first the integration of the labor movement into the dominant
system was little more than subordination. The party and the unions
lost their limited independence and all chances of political maneu­
verability. The enthusiasm of the masses, which gripped all coun­
tries as the war began, made it easy for the governments involved
to quickly unite most political groups under the national banner.
In Germany the Emperor declared that he “no longer recognized
parties, only Germans.” A public peace (Burgfrieden) was estab­
lished between the government and all the parties. After the unions
had established that the government was aware of their value as a
disciplining and welfare agency, they pledged abstention from all
wage and strike movements. Since the defeats of 1903 and 1905,
the unions had been careful not to spend great amounts of money
on strikes and had preferred to accumulate funds; this was part of
Legien’s strategy to build up the union power. Now the same funds
were used for the war efforts, as unemployment relief and as sup­
port for the dependents of draftees. Union and party functionaries
served on many public and semi-public boards; they were no longer
solely responsible to the members. This change in their relationship
was made easier by the thinning of the ranks; in September of
1914, 30 per cent of the party members had already been drafted.
13 Cf. Severing, op. cit., 223.

The Unanticipated Showdown

291

The labor movement was now composed of a greatly reduced body
of functionaries and rank and file, the latter consisting mainly of
older workers and women.
Many members and followers had vaguely believed that the party
and the International might be strong enough to prevent war; but
when the war started, their enthusiasm knew no bounds. As it be­
came apparent that the war would be unexpectedly bloody and
long, disillusionment with the government and the party began to
spread. The Social Democratic masses in the army could not polit­
ically express this disillusionment, but at home the prewar tensions
between the various party factions were rapidly revived. All party
leaders were in favor of a quick and negotiated peace, but a grow­
ing number of functionaries and members criticized the majority
for surrendering too easily to the powers-that-be and for betraying
their old commitments. The emergent opposition was severely
handicapped by the army’s constant readiness to apply the law of
siege. This gave the right much greater power than it could have
won on its own strength. The right insisted on abiding by the policy
of full cooperation with the government as the best hope for im­
proving the movement’s position in the long run. However, many
centrists and left-wingers despaired over the government’s inability
or unwillingness to end the war through compromise and to promise
definite domestic reforms. For this reason, they decided to restore
the party’s old policy of intransigent opposition; only the radical
left looked toward a revolutionary solution. The decision to leave
the party was very hard for many functionaries and workers to
make, irrespective of whether they seceded voluntarily or were ex­
pelled. The party had become for them a life center, and now they
faced the conflict of loyalty to the organization or loyalty to the old
ideology of the movement.
In December 1915, 20 members of the Social Democratic
Reichstag faction voted against the war credits and 22 refused to
vote at all; in March 1916, 18 members established a separate
Reichstag faction after being expelled by the majority. With heavy

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

292

hearts, a large minority of the party (including Bebel’s successor as
party chairman, Haase, Kautsky, and Bernstein, who was accused
of anglophile attitudes) left the party and formed the Independent
Social Democratic party (USPD) in 1917. About 40 per cent of the
430,000 party members who were left in 1916 may have joined the
so-called Minority Socialists; in the cities, often more than 50 per
cent joined.14 By 1917 the Majority Socialists had lost 80 per cent
of the male membership of 1914.15
The numerically weak extreme left was at first uneasily allied
with the Independents, who were more pacifist than revolutionary.
It had already established its own organization, Spartakus, the
forerunner of the Communist party. Its most important spokesmen
were Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, who were several
times imprisoned during the war.16 They were greatly encouraged
by the beginning of the revolution in Russia. In 1918 Liebknecht
and many members of the Spartakus moved closer to the Bolshe­
vists, as a Leninist splinter group, strong in the big seaports of
Hamburg and Bremen, had done before them. Rosa Luxemburg,
however, turned against the Bolshevist theory and practice of a
centralized revolutionary dictatorship. She wanted to rely on the
spontaneity of the masses.
Important for the coming revolution was the break in the stra­
tegic Berlin ammunitions industries, destroying the iron hold of
the top trade union leaders over the workers. Lower-ranking func­
tionaries of the traditionally aggressive metal workers’ union organ­
ized major strikes, the first beginning on the occasion of a fouryear sentence for Karl Liebknecht in 1916. Even the right-wing
Social Democrats had to support these strikes if they wanted to
retain grassroots support. In order to cope with the growing unrest
14 On the varying estimates, see Ossip Flechtheim, Die KPD in der Weimarer
Republik (Offenbach: Drott, 1948), 28.
15 Cf. F. Ebert, Schriften, op. cit., Vol. 2, 17.
16 On Karl Liebknecht, see Karl W. Meyer, Karl Liebknecht (Washington:
Public Affairs Press, 1957); on Rosa Luxemburg, see Paul Frölich, Rosa
Luxemburg (Paris: Editions Nouvelles Internationales, 1939).

The Unanticipated Showdown

293

among workers, especially the unskilled and unorganized ones, the
Majority Socialists created the position of factory Vertrauensleute,
but these positions were also used by the Independents. The Ver­
trauensleute became the forerunners of the soviets or workers*
councils.17
As the downfall of the Empire approached, the divided Social
Democrats found themselves burdened with heavy liabilities from
their commitments to support or oppose the government. Neither
group anticipated the parliamentary responsibility that would sud­
denly fall to them, although the united party had always advocated
the supremacy of parliament over the authoritarian government.
Neither of the two socialist parties was prepared for social and eco­
nomic reconstruction, especially in a situation of near economic
bankruptcy and with the prospect of reparations to the victors.
The Social Democrats did not know how to socialize the basic in­
dustries and, more important, they had never realistically faced the
problem of the seizure of power, and for good reason. Before the
war the problem seemed very remote; and since the party was de­
pendent at least on the given level of toleration in order to func­
tion as a legal mass organization, open discussion of this problem
would have been detrimental to its interests.18
During the first half of the war the liberal Progressives, the
Catholic Center, and the Social Democrats had even less of a chance
than in peacetime to promote greater parliamentary control. Since
the army was subordinate to the Emperor only, it easily managed
to establish a military dictatorship in 1916, after the military neces­
sity for total mobilization of the national resources had arisen. The
increasing powerlessness of the civilian government strengthened
17 On the major opposition groups against the party and union leadership, see
Flechtheim, op. cit., Ch. I.
18 In contrast, Lenin who observed developments from exile in Switzerland
was unrestrained by legal and organizational considerations of this kind in
drawing radical conclusions as to an effective method of seizing power.
Shortly after the beginning of the war, he started a campaign for civil war
within the warring countries.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

294

the Reichstag vis-à-vis the civilian government. The third wartime
chancellor, Count Herding, negotiated with the parties before tak­
ing office at the end of 1917, although his actual “confirmation”
depended on the military. However, when General Ludendorff
abdicated as the dictator of Germany in October 1918, conceding
military defeat, he thrust responsibility for further political action
on parliament. Before the Reichstag could consolidate parliamen­
tary government, the revolution swept away Bismarck’s edifice.
Early in November 1918, the sailors of the navy struck spon­
taneously,19 and the radical leaders of the Berlin metal workers,
who had extended their influence into many of the larger cities,
moved deliberately. Decisive was the immediate support of the
soldiers at home. The uprising of the masses was directed against
any continuation of the war. It was a protest against the failure of
the rulers to spare them four years of a senselessly bloody war and
to avoid military defeat; it did not aim at the introduction of a
specific new form of government. If the revolutionary movement
did not go beyond the establishment of the parliamentary republic
and a measure of social reform, this was, as far as the labor move­
ment was concerned, largely because of the movement’s moderating
legacies.
Friedrich Ebert was Imperial Chancellor for one day and tried
to save the monarchy. Against his wishes Philipp Scheidemann de­
clared Germany a republic on November 9.20 The lower-ranking
functionaries of the old party, together with the Soldiers’ Councils,
curbed the influence of the Minority Socialists and of the Sparta19 Class lines remained sharply drawn during the war and were ever harder
to bear as the war progressed. This was especially true in the navy; since the
battle fleet stayed mostly at home the class hierarchy was not attenuated by
combat conditions.
20 When the historian Friedrich Meinecke asked Solf, the Secretary of State
in the Foreign Office, on November 18 whether Ebert and Scheidemann had
not felt a secret joy about the revolution, Solf answered: “No, not at all.
They were deadly frightened.” Meinecke, Erinnerungen: 1909-1919 (Stutt­
gart: Köhler, 1949), 259.

The Unanticipated Showdown

295

kists. Scheidemann later extolled their loyalty to the party and de­
clared that “these were the men, above all, to whom Germany
owed its rescue from Bolshevism.” 21 Thus a majority of the Social
Democrats and of their bourgeois allies succeeded in democratizing
Germany in the direction of parliamentarism. In the process, no
radical reconstruction of the Empire’s social structure took place.22
According to their old conviction, the Majority Socialists firmly
attached themselves to the parliamentary system and accepted their
position as one of the major parties, none of which could muster a
parliamentary majority. A large number of Minority Socialists,
especially of the lower-ranking functionaries and the rank and file,
were bitterly disappointed about the establishment of a parliamen­
tary republic that did not significantly change the social structure
of the Empire. They came to reject democratic ideals with regard
to party organization and the political system at large. In 1920 they
decided to join the Third International and thus turned the Com­
munist Spartakists from a small group into a mass organization.
The Social Democratic party took back into its fold the minority of
the USPD, including most of its top leaders, many of whom had
been centrists before the war.
Despite its political integration into the parliamentary system and
the considerably improved status of the working class, the labor
movement continued to be a subculture. The Communist subcul­
ture developing next to it was quite similar, excepting, of course, its
political goals and some organizational techniques. Both profited
from the opportunities of parliamentary rule and from the new
social welfare legislation (eight hour day, paid vacation, etc.) which
improved the worker’s everyday life and gave him more leisure.
21 The phrase “Rettung von dem Bolschewismus” was also a right-wing slogan.
Scheidemann may have used it in order to argue before the general public
the importance of the role of the Social Democratic functionaries and to de­
bunk the role of the right-wing military Free Corps. Cf. Scheidemann, op. cit.,
Vol. 2, 292.
22 On the political and economic consequences of the survival of the Junkers,
see Gerschenkron, op. cit., Ch. II.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

296

The Social Democratic subculture expanded and flourished despite
the severe political and economic crises of the postwar years and
despite the greater number of alternatives offered by modern mass
culture.23 However, many cultural activities of the labor movement
became increasingly similar to neutral adult education or neutral
recreation.24
In practical politics the labor movement became a huge interest
group, conservative in its commitment to the preservation of the
democratic republic. But neither the republic nor the labor move­
ment were recognized as legitimate by large sections of the popu­
lation. As the new political system proved relatively ineffective in
the face of foreign intervention and economic catastrophes, such
as the breakdown of the currency in 1923 and the World Depres­
sion, millions of people turned to new authoritarian ideologies. The
political strength of the Social Democratic labor movement at first
was locked in stalemate and then rapidly declined. Committed to
the rules of the game of parliamentary democracy and weakened
by the disintegration of the democratic system, the labor movement
finally succumbed to Nazism.

2. The Government and Max Weber Review
the Empire’s Course
Before drawing any conclusions, I will contrast the government’s
and Weber’s views of the Empire in peacetime and wartime, as they
expressed them toward the end of the war but before the American
intervention made them realize that all was lost.25 The views of one
23 The expansion of the Austrian Social Democratic subculture was facili­
tated by the absence of a strong Communist movement.
24 Cf. Andries Sternheim, op. cit., 352 f.
25 The revolution took by surprise not only most Social Democrats and the
vast majority of the population but also the government and Max Weber.
They all believed in the ability of the military to prevent a political catas-

The Unanticipated Showdown

297

of the highest-ranking Prussian officials and those of the most
vociferous academic critic of the Empire’s authoritarian structure
provide a useful review of the Empire’s course and of alternatives
too late considered. The government’s statement is less penetrating
than Weber’s analysis, but it is interesting as an official review of
the prewar policy of isolating the Social Democrats, of the wartime
policy of cooperating with them and of the growing awareness of
the need for reform; Weber’s analysis is particularly pertinent be­
cause it argues for the imperative necessity of introducing parlia­
mentary government within the monarchy.
In February 1918, the Prussian Minister of the Interior, Drews,
sent a memorandum to William II.*26 Reviewing the government’s
prewar policies, he pointed out that the Social Democrats had stood
outside the “national life,” and that “politics”— i.e., to him, the
government— had to lead “the various forces in the country with
changing methods and means in the fight against Social Democ­
racy.” In peacetime the “political leadership” had derived “great
tactical advantages” from pitting itself “unconditionally” against
the Social Democrats. After the outbreak of the war the Social
Democrats became the major problem of domestic politics. They
were now “part of the national life” and strengthened the military
position of the Reich. Cooperation with them had, however, the
disadvantage that “for the duration of the war the attitudes of a
radical party have to be taken into account.” Right-wing groups
would welcome a new isolation of the Social Democrats, but the
government, Drews advised, should avoid or delay a break with the
party during the war. Even at that late hour the minister believed
that, if necessary, the government could defeat the Social Demo­
crats in any open conflict. Less than ten months before the outbreak
trophe by avoiding military defeat. The population was victimized by a system
of propaganda and censorship which preserved the image of military strength
until the very end; this image had a realistic element until the arrival of
masses of American troops on the continent by the middle of 1918.
26 Reproduced in the appendix of Volkmann, op. cit., 291-306.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

298

of the revolution, he saw no danger because “civil and military
power in Prussia-Germany rests on solid foundations, and the
sound, order-loving sense of the German bourgeoisie is not as sus­
ceptible to revolutionary infections as is the case with our eastern
and western neighbors.”
The developments within the labor movement during the war,
Drews continued, made the government’s policy of cooperation in­
creasingly difficult. The Social Democrats resumed the “demands
which the government and the parliamentary majority had success­
fully resisted for decades.” Had the war been short, the Social
Democrats would have continued their policy of cooperation un­
disturbed. However, the party was more than any other party de­
pendent on the mood of the masses; their enthusiasm had deter­
mined the party’s attitude on the fourth of August, 1914. But the
mounting dissatisfaction of the masses slowly weakened the party’s
patriotic stand and resulted in a split in which the minority adopted
the old Social Democratic program. Drews explained to the Em­
peror that the Social Democratic leadership was convinced it could
hold the party on a “positive national” line if the government were
willing to make concessions in domestic politics and would clearly
show its willingness to make peace. However, the split of the party
forced the Majority Socialists to compete with the radical minority
for the allegiance of the masses. For the government, the split of
the party meant that dormant problems of social and political re­
form had to be faced once more. Drews argued in favor of a reform
of the Prussian three-class suffrage because the Social Democrats
would have to be able, after the war, to justify their patriotic policy
to the masses. Drews realized that the abolition of the three-class
suffrage, which had been a major aim of the party for decades,
linked the masses and the party. He charged that the right-wing
parties were responsible for the delay in the introduction of reforms,
which had to be pronounced if consensus on foreign policy were
to be preserved. Apart from the issue of electoral reform, he con­
sidered food shortage to have the most serious effect on the masses.

The Unanticipated Showdown

299

Food shortage was the primary reason for the people’s urgent desire
for peace. The problem was particularly grave in Berlin, but Drews
considered it unlikely that the Berlin workers would riot or stop
work spontaneously— again, only a few months before it hap­
pened.27
In the summer of 1917 Max Weber exposed the Empire’s weak­
nesses in a series of articles in the influential liberal Frankfurter
Zeitung.28 His views sharply contrasted with the government’s and
Hintze’s belief in the viability and superiority of monarchic consti­
tutionalism under the given German conditions. Weber’s critique
proceeded from his basic belief that the bureaucratization of mod­
ern life was universal and inevitable, at the same time that politics
would always be a struggle for power. The supreme challenge, then,
was the preservation of individual freedom and, related to it, the
continuous regeneration of capable political leadership. The via­
bility of a political system was dependent on its ability to produce
political leaders. Therefore, the survival and power interests of
Germany had to be more important than any commitments to
specific political forms. The gravest weakness of the German polit­
ical system was government through conscientious and competent
bureaucrats, who failed as political leaders. German bureaucracy
could proudly point to great administrative achievements, but the
victories of the military bureaucracy during the war could at best
only compensate for the political weakness of government by
bureaucrats. Bureaucratic government, and not rule by autocracy,
was the basic flaw of the German system. In fact the modern con­
27 Bebel was more perspicacious: he predicted in the Reichstag on Dec. 7,
1905, that in case of a war of Germany against France and England food
shortage would drive the people into rebellion. In the same speech he also
presaged the downfall of the prevailing political order if Germany engaged
in a war which included the United States. See Reichstag Protocols, 158 B.
28 Max Weber, “Parlament und Regierung im neugeordneten Deutschland,”
Gesammelte politische Schriften (Tübingen: Mohr, 1958), 294-431. This
book-length essay is an enlargement of the articles and one of Weber’s most
important political writings. The essay was published in the summer of 1918.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

300

stitutional monarch could not be an autocrat in the strict sense of
the word, since he was unable to control the powerful bureaucracy.
He was no specialist and no politician. And yet, in Germany, the
temptation for the monarch to enter the political arena was great,
for he was only confronted by the bureaucracy and not by a strong
parliament. Despite the “personal regime” of the Emperor, the
actual ruler was the bureaucracy—uncontrolled and responsible
to no one, since it justified its power with the legitimacy of the
monarch, just as Bismarck had done. “Monarchic government” in
Germany and Russia descended to the level of perpetual depart­
mental struggles, with personal intrigues abounding. In a parliament­
ary system these struggles are more open to inspection and control.
Rule by bureaucrats was a legacy of Bismarck, who had sup­
pressed all political talents. He left Germany without political edu­
cation; the level of public political sophistication was lower in 1890
than in 1870. Contrary to customary accusations that parliament
was powerless because of its incompetence, it could not raise its level
because it was powerless. Under “monarchic government” the
qualified leaders were driven elsewhere to seek a realm of freedom
for their energies and capabilities—in particular, to industry. Con­
trary to prevailing prejudice, parliament actually had had quite a
few outstanding leaders and still had potential leaders. Weber re­
lates from his personal experience that the older leaders accepted
Caesarism as long as a politician of Bismarck’s magnitude ruled,
but that they wanted to strengthen parliament under his successors.
They did not succeed largely because Bismarck destroyed the possi­
bilities for a clear majority party. Weber points to a significant
generational difference: National unification became of supreme
emotional importance for the generation that followed its achieve­
ment, more so than for the participating generation that went
through the tensions of achieving it. The generation of writers after
1878 extolled Bismarck’s shrewdness and brutality, not his better
characteristics. The same literati who exalted Bismarck rejected
parliamentarism because of its inherent demagoguery and reckless-

The Unanticipated Showdown

301

ness. However, in Germany there had been demagoguery and mass
influence without democracy—because of the absence of institu­
tionalized democracy. Bismarck himself was a master of demagogic
and other reckless methods. Even his welfare legislation had a
demagogic basis, consisting as it did of a primitive concept of
eliciting gratitude. He transposed the Prussian Constitutional Con­
flict to the Reich level by keeping the issue of military appropria­
tions alive in order to weaken the Reichstag. He manipulated the
issue of the tariffs and of the antisocialist legislation. The inap­
propriate methods used to fight the Catholic church resulted in a
devastating defeat for the authority of the state; the antisocialist
legislation destroyed the unions, “the only working-class institutions
capable of a sombre representation of interests.” The workers were
driven into the
most extreme radicalism o f pure party politics. . . . In the treatment
of the unions one point was overlooked, a point that even today som e
politicians have not yet understood: a state that wants to base the
spirit o f its mass army on honor and solidarity must not forget that in
everyday life and in the econom ic struggles of the workers the senti­
ments o f honor and solidarity are the only decisive moral forces for
the education o f the masses. This and nothing else means “social
democracy” in purely political terms.29

Weber considered parliamentarism indispensable because it was
the only means to control the bureaucracy and to produce capable
political leadership. He was, therefore, interested in awakening
public understanding for the preconditions of effective parlia­
mentarism. The German system of “monarchic government” mili­
tated against the selection of capable leaders because the highest
positions were subject to bureaucratic advancement and to acci­
dental connections with the court. Some bureaucrats had the capa­
bilities required for political leadership, but the sense of political
independence was not encouraged in a bureaucracy. Under mo­
29 Weber, op. cit., 306.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

302

narchic constitutionalism party politics was merely the representa­
tion of local interests and a struggle for subordinate patronage.
Even this struggle went on behind closed doors, exemplified by the
Center party’s patronage system in the federal agencies. Job patron­
age existed in other political systems as well, but in Germany it
did not result in the selection of leaders qualified to lead the nation.
Contrary to Hintze, who rejected the liberal view of the Govern­
ment as being in fact a conservative party rule, Weber pointed out
that since 1878 the impartiality of the bureaucracy simply means
that only conservatives can be Landräte (district heads) in
Prussia, that “every government and its representatives must neces­
sarily be ‘conservative,’ merely tolerating some concessions to the
patronage of the Prussian bourgeoisie and of the Center.” 30
In Germany, Weber continues, parliament appears as the natural
enemy of the government, as an harassment of the bureaucracy
and as a body of “ignorant demagoguery” and “routinized im­
potence” because the structure of the diet permits only negative or
passive politics: critique, complaint, and the rejection, modification
and passing of the budget and of bills presented by the government.
Party leaders have to abandon their seats and leadership in parlia­
ment if they take a position in the federal government or on the
Federal Council, representing the states. Thus, both parliament
and the leader concerned are weakened. Parliament is further
handicapped by its inability to overcome the hurdle of administra­
tive secrecy.
The introduction of parliamentarism not only was resisted by
the court, the government and big business, but it also met resist­
ance from the parties and parliament. The parties had been trained
by Bismarck to be negative forces and were unable to agree on a
positive program to be submitted to the monarch. Party bureauc­
racies were resentful of strong political leaders. The Center’s au30 Cf. Weber, op. cit., 351 and Hintze, op. cit., 382.

The Unanticipated Showdown

303

thoritarian wing was akin to the spirit of the bureaucracy. The
largest party, the Social Democratic party, was the least willing to
take on governmental responsibility. However, the willingness to
accept responsibility was a precondition of effective parliamen­
tarism.
The Social Democrats were handicapped by “pseudorevolution­
ary” conventions from the antisocialist period and by “evolutionist”
theories. Most important, however, was the fear of the leaders of
repudiation by the rank and file if they should openly cooperate
with the government. “This situation motivated the leaders to keep
the party for decades in a kind of political ghetto, in order to avoid
any kind of contaminating contact with the workings of bourgeois
state mechanisms. Despite appearances, they do this even now.”
Weber was aware of the leader’s dilemma: On the one hand, the
war greatly strengthened syndicalism, “the unpolitical and anti­
political heroic ethos of brotherhood”; on the other, the Imperial
bureaucracy might revert to its old policies after the war.31 Weber
agreed with the Social Democratic leaders that the returning soldiers
must have the right to participate in postwar political and eco­
nomic reconstruction. Universal and equal suffrage and a strong
parliament were necessary if Germany were to acquire a govern­
ment with solid domestic support, capable of safeguarding the
interests of the nation in a critical world situation.
Max Weber’s critique was fortified by a superlative sociological
understanding of political systems, their preconditions and their
consequences. However, he did not claim the support of social
science for his political views. He knew that parliamentary democ­
racy and its recruitment of leaders had their own difficulties and
unanticipated consequences, but he was willing to stake the nation’s
fate on his perception of the relative superiority of parliamentary
democracy over monarchic constitutionalism in an age of precipi31 Weber, op. cit., 354.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

304

tous rationalization and aggravated power struggles. He knew very
well that empirical arguments cannot decisively influence ultimate
values. His reform proposals represented the viewpoint of a distinct
minority, which was thwarted by the powers-that-be until catas­
trophe engulfed defenders and opponents of the dominant system.

XII
Conclusions

When established national communities undergo the early stages of
industrialization, they are confronted with the problem of the po­
litical and social integration of the emergent industrial work force.
Theories of industrialization, whether Marxist or not, have usually
stressed its inherent dynamics in creating labor protest; only re­
cently have they given greater attention to the political and cultural
context of industrialization and labor protest. This has been owing,
in particular, to the impact of events in newly developing countries.
However, the same recurrent problems of labor protest had to be
faced in one way or another by European countries when they
were passing through the early stages of economic development.
In the history of Europe the two extreme solutions for the prob­
lem of lower-class integration have been England and Russia.
In the former integration was accomplished under a parliamentary
system of government which acceded step by step to labor’s demand
for formal political equality and a greater share in the national
product. Class conflict was ameliorated because of this accommoda­
tion. In Russia an authoritarian monarchy insisted on the complete
subordination of employers and workers. An independent class­
conscious labor movement was not tolerated to any significant
extent. Popular protest was finally focussed on the very institution
of Tsarist autocracy which nominally claimed responsibility for the
welfare of the people. An underground organization of professional
revolutionaries adhering to a voluntaristic interpretation of Marx­
ism developed. In the wake of external military defeat, this minority
of the labor movement succeeded in mobilizing peasant discontent
and in launching a total revolution.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

306

Imperial Germany constitutes a complex intermediate case be­
tween England and Russia. Labor protest did not develop at first,
as in England, into a trade union movement which supported the
liberals for a long time and created a parliamentary labor party
only after the turn of the century; nor did it evolve in the direction
of a revolutionary underground movement as in Imperial Russia.
The German labor movement was a response to political conditions
turning the movement itself into the major champion of parlia­
mentary democracy and isolating it as a class-conscious subculture.

1. Descriptive Summary
At the beginning of German industrialization, the liberal bourgeoisie
strove for a constitutional state with more or less parliamentary
prerogatives. However, class consciousness based on property and
education made the liberals hesitant about or hostile toward the
political participation by large numbers of workers on terms of
equality. The vicissitudes of the struggle against the authoritarian
monarchy reinforced this inclination of the liberal middle classes.
Only by a policy of compromise with the militarily superior mon­
archy could the liberals participate in the cherished task of
national unification and at least indirectly influence the gov­
ernment. The liberal attitudes alienated a small group of politically
interested and active workers; their class consciousness was sensi­
tized by the liberal class-conscious policies. An independent class­
conscious labor movement came into being when this small group
of workers joined its meager forces with isolated radical-democratic,
antiliberal intellectuals. (Chapter II.)
Parliamentary government was incompatible with the particular
authoritarianism of the monarchy. Under a system of monarchic
constitutionalism the government was appointed by the monarch
and shared responsibility with him, but not with parliament. Against
the liberal and later Social Democratic demand for parliamentary

Conclusions

307

government, this constitutional arrangement was defended with the
traditionalist legitimacy of the monarch and, pragmatically, with
requirements of military effectiveness and with the heterogeneity of
Prussia and the Empire. A large and independent liberal party and,
even more so, a rapidly growing Social Democratic labor move­
ment appeared to Bismarck and his successors as a major threat
to the balance of power under monarchic constitutionalism. Bis­
marck’s policy of splitting the liberals and of suppressing the Social
Democrats was also based on a long-run perspective of revolution­
ary dangers which the rise of the masses entailed for “civilized”
European society. These two perceptions prevented a recognition
of the limited revolutionary potential of the Social Democrats and
of any realistic attempt at their integration. After Bismarck’s at­
tempt at suppression had failed, a policy of isolation helped to pre­
serve the intransigence of the Social Democrats. (Chapter III.)
Two central issues came to characterize the cleavage between the
bourgeoisie and the labor movement, the issues of revolution and
patriotism. These— and, to a lesser degree, the issue of idealism
versus materialism—resulted in high-pitched rhetorical exchanges
between the spokesmen for both sides. The rhetorical antagonism
was to some extent self-perpetuating, but underlying it was a basic
disagreement about national unification through Prussia. The
achievement of national unification satisfied what had been for many
middle-class persons the most important demand and seemed to
entail for others so many benefits as to justify a continued accept­
ance of Bismarck’s setup of the Empire. For the Social Democrats
national unification through Prussia appeared to be either outright
pernicious or at best a very doubtful advance. The intensity of feel­
ings of exaltation and affirmation, on the one hand, and of resent­
ment and disdain, on the other, was bound to exacerbate the class
cleavage. (Chapter IV.)
Given the basic structure of the authoritarian state and the result­
ing impasse of the Social Democrats, the antagonistic discourse be­
tween the spokesmen of the government and the labor movement

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

308

continued unabated for half a century. The Emperor, his chancellors
and high-ranking civil servants did not waver in their public display
of hostility toward the Social Democrats, who responded in kind.
Both sides clung to their intransigent rhetoric even though the gov­
ernment gradually abandoned all serious attempts at suppression
and even though the labor movement became progressively more
involved in reformist activities. This habitual rhetoric reflected a
basic value conflict as well as the strategic requirements arising for
both sides from the structure of the constitutional system. The
rhetoric reinforced the immobility of the political dividing line,
which, late in the period, was sometimes rigidly preserved less from
serious conviction than for tactical expediency. (Chapter V.)
Trends toward the amelioration of the class cleavage did not
effect a basic change. A part of the higher-ranking civil service was
reform-minded and succeeded in introducing major welfare legis­
lation. The academic social reformers labored to assess the dy­
namics of an industrializing society and to impress government and
public with the necessity of some reforms. However, both groups
remained very distant from the Social Democrats, condemning their
unwillingness to cooperate with those in power. The evolution of
some states toward parliamentarism did not significantly influence
power conditions on the federal level and in Prussia. A trend
toward recognizing the personal respectability of the Social Demo­
crats and the disciplinary value of an organized labor movement
did not extend to the crucial holders of power. A young liberal
generation, which was less antagonistic to the labor movement, did
not mature before the First World War broke out. Whatever longrun potential for significant political change these ameliorative
tendencies may have possessed, they did not come to fruition dur­
ing the life-span of the Empire. (Chapter VI.)
A major manifestation of the class cleavage was the develop­
ment of a large and self-contained Social Democratic subculture,
embodying a way of life for masses of workers. The mixture of
permissive and repressive conditions characteristic of the dominant

Conclusions

309

system made a moderate practice advisable, but it also encouraged
the adherence to a radical though deterministically attenuated
Marxist ideology. This relative attenuation did not make it less ob­
jectionable to the opponents of the Social Democrats. Deterministic
Marxism “corresponded” to the prevailing rigid power conditions,
but its adoption was very slow; it became important as a means of
ideological defense no less than attack. It justified the reliance on
“automatic” social developments and on moderate practices in
general. However, it involved increasing strains for the movement.
It prevented its appeal beyond proletarian strata, and it was bound
to create a conflict between those who wanted to pursue a more
reformist path and those who demanded a more radical course.
(Chapter VII.)
The official Marxism constituted only part of the meaning which
the labor movement had for the workers. Many of them absorbed
it in an inevitably simplified and vulgarized form, which often pro­
tected them against the realization of social and ideological com­
plexities and sometimes exposed them to the frustrations of in­
adequate comprehension. The rank and file recognized the party
leaders as their spokesmen, but vulgar Marxist beliefs do not seem
to have overcome a tendency to be skeptical toward the leaders*
vision of radical social reconstruction. Many workers were anxious
to prove themselves sober and respectable. The Social Democratic
subculture gave them an opportunity to experience the moral senti­
ments of solidarity in collective action; it provided them with many
satisfactions not available to them in society. This compensated
for their sense of social inferiority and of second-class citizenship.
(Chapter VIII.)
However, the influence of the political and cultural norms of the
dominant system remained strong and pervasive, especially through
the agencies of elementary school, army service and newspapers. A
dual loyalty was typical of the Social Democratic workers. The
cultural exertions of the Social Democrats were extraordinary, but
many cultural activities actually reinforced the workers’ adherence

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

310

to significant components of the dominant culture. The leaders
were committed to the improvement of their followers’ cultural level;
they hoped that cultural activities would strengthen their attach­
ment to the political cause of the movement, yet most leaders were
culturally quite conservative. Library and lecture programs were
extensive, but interest was often limited to nonsocialist topics. The
socialist press was doctrinaire, and since it had a strong intra-party
orientation, it furthered the self-containment of the movement.
(Chapter IX.)
The labor movement’s rapid expansion after 1890 made the or­
ganizational maintenance of party and unions more and more com­
plex. The Social Democratic unions, resurrected primarily as
mutual insurance societies, very soon concentrated upon organiza­
tional strength rather than upon agitation. However, the party
reorganized its rapidly obsolescent apparatus only after 1905 ac­
cording to the technical requirements of a mass movement. Bu­
reaucratization and embourgeoisement do not appear to have
caused its growing difficulties in the last years before the First
World War. Many leaders and proletarian members had always
been culturally petty-bourgeois; the masses of followers were not
more radical than the leaders; and the intellectuals got along rela­
tively well with the proletarian functionaries. Contrary to Robert
Michels’ emphasis, I support the point of view that the party’s
crisis was not due primarily to the predominance of organizational
interests in survival and “self-maintenance” over allegedly older,
radical aspirations. Its dilemma was more strategic than organiza­
tional: the top leaders’ strategy of “self-maintenance” as well as the
alternatives advocated by the right and left appeared unable, in the
near future, to change the national balance of power. (Chapter X.)
At the beginning of the First World War the labor movement
was integrated, in a strictly subordinate fashion, into the national
community. Initially the leaders supported the government because
they feared its repressive power, considered the war to be de­
fensive, and were confronted with rank and file enthusiasm. Very

Conclusions

311

important was the leaders’ hope that the support of the war efforts
might overcome the stagnation of democratization. However, dis­
illusionment soon spread and resulted in the split of the labor
movement. In order to highlight the internal reasons for the down­
fall of the Empire, I contrasted the Prussian government’s percep­
tion of its own peace and wartime policies with Max Weber’s war­
time critique of monarchic constitutionalism, which required, in his
opinion, a no less radical cure than its replacement with parlia­
mentary rule. The latter came about only after the Empire’s mili­
tary defeat, which was aggravated by the legacy of the class cleav­
age. Labor did achieve a precarious formal equality in the new
republic. (Chapter XI.)

2. Negative Integration and Historical Alternatives
In 1913, when Vilfredo Pareto was at work on his Trattato di
sociologia generale, the Zabern incident occurred.1 He discussed
it as a particular case of the general problem of the use of force.
Interested as he was in the stability of social systems and the un­
intended consequences of social action, he contrasted French and
German sentiments and the political systems of the two countries.
He observed that under the “Latin condition” the people are
always right, the army always wrong, and that under “the Ger­
manic condition . . . people whose nerves are affected by the
mere glimpse of a soldier had better stay indoors.” 2 The Dreyfus
affair polarized French political life and threatened the stability of
the Third Republic; the protest of the Reichstag majority about the
Zabern incident could not shake the German government. And
the French government fell in December 1913 as a result of a be­
lated left-wing revenge over the prolongation of military service.
1 On the Zabern incident, see p. 286, above.
2 Vilfredo Pareto, The Mind and Society, A. Livingston, ed. (New York:
Harcourt, Brace, 1935), 1489. By permission of the publisher.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

312

French left-wingers were incensed about the Zabern affair as well
as about their own government’s armament policies. Pareto pointed
out that their antimilitarism was unintentionally harmful to the
international interests of democracy vis-à-vis the authoritarian in­
terests of Imperial Germany. In contrast, the German militarists
strengthened their system by vigorously upholding the army’s Za­
bern action. However, in looking for unintended consequences of
their actions, he noticed that they were also weakening their system
by creating a crisis of allegiance. Pareto concluded that “both the
defenders of the Latin condition and the defenders of the Germanic
condition entirely disregard the quantitative problem” : Are inter­
mediary conditions (C, instead of A and B) possible?— i.e., instead
of the prevailing French and German conditions.3
Pareto wanted to make sociology scientific in the quantitative
and predictive sense. He believed that a strictly value-neutral,
“logico-experimental” approach could establish social laws and
social uniformities. Yet complex political systems have remained
beyond the grasp of successful quantitative and predictive treat­
ment, and judgments on the degree of social stability and on
the extent of unintended consequences are unavoidably subjective
and controvertible. However, Pareto’s general approach to the
stability and flexibility of political systems and to the problem of
unintended consequences is pertinent for us. We have to assess the
relative viability of monarchic constitutionalism and of conflict
regulation through isolation and negative integration. Logically, this
also requires a consideration of historical alternatives, a mental
projection whose analytical necessity and legitimacy have been
established ever since Max Weber and the renowned historian
Eduard Meyer carried out their memorable controversy about its
methodological adequacy.4 Max Weber’s own option for parlia­
mentary government under the monarchy, for example, was an
3 Ibid., 1494.
4 Cf. Part III of The Methodology of Max Weber, E. A. Shils and H. A.
Finch, eds. and transi. (Glencoe: Free Press, 1949).

Conclusions

313

attempt to establish “an intermediate state, C,” in Pareto’s words,
that “might perhaps better than A or B assure the attainment of
the purposes aimed at by defenders of the two extremes.” In par­
ticular, we must face the question of alternative developments be­
cause the First World War and Germany’s military defeat cannot
be considered historically inevitable, although on hindsight they do
not appear to be surprising events.6
The authoritarian monarchy was stable as long as it was not de­
feated externally; its traditional legitimacy and military power were
reinforced by the achievement of national unification and rapid
industrialization. At the same time monarchic constitutionalism
was a concession to the forces of democratization, although it was
granted more from a position of strength than of weakness. Bis­
marck made constitutional compromises in 1867 and again in 1871,
when he took his two decisive steps toward national unification.7
5 Pareto, loc. cit.
6 Cf. Robert Kann on the questionable inevitability of the breakdown of the
Double Monarchy in 1918: “The last link in the chain of causation that led
to the dissolution of the dual empire was unquestionably the First World War.
A good deal about the reasons for its outbreak is known of course, including
both the active and passive share of Austria-Hungary in bringing about the
catastrophe. Yet nobody has succeeded or probably ever will succeed in prov­
ing the logical inevitability of the great conflagration.. . . Actually, the World
War in itself was not even the last phase o f . . . disintegration. The Habsburg monarchy was technically intact until the two last weeks of October
1918. . . . No conscientious analyst of these fateful events is able to elimi­
nate the powerful effect of seeming accidentals on those stormy happenings.”
The Habsburg Empire: A Study in Integration and Disintegration (New York:
Praeger, 1957), 23. By permission of the publisher.
7 Significantly these compromises with the liberals were never made in the
spirit of the British upper-class mentality expressed in a remark of Lady
Dorothy Nevill to H. M. Hyndman about incipient working-class organiza­
tion: “The turn of the people will come some day, I see that quite as clearly
as you do. But not yet, not yet. You will educate some of the working class
. . . and when you have educated them, we shall buy them, or, if we don’t,
the Liberals will. Besides we shall never offer any obstinate or bitter resistance
. . . when your agitation becomes really serious we shall give way a little
. . . our object is to avoid any direct conflict in order to gain time.” Quoted
in Anne Fremantle, op. cit., 25 f.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

314

To this extent monarchic constitutionalism proved flexible. Al­
though its logic did not permit major concessions toward parlia­
mentarism, more basic reasons explain the unwillingness and in­
ability of Bismarck and his successors to modify the system. It is
true that a dominant system cannot be expected to prepare for the
eventuality of its own military defeat, but after all, a higher degree
of integration of the working class, accomplished through appro­
priate concessions during peacetime, might have saved Imperial
Germany altogether in 1918. It may be fair to say that Bismarck’s
basic assumption— the irreconcilability of parliamentarism with the
survival interests of the monarchy and the Empire—proved as fatal
for his edifice as it did for his career. Despite his sense for Realpolitik his long-range vision was blurred by ideological precon­
ceptions. After 1945, when he became once again particularly con­
troversial, Hans Rothfels conceded his failure to understand
the peaceful protest character of the Social Democrats and the
complexity of Marxian theory, but reasoned that, after the experi­
ence of Bolshevism and Nazism, this failure can no longer be seen
as just a natural outcome of a reactionary class bias. Behind the
labor movement, Rothfels argues, Bismarck sensed the danger of
popular dictators carried into power by the masses, the spectre of
totalitarianism— in his words: the union of Jacobins and Cossacks.8
I agree that Bismarck, as well as many conservatives and liberals,
had indeed a premonition of things to come; but theirs was also a
self-fulfilling prophecy in that they contributed substantially to the
rise of the totalitarian movements of later decades by taking an
uncompromising stand against their democratic opponents, espe­
cially the Social Democrats. They eventually drove the most radical
wing of the Social Democrats to establishment of the Communist
party; the hostility and hatred against the labor movement and
parliamentarism, instilled over decades into the right-wing middle
8 See Rothfels, ed., op. cit., XLVII.

Conclusions

315

classes, became one of the major sources of Nazi sentiment after
the fall of the Empire.
The phenomenon of negative integration emerged in a situation
in which neither the transition to parliamentarism nor the complete
repression of the labor movement appeared feasible. The Reichstag
was constitutionally weak, but its mere existence constituted an in­
herent restraint on the government. This became clear when Bis­
marck attempted to tamper with his life’s work and to precipitate
a coup d'état. The edifice he had created proved not only resistant
to liberal reconstruction, as he wanted it to be, but also to recon­
struction along more authoritarian lines. The government did not
dare to tear apart the web of reciprocity it had established with the
Reichstag over two decades, and without sufficient voting strength
in the diet it felt incapable of completely suppressing the labor
movement. The compulsion of circumstances dictated a conscious
policy of tolerating the labor movement in a state of isolation. Thus
a class-conscious Social Democratic subculture based on legal mass
organization was free to develop.
The subculture was “negatively” integrated into the dominant
system because by its very existence it provided an important means
for the controlled expression and dissipation of conflict and thus
contributed, for decades of peacetime, to the stability of the Em­
pire. Specifically, the Social Democratic subculture furthered polit­
ical moderation and industrial discipline in the following way:
(a) It gave the workers the political and social recognition which
the dominant system denied them, (b) Radicalism was greatly weak­
ened because both the individual Social Democrat in his indus­
trial job and the party as a whole had to be careful not to provoke
retaliatory measures or an intensification of repressive policies.
Because of the permissive aspects of the dominant system, party
and unions had an overriding interest in legality and therefore strove
to protect themselves against complete suppression by fighting
Blanquist and anarchist tendencies, (c) With the expansion of the

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

316

labor movement, more and more workers were taught by their own
representatives to accept the necessity of authority, discipline, skill
and good work performance. Social Democratic workers endeav­
ored to prove to themselves and to others that radical political aims
and personal respectability were not mutually exclusive, (d) In­
directly the Social Democratic labor movement enforced better liv­
ing and working conditions by its mere presence and thus promoted
reformist moderation and industrial peace, even though the unions
could not negotiate with big business and even though the Social
Democrats did not cooperate on welfare legislation.
The peculiar combination of repression and permissiveness re­
sulting in negative integration also had significant consequences
at the moment of Imperial Germany’s military defeat. It may
be suggested that by refraining from any persistent attempt at com­
plete suppression the dominant system encouraged the labor move­
ment to stay on a relatively moderate path; this facilitated the sur­
vival of important social, economic and even political components
of the old regime— bureaucracy, army, right-wing parties— after its
political debacle. During the lifetime of the Empire the labor move­
ment’s democratic-parliamentary commitments were reinforced by
the advantages of legality. When the Empire collapsed the labor
movement had no concrete economic and social alternatives to
offer. The long years of isolation within a powerful system had
discouraged any concern with social reconstruction after its down­
fall. When called upon to take responsibility for the country, the
old Social Democratic party (Majority Socialists) retained much of
the established order, and the Minority Socialists retreated to the
old stance of opposition. Only the numerically weak extreme left
wanted a total revolution, but had no mass support for it.
If there had been no war, some democratization on the federal
level and in Prussia might have occurred in the long run; the fact
that the reformist tendencies— analyzed in Chapter VI—were not
strong enough to change the basic structure of the Empire as long
as it actually lasted, does not exclude this possibility. The Prussian

Conclusions

317

three-class suffrage was a formidable roadblock, and its disappear­
ance was not likely in the near future; symbolically it was the
most important indicator of the second-class or, literally, the “thirdclass” citizenship of the workers. However, this very importance
might have heightened the effect of any suffrage concessions.
With a modicum of reform, the dominant system might have been
able to continue the check on the labor movement long enough to
force the greater part of it into abandoning the stance of radical
opposition and into adopting a clear position of loyal opposition or
even cooperation. Economically, such a development was, of course,
dependent on a rising national income, a higher standard of living
for the workers, and especially a continuous increase of the tertiary
industries and the new middle classes, vitiating the Social Demo­
cratic hopes of “automatic” victory. Thus, negative integration
might have become positive integration, although on a more un­
equal basis than in England.
A victorious outcome of the war would have greatly strength­
ened the dominant system, resulting in substantial material benefits
to the working class and probably also in some political concessions
granted from a position of benevolent strength; but a peace founded
on compromise might have led to even greater concessions. Im­
provements in the areas of parliamentary rights, collective bargain­
ing, state arbitration of labor disputes, and work and leisure condi­
tions could have resulted at first in a boom for the cultural activities
of the labor movement, as was to happen after the First World
War despite the continued economic hardships and political convul­
sions. With the basic political cleavage substantially narrowed, a
greater spread of economic wealth and the rise of mass media of
entertainment, including spectator sports, might have gradually dis­
solved the Social Democratic subculture and turned the party into
a purely parliamentary one. After another historical catastrophe,
this, too, finally happened in the West Germany of the 1950’s, the
decade of the triumph of middle-class parliamentary democracy.
How should the Social Democrats be adjudged in the light of

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

318

these historical developments and speculative alternatives? The
socialist millennium never arrived. Many Social Democrats sin­
cerely believed in its imminence, although it is unclear— and pos­
sibly beyond historical reconstruction—whether their revered leader
August Bebel really did, despite his voluble assurances. At any rate,
most Social Democrats, whether for or against Eduard Bernstein,
acted as if they considered “the movement everything, the goal
nothing”; the existence and welfare of the movement, the advanc­
ing of material working-class interests and the struggle for piece­
meal democratization were concrete goals and realistic values, while
the socialist millennium and, even more so, a “glorious revolution”
were above all anti-ideals pitted against the official values of Im­
perial Germany. As an intransigent opposition aiming at the seizure
of power, the movement was a failure; as an embodiment of social
protest, it was a splendid achievement of the working class; as an
instrument of social reform its success was very limited, but the latter
role became its major one after the two world wars. Its later suc­
cesses on the municipal, state and (more limited) federal levels are
relevant here in view of the historic continuity of the movement,
which is now just 100 years old— older than any other German party.
For half a century the party has represented one-third of the
electorate on the federal level but never substantially more. The
ideological antagonism of a century ago is still a potent historical
legacy, despite all political changes and ideological adjustments.9
The charges of Max Weber and other liberals are probably correct
that through its original self-conscious and class-conscious isolation
the Social Democratic movement perpetuated the power of the con9 In the 1961 federal elections in the Federal Republic of Germany, many
voters cast a protest vote against the aging “bourgeois Bismarck,” Chancellor
Adenauer, by supporting the Liberal-Conservative party (FDP), an amalgam
of progressive and conservative traditions from the Empire and the Weimar
Republic and of former Nazis; many of them did not vote for the Social
Democrats, who had considerably modernized and mitigated their program,
because they still considered them “Red” and harbored some of the same old
stereotypes about the party as were current during the Empire.

Conclusions

319

servative and the illiberal forces. However, as this analysis
has endeavored to demonstrate, the ideological antagonism was
fully reciprocal. The Social Democrats and their bourgeois and
governmental adversaries were trapped by their ideological pre­
conceptions and habitual rhetoric, which thwarted the modicum of
give and take that might have prevented the later historical dis­
asters.
The eruption of ideological commitments into mass violence
might not have occurred without the international catastrophe of
the First World War. The war became decisive for the relations
between the German— and the Russian—labor movements and
the established political systems, whereas it played a much less
important role in England and France. The Scandinavian countries,
spared by the First World War, provide perhaps the best vantage
point for assessing Imperial Germany on this score. In them the
pressures for a large standing army and increasing armaments were
considerably weaker. But even under these favorable conditions it
took democratization about half a century—up to the end of the
First World War— to reach the stage of full universal suffrage and
full parliamentary government. In Denmark, for example, a conserv­
ative government ruled for two decades, from 1876 on, without
parliamentary appropriations, far longer than Bismarck did during
the Constitutional Conflict in Prussia. But in a different interna­
tional and military context the long-range consequences were less
detrimental to democratization than in Imperial Germany. In Nor­
way, by contrast, the issue of national independence helped rather
than hindered democratization, probably because of the absence of
major international complications and military pressures.
For the current theories of industrialization and democratiza­
tion a relevant caveat emerges from this analysis. The prevailing
theories are largely based on the internal developments of sev­
eral countries. In the case of West Germany, two world wars “recti­
fied” her conformity to the theory that the problem of working-class
protest is “best” solved by the integration of the lower classes into

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

320

the pluralist system of a highly industrialized country. The two wars
destroyed the old aristocracy and the terribles simplificateurs
whom Jacob Burckhardt expected with sad premonition; “middleclass elites” rule undisputed. To an onlooker who did not know that
the two wars had interfered, it might seem that the intrinsic
forces of industrialization had brought about this result. Sketched
broadly and viewed over the full span of a century, the German
case fits the theory of an inherent “logic of industrialism” advanced
by Clark Kerr and others. With successful economic development,
labor protest seems to decline, the “end of ideology” to approach,
and bureaucratic skirmishes between big organizations to prevail
over the conflict of classes with one another and the state. It is true
that at the end of the reviewed period, which comprises only half
a century, Germany had barely reached the stage of “economic
maturity,” in W. W. Rostow’s terms, and was far from the “age
of high mass-consumption.” But it was already clear that labor
protest would not pose a cumulative threat and that a very pre­
carious accommodation and very unequal integration of the labor
movement were sufficient to diminish the danger of a revolutionary
challenge. However, such long-run perspectives tend to lack ex­
planatory power in any given case because they blur the impact
of ideologies, institutional legacies and international events. These
three factors largely determine the struggle for democratization.
Just like industrialization, democratization does not appear to have
determinate consequences. The lower-class challenge may be
checked by various degrees of national integration on the basis of
equality, inequality or isolation; only in case of persistent failure
does the likelihood of total revolution increase.
Finally, the relative degree of integration even within a plural­
ist system should be kept clearly in mind, lest the more obviously
unequal forms of integration be misperceived. The two basic con­
ceptions of democracy, which separated the right and left of German
Social Democracy and partly also its historians, are relevant here.

Conclusions

321

Democracy may be defined as a system of institutional arrange­
ments permitting the bloodless change of governments, the assertion
and balancing of group interests and the protection of civil liber­
ties. This conception—sometimes called Schumpeterian—is increas­
ingly affirmed among political sociologists. According to it, Weimar
Germany and the United States appear as model cases of democratic
systems, disregarding the criterion of stability. The other concep­
tion of democracy is older and more formal and goes back to Rous­
seau’s “general will,” which does not permit organized interest
groups and parties. In historical reality there have been, on the
whole, only quasi-Rousseauan systems manipulating the “general
will”; they have been plebiscitarian, Caesarist and eventually to­
talitarian in the sense of the Volksgemeinschaft and of Stalinism.
Communist “democracy” today implies the absence of large landowners, shareholders and corporation managers and the integration
of the working class into a system run by a new class of function­
aries. From a Communist perspective the Germanies of Bismarck,
Weimar and Bonn, as well as the United States, appear as reaction­
ary capitalist countries which repress the working class by spurious
forms of integration.
Pluralist theoreticians themselves have not been blind to the
dangers of too complete a political integration and have also dealt
extensively with the problem of how to preserve individual liberty
in the age of the Big Organization with its total claim on the indi­
vidual. George Orwell and some critics of American corporate mass
society have seen the beginnings of a new totalitarianism in their
countries which integrated the lower classes on a formally equal
basis. As far as many newly developing countries are concerned,
the difficulties of national integration— due to a multitude of cul­
tural, ethnic and economic factors— seem to invite authoritarian
“solutions.” Thus the highly developed as well as the newly de­
veloping countries continuously face recurrent problems of national
integration and individual liberty. In this context Imperial Germany

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

322

and her negative integration of the working class should be seen
as one important instance of the struggle for democratization in a
rapidly industrializing world.

3. A Personal Postscript
In propounding this or that theory
an author as a rule wants other
people to assent to it and to adopt
it— in him the seeker after experi­
mental truth and the apostle stand
combined. . . . If one’s aim is to
inspire or reinforce certain senti­
ments in men, one must present
facts favorable to that design and
keep unfavorable data quiet. But
if one is interested strictly in uni­
formities, one must not ignore any
fact that may in any way serve to
disclose them. . . . W e keep open
house to all facts, whatever their
character, provided that directly or
indirectly they point the way to
discovering a uniformity.
— Pareto, Trattato 10

In the course of my research I have been as impressed with the
difficulties of establishing “uniformities” or generalizations as I
have been with the thinness of the line between academic analysis
and moral judgment. As the study advanced I began to reflect in­
creasingly upon my own scholarly and political presuppositions and
conclusions.
As a member of a generation which was very early forced into
political awareness by living through Germany’s totalitarian regime
i° Pareto, op. cit., 44 f.

Conclusions

323

during an increasingly devastating war, my first questions about
German history were inevitably directed toward the search for the
causes of the historical catastrophe. I was reared, in my early
teens, to respect Ebert and Scheidemann, Rathenau and Stresemann
as men who, despite their faults, had been statesmen and respon­
sible politicians in contrast to the rulers of the day. After the war,
I intensified my readings in German history; I was particularly im­
pressed by the dire prophecies on Germany’s future essayed a
century ago by the great poet and critic Heinrich Heine, whose out­
lawed volumes had remained on the family bookshelves until
incendiary bombs destroyed them toward the end of the war. Re­
jecting wiser family counsel, I began to sympathize, with youthful
fervor, with the left wing of the Social Democratic party in Imperial
Germany; I believed that the socialist left should have succeeded
in 1918/19. I was also convinced that a massive denazification
program could prevent a repetition of the right-wing develop­
ments that had occurred after the First World War. Eventually,
however, I began to comprehend the dictatorial and totalitarian
implications of a brand of anti-fascism that would have excluded
indefinitely a substantial part of the population from the process of
democratic government. Research on the failure of the American
denazification program helped me to understand the difference be­
tween the requirements of political purges necessary for political
reconstruction and moral retribution transcending the realm of
mechanical institutional change. Moralistic and legalistic Amer­
ican traditions were in part responsible for this failure.11
American writers on the history of the German labor movement
have combined a traditionally liberal exasperation with obstacles
standing in the way of a democratic society, beyond the Anglo-Saxon
realm, with a tendency to be more sympathetic toward the German
radical left than toward the convinced Social Democratic believers in
II Cf. Guenther Roth and Kurt H. Wolff, “The American Denazification of
Germany.” Studies in German-American Postwar Problems. No. 1, Dept,
of Sociology, Ohio State University, 1954, 46 pp. (mimeo.).

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

324

parliamentary democracy.12 Such a view appears to me permissible
only if based on the assumption that a left-wing dictatorship in
1918/19— disregarding for the moment its historical impossibility
— would have made German history less bloody for outsiders in sub­
sequent years. The facts of Nazism provide a powerful moral per­
spective for German history, but it is neither fair to past generations
nor analytically adequate to view this history solely with the ques­
tionable wisdom of hindsight.
When I began my research, my own perspective of the history
of the German labor movement was strongly affected by German
self-recrimination and conventional American perspectives. But
gradually I came to change my views. I tried to arrive at a more
balanced and detached view, influenced by the positivistic injunc­
tions of an American graduate education and perhaps also by the
soothing atmosphere of the Pacific Coast, far removed from Ger­
many in time and space. Looking over the completed study, I find
myself more sympathetic to the right and the center of the Social
Democratic movement than to the left. In fact, a historical day­
dream opposite to the one behind the older literature might emerge
from my own work. If the Empire could have been saved and if a
major conservative and right-wing liberal crisis of legitimacy could
have been averted by establishing parliamentarism within the mon­
archy rather than a democratic republic, neither Communism
nor Nazism might have triumphed. Disregarding many other his­
torical forces and pushing the historical fantasy to its limits, even
the chances for a Second World War and a subsequent Cold War
might have been slimmer. This is the hopeful “right-wing” utopia
— actually voiced in part by British statesmen from Winston
12 Cf. Klaus Epstein’s very perceptive review of the works by Joseph Berlau,
Peter Gay and Carl Schorske in World Politics, XI, 1959, 629-51. Epstein
indicates that American historians find it difficult, given the fortunate history
of the United States, to empathize with a country that seemed to be over­
whelmed with “insoluble” problems. The contemporary plight of France may
create the necessary empathy more easily than Imperial Germany.

Conclusions

325

Churchill to Clement Attlee— 13 which contrasts with the hopeful
“left-wing” utopia of other writers. If this could have been “bought”
with the continued existence of a distasteful Hohenzollern mon­
archy, boisterous Junkers and supercilious civil servants (though
parliamentarism would presumably have mellowed them), it ap­
pears a small historical price.
A skeptic might retort that the heterogeneity of the Empire was
so great that Bismarck’s Germany, unified with “blood and iron,”
could perhaps have been preserved without monarchic constitu­
tionalism only by an extremely nationalist appeal to all strata of
the population. Imperial Germany, he might concede, could have
developed into a parliamentary system, but at the price of intensi­
fied nationalism once again subordinating the working class. Or he
might point out that a successful national unification under a par­
liamentary system in 1848 might have created a nationalist and
expansionist Germany, compared to which the Germany of Bis­
marck’s policies was relatively restrained. In the worst case, the
end effect of such hypothetical developments might have been not
too dissimilar from the Nazi Volksgemeinschaft.
It is indeed not easy to avoid a deterministic view of social
structure and historical legacies, but my study of Imperial Germany
and of her Social Democrats has endeavored to preserve a sense
for the capacity of individuals and groups to change some parts of
their lives as well as for the fateful persistence of social structures
and the unpredictable uniqueness of historical events.
13 See Winston Churchill, The Gathering Storm (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1948), 10 f, and the more indirect remark by Clement Attlee in the House
of Commons on July 9, 1952, quoted in Edward Shils and Michael Young,
“The Meaning of the Coronation,” Sociological Review, I, 1963, 64.

Bibliography

1. Protocols
P rotokoll der Verhandlungen des fünften Kongresses der G ew erk­
schaften Deutschlands, Cologne, 1905 (Berlin: Verlag der General­
kommission, n.d.).
Protokolle über die Verhandlungen des Parteitages der Sozialdem o­
kratischen Partei (Berlin: Vorwärts, 1890-1913).
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Reichstag (Ber­
lin: Norddeutsche Buchdruckerei und Verlagsgesellschaft, 1 8 6 9 1914).
Verhandlungen. Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, vol. 116, 1906.

2.

Autobiographies, Memoirs, Letters, Collected Works
Biographies and Monographs on Major Participants

Adler, Victor, Briefwechsel m it A ugust Bebel und K arl K au tsky, Fried­
rich Adler, ed. (together with Parteivorstand der Sozialistischen
Partei Österreichs) (Vienna: Volksbuchhandlung, 1954).
Auer, Ignaz, N ach zehn Jahren (Nuremberg: Fränkische Verlagsan­
stalt, 1913).
(Bassermann, Em st)
Eschenburg, Theodor, Bassermann und die Blockpolitik, Ph.D .
dissertation, University of Berlin, 1929.
Bebel, August, A u s m einem Leben (Berlin: Dietz, 1946), 3 vols.
Gerlach, Hellmuth von, A ugust Bebel: Ein biographischer Essay
(Munich: Langen, 1909).
Michels, Robert, “August Bebel,” A rchiv für Sozialwissenschaft,
vol. 37, 1913, 6 7 1 -7 0 0 .

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

328

(Bennigsen, Rudolf von)
Oncken, Hermann, R u dolf von Bennigsen: Ein deutscher liber­
aler Politiker, nach seinen Briefen und hinterlassenen Papie­
ren (Stuttgart: D eutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1910).
Berlepsch, Hans Freiherr von, Sozialpolitische Erfahrungen und Erin­
nerungen (M önchengladbach: Volksvereinsverlag, 1925).
Bernstein, Eduard, Sozialdem okratische Lehrjahre (Berlin: Bücher­
kreis, 1928).
Bismarck, Otto von, Bism arck und der Staat: Ausgewählte D okum ente,
H ans Rothfels, ed. (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1953), 2nd ed.
Id., D ie gesam m elten Werke, Gerhard Ritter and Rudolf Stadelmann,
eds. (Berlin: Deutsche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1932), vol. 15.
Id., D ie politischen R eden des Fürsten Bism arck, H . Kohl, ed. (Stutt­
gart: Cotta, 1905), vol. 13.
Id., Gedanken und Erinnerungen (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1921), 3 vols.
Braun, Lily, M em oiren einer Sozialistin (Munich: Langen, 1 909).
Vogelstein, Julie, “Lily Braun: Ein Lebensbild,” in L. Braun,
G esam m elte W erke (Berlin: Klemm, 1923).
Brentano, Lujo, M ein Leben im K a m p f um die soziale Entwicklung
Deutschlands (Jena: Diederichs, 1931).
Barich, Werner, Lujo Brentano als Sozialpolitiker. Ph.D . dis­
sertation, University o f Frankfurt, 1936.
Bröger, Karl, D er H eld im Schatten (Jena: Diederichs, 1930).
Bromme, William, Lebensgeschichte eines m odernen Fabrikarbeiters,
Paul Göhre, ed. (Jena: Diederichs, 1905).
Bülow, Bernhard Fürst von, M em oirs o f Prince von Bülow (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1 9 3 1 /3 2 ).
Bürgel, Bruno, V om A rbeiter zum A stron om (Berlin: Druckhaus Tem ­
pelhof, 1929).
Buttinger, Joseph, In the Twilight o f Socialism (N ew York: Praeger,
1953).
(Delbrück, Hans)
Thimme, Annelise, H ans D elbrück als K ritiker der Wilhelm i­
nischen E poche (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1955).
Ebert, Friedrich, Schriften, Paul Kampffmeyer, ed. (Dresden: Reissner,
1926).
Peters, Max, Friedrich E bert (Berlin: Arani, 1950).
Frank, Ludwig, A u fsätze, Reden und Briefe, Hedwig Wachenheim, ed.
(Berlin: Verlag für Sozialwissenschaft, 1924).
Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst, Fürst Chlodwig zu, D enkwürdigkeiten der

Bibliography

329

Reichskanzler zeit, A. von Müller, ed. (Stuttgart: Deutsche Ver­
lagsanstalt, 1931).
Holek, W enzel, Lebensgang eines H andarbeiters (Jena: Diederichs,
1930).
Id., Vom H andarbeiter zum Jugenderzieher (Jena: Diederichs, 1921).
Holstein, Friedrich von, The H olstein Papers, Norm an Rich and M. H.
Fisher, eds. (London: Cambridge University Press, 1955).
Kardorff, W., W ilhelm von Kardorff, Siegfried von Kardorff, ed. (Ber­
lin: Mittler, 1936).
Kautsky, Karl, Erinnerungen und Erörterungen, Benedikt Kautsky, ed.
(The Hague: Mouton, 1960).
Id., Friedrich Engels Briefwechsel m it K arl K autsky, Benedikt Kaut­
sky, ed. (Vienna: Wiener Volksbuchhandlung, 1955).
Keil, Wilhelm, Erlebnisse eines Sozialdem okraten (Stuttgart: Deutsche
Verlagsanstalt, 1949), 2 vols.
Lassalle, Ferdinand, G esam m elte R eden und Schriften, Eduard Bern­
stein, ed. (Berlin: Cassirer, 1919), vols. 1-3.
Id., Nachgelassene Briefe und Schriften, Gustav Mayer, ed. (Stuttgart:
Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1 921-25), six vols.
Footman, David, Ferdinand Lassalle: R om an tic Revolutionary
(N ew Haven: Yale University Press, 1947).
Lukacs, Georg, “D ie neue Ausgabe von Lassalle Briefen,”
Grünbergs A rch iv für die Geschichte des Sozialismus und
der A rbeiterbewegung, XI, 1925, 414.
Oncken, Hermann, Lassalle (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt,
1920), 3rd ed.
Ramm, Thüo, Ferdinand Lassalle als R echts-und Sozialphilosoph
(Vienna: Westkulturverlag, 1953).
(Liebknecht, Karl)
Meyer, Karl W ., K a rl L iebknecht (Washington: Public Affairs
Press, 1957).
Liebknecht, Wilhelm, K arl M arx (Chicago: Kerr, 1904).
(Lohmann, Theodor)
Rothfels, Hans, Theodor Lohm ann und die KampfJahre der
staatlichen Sozialpolitik (Berlin: Mittler, 1927).
(Luxemburg, Rosa)
Frölich, Paul, R osa Luxem burg (Paris: Editions Nouvelles Intertemationales, 1939).
de Man, Hendrik, G egen den Strom : M em oiren eines europäischen
Sozialisten (Stuttgart: D eutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1953).

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

330

Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels, M arx-Engels Gesam tausgabe, V.
Adoratsky, ed. (Berlin: Marx-Engels Verlag, 1^31), vols. I l l : 3
and III:4 (Correspondence).
Korsch, Karl, K a rl M arx (London: Chapman, 1938).
Mayer, Gustav, Friedrich Engels (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1934),
2 vols.
M einecke, Friedrich, Erinnerungen: 1 9 0 1 -1 9 1 9 (Stuttgart: Koehler,
1949).
(Miquel, Johannes von)
Herzfeld, Hans, Johannes von M iquel (Detm old: Meyer, 1938).
(M ommsen, Theodor)
Heuss, Alfred, T heodor M om m sen und das 19. Jahrhundert
(Kiel: Hirt, 1956).
(Most, Johann)
Nom ad, Max, “Johann Most, Terrorist of the Word,” in id.,
A po stles o f R evolution (Boston: Little, Brown, 1939).
(Naumann, Friedrich)
Heuss, Theodor, Friedrich Naum ann (Stuttgart: D eutsche Ver­
lagsanstalt, 1957).
Nürnberger, Richard, “Imperialismus, Sozialismus und Christen­
tum bei Friedrich Naum ann,” H istorische Zeitschrift, vol.
170, 1950, 5 2 5 -4 8 .
Shanahan, W., “Friedrich Naum ann: A German V iew of
Power and Nationalism ,” in Edward Mead Earle, ed., N a­
tionalism and Internationalism (N ew York: Columbia U ni­
versity Press, 1950), 3 5 2 -9 8 .
Id., “Friedrich Naum ann: A Mirror o f Wilhelmian Germany,”
The R eview of Politics, 13:3, July 1951, 267 -3 0 1 .
Noske, Gustav, Erlebtes aus A u fstieg und N iedergang einer D em o­
kratie (Offenbach: Bollwerk-Verlag, 1947).
Oldenburg-Januschau, Elard von, Erinnerungen (Leipzig: Koehler,
1936).
Popp, Adelheid, Autobiography o f a W orking W oman (London: U n ­
win, 1912).
(Posadowsky-W ehner, Graf von)
Penzler, Johannes, G raf Posadowsky als Finanz-, Sozial-und
H andelspolitiker (Leipzig: Weber, 1 907/8), 2 vols.
Wiese, Leopold von, G raf Posadowsky als Sozialpolitiker
(Cologne: Christlicher Gewerkschaftsverlag, 1909).

Bibliography

331

Scheidemann, Philipp, M em oiren eines Sozialdem okraten (Dresden:
Reissner, 1928).
Scheu, Andreas, Um sturzkeim e: Erlebnisse eines K äm pfers (Vienna:
Wiener Volksbuchhandlung, 1923), 3 vols.
(Schweitzer, Johann Baptist von)
Mayer, Gustav, Johann Baptist von Schw eitzer (Jena: Fischer,
1909).
Sender, Toni, The Autobiography o f a Germ an R ebel (New York:
Vanguard Press, 1939).
Severing, Carl, M ein Lebensw eg (Cologne: Greven, 1950), 2 vols.
Stein, August (pseudonym: Irenaeus), A u fsätze (Frankfurt: Frank­
furter Societätsdruckerei, 1921).
(Stresemann, Gustav)
Miethke, Franz, G ustav Stresemann als W irtschaftspolitiker
(Dresden: Sächische Verlagsanstalt, 1919).
(Stumm-Halberg, C. F.)
Hellwig, Fritz, Carl Ferdinand Freiherr von Stum m -H alberg
(Heidelberg: Westmarck Verlag, 1936).
Vahlteich, Julius, Ferdinand Lassalle und die A nfänge der deutschen
Arbeiterbewegung (Munich: Birk, n.d., ca. 1902/3).
(Max Weber)
Bendix, Reinhard, M ax Weber: A n Intellectual Portrait (Garden
City: Doubleday, 1960).
Bergsträsser, Arnold, “Max Webers Antrittsvorlesung in zeit­
geschichtlicher Perspektive,” Vierteljahrshefte für Z eitge­
schichte, V :3, 1957, 2 0 9 -1 9 .
Mommsen, W olfgang, M ax W eber und die deutsche Politik.
1 8 9 0 -1 9 2 0 (Tübingen: Mohr, 1959).
Winnig, August, D as Reich als Republik (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1928).
Wolff, Theodor, Through Two D ecades (London: Heinemann, 1936).

3. Contemporary Academie and Political Literature 1848-1918
Anonymous, “Parteibetrachtungen eines Frontsoldaten,” D er K am pf,
vol. 10, 1917, 163-66.
Bauer, Otto, “D ie Geschichte eines Buches,” N eu e Z eit, vol. 26:1,
1908, 2 3 -3 3 .
Bebel, August, A kadem iker und Sozialismus (Berlin: Verlag Sozial­
istische Monatshefte, 1906), 2nd ed.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

332

Id., D ie Frau und der Sozialismus (Stuttgart: Dietz, 1910), 50th ed.
Bernstein, Eduard, D ie Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die A u f­
gaben der Sozialdem okratie (Stuttgart: Dietz, 1909); English edi­
tion: Evolutionary Socialism (N ew York: Huebsch, 1909).
Id., Geschichte der Berliner A rbeiterbew egung (Berlin: Vorwärts,
1907), 3 vols.
Id., “Von der Sekte zur Partei,” Z eitschrift für Politik, vol. 3, 1910,
4 9 8 -5 5 1 .
Blank, R., “D ie soziale Zusammensetzung der sozialdemokratischen
Wählerschaft Deutschlands,” A rch iv für Sozialwissenschaft, vol.
20, 1905, 5 0 7 -5 0 .
Brandt, Alexander von, Z ur sozialen Entwicklung im Saargebiet (Leip­
zig: Duncker, 1904).
Braun, Adolf, “Bildungsprobleme in der Arbeiterbewegung,” D er
K am pf, vol. 8, 1915, 2 4 0 -5 0 .
Id., “Die Intellektuellen und die Politik,” N eu e Z eit, 27:2, 1909,
8 4 7 -5 3 .
Id., “Realismus und Utopism us in den G ewerkschaften,” D er K am pf,
vol. 8, 1915, 4 2 -4 7 .
Brentano, Lujo, “Arbeitseinstellungen und die Fortbildung des Ar­
beitsvertrags,” Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, vol. 47,
1890, 1 19-30.
Brunhuber, Robert, D ie heutige Sozialdem okratie (Jena: Fischer, 1906).
Calwer, Richard, “Englands Absichten und die deutsche Sozialdemo­
kratie,” Sozialistische M onatshefte, XI, 1905, 9 1 9 -2 2 .
Daniels, Emil, “Ein vergessenes Dokum ent zur Geschichte der Frei­
heitskriege,” Preussische Jahrbücher, vol. 144, 1911. 25 6 -6 4 .
Danneberg, Robert, “D ie Ergebnisse sozialdemokratischer Bildungsar­
beit,” D er K am pf, vol. 8, 1915, 27 2 -8 9 .
David, Eduard, “D ie Eroberung der politischen M acht,” Sozialistische
M onatshefte, X , 1904, 9 -1 8 .
Id., D ie Sozialdem okratie im W eltkriege (Berlin: Vorwärts, 1915).
D eutsche Industriezeitung, 1871, 1877, published by the Chambers of
Commerce in Chemnitz, Dresden, Plauen and Zittau.
Dühring, Eugen, Cursus der National- und Socialökonom ie (Berlin:
Grieben, 1873).
Id., Kritische Geschichte der N ationalökonom ie und des Sozialismus
(Leipzig: Naum ann, 1900), 4th rev. ed.
Engels, Friedrich, Anti-Dühring. Special volume of the Marx-Engels G esam tausgabe (M oscow: Marx-Engels Verlag, 1935).

Bibliography

333

Erdmann, August, D ie Sozialdem okratie im Urteile ihrer Gegner
(Berlin: Vorwärts, 1911).
Freese, Heinrich, D ie konstitutionelle Fabrik (Jena: Fischer, 1922).
Id., “Empfindsame Sozialpolitik,” Preussische Jahrbücher, vol. 85,
1896, 135-48 and 3 7 9 -8 1 .
Geithner, Otto, “Zur Taktik der Sozialdemokratie,” N eue Z eit, 23:2,
1905, 6 5 6 -6 2 .
Göhre, Paul, D rei M onate Fabrikarbeiter (Leipzig: Grunow, 1891).
Günther, Adolf, D ie W ohlfahrtseinrichtungen der A rbeitgeber. Schriften
des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, vols. 1 1 2-14, 1905.
Hänisch, Konrad, D ie deutsche Sozialdem okratie in und nach dem
W eltkriege (Berlin: Schwetschke, 1916).
H aym , Rudolf, D ie deutsche Nationalversam m lung: Ein Bericht aus
der Partei des rechten Zentrum s (Frankfurt: Jügel, 1849), 2 vols.
Held, A dolf, D ie deutsche Arbeiterpresse der G egenw art (Leipzig:
Duncker, 1873).
Hellpach, Wilhelm, N ervenleben und Weltanschauung (Wiesbaden:
Bergmann, 1906).
Herkner, Heinrich, D ie Arbeiterfrage (Berlin: Guttentag, 1908), 5th ed.
Hintze, Otto, “D as monarchische Prinzip und die konstitutionelle
Verfassung,” Preussische Jahrbücher, vol. 144, 1911, 38 1 -4 1 2 .
Lenin, V. I., Extracts and M arginal N otes on H e g e ls Science o f Logic
(M oscow: Marx-Engels Institute, 1932).
Liebknecht, Wilhelm, ed., D er H ochverratsprozess w ider L iebknecht,
Bebel, H epner (Berlin: Vorwärts, 1894).
Id., Wissen ist M acht— M acht ist Wissen (Leipzig: Genossenschafts­
buchdruckerei, 187 3 ).
Marx, Karl, Capital (New York: The Modern Library, 1936).
Id. and Friedrich Engels, Basic Writings on P olitics and Philosophy,
Lewis S. Feuer, ed. (Garden City: Doubleday, 1959).
Mehring, Franz, D ie Sozialdem okratie (Bremen: Schünemann, 1878)
2nd ed.
Michels, Robert, “D ie deutsche Sozialdemokratie im internationalen
Verbände,” A rch iv für Sozialwissenschaft, vol. 25, 1907, pp. 1 4 8 231.
Id., Soziologie des Parteiwesens (Stuttgart: Kroner, 1957); English edi­
tion: Political Parties (N ew York: Collier, 1962).
Müller, Hans, D er K lassenkam pf in der deutschen Sozialdem okratie
(Zürich: Verlags-Magazin, 1892).

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

334

Naumann, Friedrich, D em okratie und K aisertum (Berlin: H ilfe, 1900).
Id., D ie politischen Parteien (Berlin: H ilfe, 1910).
Ostrogorski, M., D em ocracy and the Organization o f Political Parties
(London. Macmillan, 1902).
Pareto, Vilfredo, The M in d and Society, Arthur Livingston, ed. (New
York: Harcourt, Brace, 1935), 4 vols. This is the translation o f the
Trattato di sociologia generale, first published in 1916.
Post, Julius and H. Albrecht, M usterstätten persönlicher Fürsorge von
Arbeitgebern für ihre Geschäftsangehörigen (Berlin: Oppenheim,
1893), 2 vols.
Richter, Eugen, Sozialdem okratische Zukunftsbilder, frei nach Bebel
(Berlin: Verlag Forschritt, 1893).
Riehl, W ilhelm, D ie bürgerliche Gesellschaft (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1930),
first published in 1851.
Riesser, J., D er H ansabund (Jena: Diederichs, 1912).
Rösicke, Richard, “Über das Verhältnis der Arbeitgeber zu ihren Ar­
beitnehmern,” Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung, vol. 7. 1893, 1-22.
Russell, Bertrand, Germ an Social D em ocracy (London: Longmans,
Green, 1896).
Schäffie, Albert, The Quintessence o f Socialism (London: Sonnen­
schein, 1896).
Schmoller, Gustav von, “D er Weltkrieg und die deutsche Sozialdemo­
kratie,” Schm ollers Jahrbuch, vol. 39, 1915, 1-12.
Id., “D ie englische Gewerkvereinsentwickelung im Lichte der Webbschen Darstellung,” Schm ollers Jahrbuch, vol. 25, 1901, 291 -3 1 4 .
Id., Z ur Sozial-und G ew erbepolitik der G egenw art (Leipzig: Duncker,
1890).
Id., Z w anzig Jahre deutscher Politik: 1 8 9 7 -1 9 1 7 (Munich: Duncker,
1920).
Schröder, Wilhelm, Geschichte der sozialdem okratischen Parteiorganisation in Deutschland (Dresden: Kaden, 1912).
Schücking, Lothar, D ie Reaktion in der inneren Verwaltung Preussens
(Berlin: H ilfe, 1908).
Schuster, Richard, D ie Social-D em okratie, nach ihrem Wessen und
ihrer A gitation quellenm ässig dargestellt (Stuttgart: Steinkopf,
1875).
Stein, Lorenz von, Geschichte der sozialen Bewegung in Frankreich
von 1789 bis auf unsere Tage (Darmstadt: W issenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, 1959), 3 vols., first published in 1848-50.

Bibliography

335

Ströbel, Heinrich, “Gewerkschaften und ‘sozialistischer G eist,’ ” N eue
Z eit, 23:2, 1905, 5 6 1 -6 9 .
Thimme, Friedrich and Carl Legien, eds., D ie A rbeiterschaft im neuen
D eutschland (Leipzig: Hirzel, 1915).
Tocqueville, Alexis, The O ld R egim e and the French R evolution (Gar­
den City: Doubleday, 1955), first published in 1856.
Treitschke, Heinrich von, “D er Sozialismus und seine G önner,” Preussiche Jahrbücher, vol. 34, 1874, 6 7 -1 1 0 (also published by Reimer,
Berlin, 1875).
Vorster, Julius, “D ie Sozialpolitik des Herrn Heinrich Freese in Ber­
lin,” Preussische Jahrbücher, vol. 85, 1896, 3 7 1 -7 9 .
Weber, Max, “Parlament und Regierung im neugeordneten Deutsch­
land,” G esam m elte politische Schriften, Johannes Winckelmann,
ed. (Tübingen: Mohr, 1958), 2nd ed., 2 9 4 -4 3 1 , written in
1 9 1 7 /1 8.
Id., Remarks on Blank, op. cit., A rchiv für Sozialwissenscraft, vol. 20,
1905, 5 5 0 -5 3 .
Id., W irtschaft und Gesellschaft, Johannes W inckelmann, ed. (Tübin­
gen: Mohr, 1956), 4th ed.
Id., The M ethodology o f M ax Weber, E. A. Shils and H. A. Finch, eds.
and transi. (Glencoe: Free Press, 1949).

4. Post-1918 Literature on the Labor Movement and Socialism
Anderson, Evelyn, H am m er or A n vil (London: G ollancz, 1945).
Baiser, Frolinde, Sozial-D em okratie 1 8 4 8 /4 9 -1 8 6 3 (Stuttgart: Klett,
1962), 2 vols.
Berlau, A. J., The Germ an Social D em ocratic Party: 1914-1921 (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1949).
Brandis, Kurt, D ie deutsche Sozialdem okratie bis zum Fall des Sozia­
listengesetzes (Leipzig: Hirschfeld, 1931).
Drahn, Em st, “Sozialdemokratie,” H andwörterbuch der Staatswissen­
schaften, vol. 7, 1926.
Drexel, E., “The Communist Presence in France,” Am erican Political
Science R eview , L :2, 1956, 3 2 1 -3 8 .
Epstein, Klaus, “Three American Studies of German Socialism ,” W orld
Politics, XI: 4, 1959, 6 2 9 -5 1 .

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

336

Flechtheim , Ossip, D ie K P D in der W eim arer Republik (Offenbach:
Drott, 1948).
Freemantle, Anne, This L ittle Band of Prophets: The British Fabians
(N ew York: Mentor Book, 1960).
Gay, Peter, The D ilem m a o f D em ocratic Socialism: Eduard Bern­
stein's Challenge to M arx (New York: Columbia University Press,
1952).
Goldenberg, Boris, Beiträge zu r Soziologie der deutschen Vorkriegs­
sozialdem okratie, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Heidelberg,
1932.
Heidegger, H ., D ie deutsche Sozialdem okratie und der nationale Staat:
1 8 7 9 -1 9 2 0 (Göttingen: Musterschmitt, 1956).
Hilferding, Rudolf (pseudonym: Richard Kern), “Revolutionärer So­
zialismus,” Z eitschrift für Sozialismus, 1:5, 1935, 145-52.
Huhn, Willy, “Etatismus, ‘Kriegssozialismus’, ‘Nationalsozialism us’ in
der Literatur der deutschen Sozialdemokratie,” Aufklärung, 11:3,
1952, 1 6 2 -7 9 and 11:4, 2 6 4 -8 8 .
Kampffmeyer, Paul and Bruno Altmann, V or dem Sozialistengesetz
(Berlin: Der Bücherkreis, 1928).
Kantorowicz, Ludwig, D ie sozialdem okratische Presse Deutschlands
(Tübingen: Mohr, 1922).
Kautsky, Karl, “Natur und G esellschaft,” Gesellschaft, 1929:2, 4 8 1 505.
K och, Max, D ie Bergarbeiterbewegung im Ruhrgebiet zu r Z eit W ilhelm s
II: 1 8 8 9 -1 9 1 4 (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1954).
Korn, Karl, D ie Arbeiterjugendbew egung (Berlin: Arbeiterjugend-Ver­
lag, 1922).
Korsch, Karl, M arxism us und Philosophie (Leipzig: Hirschfeld, 1930).
Landauer, Carl, European Socialism (Berkeley and Los Angeles: U ni­
versity o f California Press, 1959) 2 vols.
Laub-Coser, Rose, A n A nalysis of the Early Germ an Socialist M ove­
m ent, M.A. thesis, Columbia University, 1951.
Maehl, William, “Recent Literature on the German Socialists, 1891—
1932,” The Journal o f M odern H istory, X X X IIL 3, 1961, 2 9 2 -3 0 6 .
Id., “The Triumph o f Nationalism in the German Socialist Party on the
Eve o f the First World War,” The Journal of M odern H istory,
X X IV , 1952, 15-41.
de Man, Hendrik, The Psychology o f Socialism (N ew York: Holt,
1927).
Marks, Harry J., “The Sources of Reformism in the Social Dem ocratic

Bibliography

337

Party o f Germany, 1 8 9 0 -1 9 1 4 ,” The Journal o f M odern H istory,
X I:3 , 1939, 3 3 4 -5 6 .
Matthias, Erich, “Kautsky und der Kautskyanismus: D ie Funktion der
Ideologie in der deutschen Sozialdemokratie vor dem ersten Welt­
krieg,” in Iring Fetscher, ed., M arxism usstudien (Tübingen:
Mohr, 1957), vol. II, 151-97.
Mayer, Gustav, “D er Allgem eine Deutsche Arbeiterverein und die
Krisis 1866 " A rch iv für Sozialwissenschaft, vol. 57, 1927, 167-75.
Id., “D ie Trennung der proletarischen von der bürgerlichen D em o­
kratie,” Grünbergs A rchiv, II, 1912, 1-67.
Neufeld, M. E., Italy: School for A w akening Countries. The Italian
Labor M ovem en t in Its Political, Social, and E conom ic Setting
from 1800 to 1960 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1961).
Popp, Adelheid, Der W eg zur H öhe (Vienna: Frauenzentralkomitee
der Sozialdemokratischen Arbeiterpartei Deutschösterreichs,
1929) .
Posse, Em st, D er M arxism us in Frankreich 1 8 7 1 -1 9 0 5 (Berlin: Prager,
1930) .
Prager, Eugen, G eschichte der USPD (Berlin: Freiheit, 1921).
Pribram, Karl, “Deutscher Nationalismus und deutscher Sozialismus,”
A rchiv für Sozialwissenschaft, vol. 49, 1922, 2 9 8-376.
Ritter, Gerhard A ., D ie Arbeiterbew egung im W ilhelminischen Reich:
1 8 9 0 -1 9 0 0 (Berlin: Colloquiumverlag, 1959).
Rosenberg, Arthur, A H istory o f Bolshevism: From M arx to the First
Five Years’ Plan (London: Oxford University Press, 1934).
Schorske, Carl E., Germ an Social D em ocracy 1 9 0 5-1917: The D evel­
opm ent o f the G reat Schism (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1955).
Schumpeter, Joseph, Capitalism , Socialism and D em ocracy (N ew York:
Harper, 1947) 2nd ed.
Shuchman, Abraham, Codeterm ination: L abor’s M iddle W ay in G er­
many (Washington: Public Affairs Press, 1957).
Sloan, Henry S., The Germ an Social D em ocrats in the R eichstag Elections o f 1912, M .A. thesis, N ew York University, 1952.
Sombart, Werner, D er proletarische Sozialism us (Jena: Fischer, 1924),
10th ed., 2 vols.
Varein, H einz Josef, Freie G ew erkschaften, S ozialdem okratie und
Staat: D ie Politik der Generalkom m ission unter der Führung Carl
Legiens: 1 8 9 0 -1 9 2 0 (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1 956).
Wagner, Richard, Geschichte der K leiderarbeiter in Österreich im 19.

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

338

Jahrhundert und im ersten Viertel des 20. Jahrhunderts (Vienna:
Gewerkschaft der Kleiderarbeiter Österreich, 1930).
Wolff, Hertha, D ie Stellung der Sozialdem okratie zur deutschen A r­
beiterversicherungsgesetzgebung von ihrer Entstehung bis zur
Reichsversicherungsordnung, Ph.D . dissertation, University of
Freiberg, 1933.

5. Background Literature on the Period 1848-1918
Anderson, Eugene N ., The Social and Political Conflict in Prussia:
1 8 5 8 -1 8 6 4 (Lincoln: The University of Nebraska, 1954).
Bergstrasser, Ludwig, Geschichte der politischen Parteien in D eutsch­
land (Munich: Isar Verlag, 1955).
Boberach, Heinz, W ahlrechtsfragen im V orm ärz. D ie W ahlrechtsan­
schauung im Rheinland 1 8 1 5 -1 8 4 9 und die Entstehung des D rei­
klassenwahlrechts (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1959).
Boese, Franz, Geschichte des Vereins für Sozialpolitik: 1872-1 9 3 9 .
Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, vol. 188, 1939.
Briggs, Asa, “The Language of ‘Class’ in Early Nineteenth-Century
England,” in id., ed., Essays in Labor H istory in M em ory of
G . D . H. Cole (London: M acmillan, 1960), 4 3 -7 3 .
Id., Victorian P eople (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1955).
Churchill, W inston, The Gathering Storm (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1948).
Clapham, J. H., The E conom ic D evelopm en t of France and Germ any:
1 8 1 5 -1 9 1 4 (London: Cambridge University Press, 1936).
Craig, Gordon A ., The Politics o f the Prussian A rm y: 1 6 4 0 -1 9 4 5
(N ew York: Oxford University Press, 1956).
Darmstaedter, F., G erm any and Europe: Political Tendencies from
Frederick the G reat to H itler (London: Methuen, 1945).
Decker, Georg, “Krise des deutschen Parteisystems,” Gesellschaft,
1926:1, 1-16.
Dem eter, Karl, D as deutsche Offizierskorps in seinen historisch-sozio­
logischen Grundlagen (Berlin: Hobbing, 1930).
Id., “D ie soziale Schichtung des Deutschen Parlamentes seit 1848, ein
Spiegelbild der Strukturwandlung des V olkes,” Vierteljahrschrift
für Sozial-und W irtschaftsgeschichte, vol. 39:1, 1-29.
Dietzel, Hans, D ie preussischen W ahlreform bestrebungen von der

Bibliography

339

Oktroyierung des D reiklassenwahlrechts bis zum Beginn des W elt­
krieges, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Cologne, 1934.
Gagel, Walter, D ie Wahlrechtsfrage in der G eschichte der deutschen
liberalen Parteien: 1848—1918 (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1958).
Gerschenkron, Alexander, Bread and D em ocracy in G erm any (Berke­
ley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1943).
Gollwitzer, H., “D er Cäsarismus Napoleons III. im Widerhall der
öffentlichen Meinung Deutschlands,” H istorische Z eitschrift, vol.
173, 1952, 2 3 -7 5 .
G ooch, G. P., G erm any and the French R evolution (London: Long­
mans, 1920).
Gulick, Charles A., A ustria from H absburg to H itler (Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University o f California Press, 1949), 2 vols.
Hallgarten, G. W. F., Im perialism us vor 1914 (Munich: Beck, 1951),
2 vols.
Heffter, H ., D ie deutsche Selbstverwaltung im 19. Jahrhundert (Stutt­
gart: Koehler, 1950).
Herzfeld, Hans, “Berlin als Kaiserstadt und Reichshauptstadt, 1871—
1945,” Jahrbuch für die Geschichte des deutschen Ostens, vol. I,
1952, 141-70.
Holborn, Hajo, “Der deutsche Idealismus in sozialgeschichtlicher Be­
leuchtung,” H istorische Zeitschrift, vol. 174, 1952, 35 9 -8 4 .
Horkheimer, Max, “D ie Philosophie der absoluten Konzentration,”
Z eitschrift für Sozialforschung, VII, 1938, 37 6 -8 7 .
Hughes, H. Stuart, Consciousness and Society: The Reorientation o f
European Social Thought: 1 8 9 0 -1 9 3 0 (N ew York: Knopf, 1958).
Kehr, Eckart, “Das soziale System der Reaktion unter dem Ministerium
Puttkamer,” Gesellschaft, 1929:2, 2 5 3 -7 4 .
Id., Schlachtflottenbau und Parteipolitik: 1894-1901 (Berlin: Ebering,
1930).
Ir., “Zur Genesis des Kgl. preussischen Reserveoffiziers,” Gesellschaft,
1928:2, 4 9 2 -5 0 2 .
Klass, Gert von, K rupps: The Story o f an Industrial Em pire (London:
Sidgwick and Jackson, 1954).
Knoll, Joachim, Führungsauslese in Liberalism us und D em okratie
(Stuttgart: Schwab, 1957).
Kruck, Alfred, G eschichte des alldeutschen Verbandes: 1 8 9 0 -1 9 3 9
(Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1954).
Kupisch, Karl, Vom Pietism us zum Kom m unism us (Berlin: Lettner,
1953).

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

340

Langsam, Walter Consuelo, “Nationalism and History in the Prussian
Elementary Schools under William II,” in Edward Mead Earle,
ed., Nationalism and Internationalism (New York: Columbia U ni­
versity Press, 1950), 2 4 1 -2 6 0 .
Märcker, Georg, V om Kaiserheer zur Reichswehr (Leipzig: Koehler,
1 9 2 1 >.

Marcuse, Herbert, “Über den affirmativen Charakter der Kultur,”
Z eitschrift für Sozialforschung, VI, 1937, 5 4 -9 4 .
Massing, Paul W., Rehearsal fo r D estruction: A Study o f Political A n tiSem itism in Im perial G erm any (N ew York: Harper, 1949).
M ommsen, W ilhelm, Stein, R anke, Bism arck: Ein Beitrag zu r poli­
tischen und sozialen Bewegung des 19. Jahrhunderts (Munich:
Bruckmann, 1954).
N icolai, W ., Nachrichtendienst, Presse und Volksstim m ung im W elt­
krieg (Berlin: Mittler, 1920).
Pack, W olfgang, D as parlam entarische Ringen um das Sozialistengesetz
Bism arcks 1 8 7 8 -1 8 9 0 (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1961).
Pinson, Koppel S., M odern G erm any, Its H istory and Civilization (N ew
York: M acmillan, 1954).
Poschinger, H . R. von, Fürst Bism arck und die Parlam entarier (Ber­
lin: Trewendt, 1894).
Reinhardt, Kurt F., G erm any: 2,000 Years (N ew York: Ungar, 1961),
vol. II.
Ritter, Emil, D ie katholisch-soziale Bewegung D eutschlands im neun­
zehnten Jahrhundert und der Volksverein (Cologne: Bachem,
1954.)
Ritter, Gerhard, D er Schließenplan: K ritik eines M yth os (Munich:
Oldenbourg, 1956).
Id., Staatskunst und Kriegshandwerk: D as P roblem des *M ilitarism u s
in Deutschland (Munich: Oldenbourg, 1954).
Rosenberg, Arthur, The Birth o f the Germ an R epublic: 1 8 7 1 -1 9 1 8
(London: Oxford University Press, 1931).
Rosenberg, Hans, Bureaucracy, A ristocracy and A utocracy: The Prus­
sian Experience (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1958).
Saitschick, Robert, Bism arck und das Schicksal des deutschen V olkes
(Basel: Reinhardt, 1949).
Samuel, R. H. and R. H. Thomas, Education and Society in M odern
G erm any (London: Routledge, 1949).
Sartorius von Waltershausen, A ., D eutsche Wirtschaftsgeschichte:
1 8 1 5 -1 9 1 4 (Jena: Fischer, 1 9 3 2 ), 2nd ed.

Bibliography

341

Schilfert, Gerhard, Sieg und N iederlage des dem okratischen Wahlrechts in der deutschen R evolution 1 8 4 8 -1 8 4 9 (Berlin: Ruetten,
1952).
Schwenger, Rudolf, D ie betriebliche Sozialpolitik in der westdeutschen
Grosseissenindustrie. Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, vol.
186, 1934.
Shanahan, William O., Germ an Protestants Face the Social Question:
The Conservative Phase: 1815-1871 (University of Notre Dam e
Press, 1954), vol. I.
Simon, Walter, The Failure o f the Prussian R eform M ovem ent: 1807—
1819 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1955).
Stern, Alfred, D er Einfluss der Französischen R evolution auf das
deutsche Geistesleben (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1928).
Sternheim, Andries, “Zum Problem der Freizeitgestaltung,” Z eitschrift
für Sozialforschung, I, 1932, 33 6 -5 5 .
Stolper, Gustav, Germ an Econom y: 1870-1 9 4 0 : Issues and Trends
(N ew York: Reynal & Hitchcock, 1940).
Tönnies, Ferdinand, K ritik der öffentlichen M einung (Berlin: Springer,
192 2 ).
Treue, Wilhelm, D ie deutsche Landw irtschaft zu r Z eit Caprivis und ihr
K a m p f gegen die Handelsverträge, Ph.D . dissertation, University
o f Berlin, 1933.
Volkmann, Erich Otto, D er M arxism us und das deutsche H eer im
W eltkriege (Berlin: Hobbing, 1925).
Werner, Lothar, D er A lldeutsche Verband: 1 8 9 0 -1 9 1 8 (Berlin: Eber­
ing, 1935).

6. Literature on Industrialization, Bureaucratization
and Democratization
Almond, Gabriel and J. S. Coleman, eds., The P olitics o f the D evelop­
ing A reas (Princeton University Press, 1960).
Baldwin, James, N o tes o f a N a tive Son (Boston: Beacon Press, 1955).
Bendix, Reinhard, H igher C ivil Servants in Am erican Society (Boulder:
University o f Colorado Press, 1949).
Id., “Industrialization, Ideologies, and Social Structure,” Am erican So­
ciological R eview , 24:5, Oct. 1959, 6 1 3 -2 3 .

The Social Democrats in Imperial Germany

342

Id., “Social Stratification and the Political Community,” A rchives
Européennes de Sociologie, I, 1960, 181-210.
Id., “The Lower Classes in the A ge of Dem ocratic Revolution,” Indus­
trial Relations, 1:1, Oct. 1961, 9 1 -1 1 6 .
Id., W ork and A u th o rity: Ideologies o f M anagem ent in the Course of
Industrialization (N ew York: Wiley, 1956).
Blumer, Herbert, “Early Industrialization and the Laboring Class,” The
Sociological Quarterly, 1:1, Jan. 1960, 5 -1 4 .
Dahrendorf, Ralf, Class and Class Conflict in Industrial Society (Stan­
ford University Press, 1959).
Friedrich, Carl, Constitutional G overnm ent and D em ocracy (Boston:
Little, Brown, 1941).
Gouldner, Alvin, “Metaphysical Pathos and the Theory of Bureauc­
racy,” A m erican Political Science R eview , vol. 49, 1955, 4 9 6 -5 0 7 .
Gulick, Charles A . and Melvin Bers, “Insight and Illusion in Perl­
man’s Theory o f the Labor M ovem ent,” Industrial and L abor
R elations R eview , X I:4, 1943, 5 1 0 -3 1 .
Kerr, Clark, Frederick H. Harbison, John T. Dunlop arid Charles A .
Myers, Industrialism and Industrial M an (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1960).
Id. et al., “The Labour Problem in Econom ic Developm ent,” Inter­
national Labour R eview , L X X L 3, March 1955, 1-15.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, Political M an: The Social Bases o f Politics
(Garden City: Doubleday, 1960).
Id., “Political Sociology,” in R. Merton et a l, eds., Sociology Today
(N ew York: Basic Books, 1959), 8 1 -114.
Id., Martin Trow, James Coleman, Union D em ocracy (G lencoe: Free
Press, 1956).
Id. and Reinhard Bendix, Social M obility in Industrial Society (Berke­
ley and Los Angeles: University o f California Press, 1959).
Lorwin, Val, “Working-Class Politics and Econom ic Developm ent in
Western Europe,” Am erican H istorical R eview , L X IIL 2, 1958,
3 3 8 -5 1 .
Mannheim, Karl, Ideology and Utopia (N ew York: Harcourt, Brace
Harvest Books, n.d.).
Marshall, T. H ., “The Nature of Class Conflict,” in R. Bendix and
S. M. Lipset, eds., Class, Status, P ow er (Glencoe: Free Press,
1953), 8 1 -8 7 .
Palmer, R. R., The A g e o f D em ocratic R evolution (Princeton U ni­
versity Press, 1959).

Bibliography

343

Pirker, Theo., et al., A rbeiter, M anagem ent, M itbestim m ung (Stutt­
gart: Ring-Verlag, 1954).
Rimlinger, Gaston, “The Legitimation of Protest: A Comparative Study
in Labor H istory,” Com parative Studies in Society and H istory,
11:3, April 1960, 3 2 9 -4 3 .
Rostow, W. W., The Stages o f E conom ic G rowth: A N on-C om m unist
M anifesto (Cambridge University Press, 1960).
Schlesinger, A. M., Jr., “Sources of the N ew Deal: Reflections on the
Temper o f a Tim e,” Colum bia U niversity Forum, II, Fall 1959.
Sheppard, H. L., “Approaches to Conflict in American Industrial Soci­
ology,” British Journal o f Sociology, V :4, 1954, 32 4 -4 1 .
Selznick, Philip, Leadership in Adm inistration (Evanston: Row, Peter­
son, 1957).
Talmon, J. L., The Origins o f Totalitarian D em ocracy (N ew York:
Praeger, 1960).
Ulam, Adam, The Unfinished Revolution (New York: Random House,
1960).
Yinger, Milton, “Contraculture and Subculture,” A m erican Socio­
logical R eview , 25:5, Oct. 1960, 6 2 5 -3 5 .

Index o f Names

Ackermann, Karl, 274
Adenauer, Konrad, 318n
Adler, Friedrich, 186n
Adler, Victor, 186n
Albrecht, Heinrich, 146n
Alm ond, Gabriel, 4n
Altmann, Bruno, 53n, 76n
Applegarth, Robert, 3 ln
Arnim, Harry Graf von, 87n
Attlee, Clement, 325
Auer, Ignaz, 56, 186n, 191, 209f
Baldwin, James, 227n
Baiser, Frolinde, 20n
Bamberger, Ludwig, 55, 74, 93,
139
Barich, Werner, 137n
Barth, Theodor, 151, 157
Bassermann, Ernest, 125, 146
Bauer, Edgar, 100
Bauer, Otto, 199ff, 242n
Bebel, August, 41, 46n, 48n, 4 9 53, 93, 116f, 119-34, 158, 168,
171 f, 175-78, 18 Iff, 186ff, 191,
194f, 198f, 210, 217, 226, 228,
235ff, 240, 242, 253n, 255, 259,
273, 276, 2 8 0 -8 3 , 288n, 292,
299, 318

Becker, Bernhard, 76
Bellamy, Edward, 237
Bendix, Reinhard, 6f, 9n, 12n, 62n,
195n, 258n
Bennigsen, Rudolf von, 146
Bergstraesser, Arnold, 147n
Bergsträsser, Ludwig, 286n
Berlau, Abraham Joseph, 287n,
324n
Berlepsch, Hans Freiherr von, 80n,
142n
Bernstein, Eduard, 37n, 42n, 53n,
55ff, 160, 175-83, 186n, 188n,
191, 233, 242n, 262f, 276, 281,
2 9 2 ,3 1 8
Bers, Melvin, 179n
Bethmann-Hollweg, Theobald von,
66n, 288
Bismarck, 22f, 34ff, 45n, 53f, 59f,
6 3 -8 4 , 86f, 91, 97ff, 109, 113f,
123, 141, 144f, 156n, 169, 172,
214, 21 6 -1 9 , 294, 300ff, 307,
313ff, 319, 325
Blanc, Louis, 173f, 233
Blank, R., 253n, 274n
Blumer, Herbert, 5n
Boberach, Heinz, 30n
Boese, Franz, 137n

Index of Names
Bölsche, Wilhelm, 227
Bömelburg, Theodor, 278n, 281
Börne, Ludwig, 234
Bracke, W ilhelm, 175f
Brandis, Kurt, 52n, 58, 180n
Brandt, Alexander von, 146n
Braun, Adolf, 186n, 212, 220, 229,
2 3 I n , 240, 258n, 270f
Braun, Lily, 265n
Brentano, Lujo, 137, 141ff
Briggs, Asa, 3 In
Bröger, Karl, 204, 217
Bromme, William, 205f, 2 0 8 ,2 1 5n,
217n, 234f, 264n
Broom, Leonard, 257n
Brunhuber, Robert, 2 8 In
Büchner, Georg, 43n
Büchner, Louis, 43n
Buckle, Henry Thomas, 213
Bueck, Henry Axel, 143
Bülow, Bernhard Fürst von, 66n,
7 5 ,1 0 6 , 113, 1 1 6 ,1 1 9 - 2 6 ,131n,
152, 156, 285, 288
Burckhardt, Jacob, 320
Bürgel, Bruno, 196n, 198, 233f,
242n
Buttinger, Joseph, 200, 204, 2 0 8 11, 232n, 238n
Calwer, Richard, 132
Caprivi, Leo Graf von, 66n, 8 If,
117, 150, 219n
Carnot, Marie François, 8 If
Churchill, W inston, 325
Clapham, Sir John Harold, 163n
Coleman, James S., 4n
Conze, Werner, 249n, 2 5 In
Coser, Lewis, 14n
Craig, Gordon A ., 18n

346
Dahrendorf, Ralf, 14n
Daniels, Emil, 17n
Danneberg, Robert, 2 3 In, 240ff,
270f
Darmstaedter, Friedrich, 240n
David, Eduard, 195n, 280, 289
Decker, Georg, 260n
Delbrück, Hans, 146f
Dem eter, Karl, 29n, 145n
Dietz, Heinrich, 178, 186
Dietzel, Hans, 3On
Douglas, H ugo von, 80n
Drahn, Ernst, 287n
Drews, Wilhelm, 68n, 297f
Dühring, Eugen, 173-78, 245n
Dunlop, John T., 4n
Ebert, Friedrich, 134, 186n, 229ff,
260n, 266, 287, 292n, 294, 323
Elm, A dolf von, 134n
Engels, 20n, 42, 50n, 52ff, 57n,
125, 166, 172-83, 187-90, 233,
235, 239
Epstein, Klaus, 324n
Erdmann, August, 153n, 157n
Eschenburg, Theodor, 146n
Eulenburg, Botho Graf zu, 82
Eulenburg, Friedrich Graf zu, 82n,
107-10
Eulenburg, Philip Graf zu, 80n,
82n, 1 14n, 115f
Feilitzsch, Max Freiherr von, 111
Ferdinand II, 286n
Ferri, Enrico, 186n
Fetscher, Iring, 189
Feuer, Lewis, 58n
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 17
Finch, Henry A ., 312n
Fisher, M. H., 80n

347

Index of Names
Flechtheim, Ossip, 292f
Footman, David, 43n
Försterling, Emil, 47n, 128
Frank, Ludwig, 153n, 194, 265,
276
Frederick III, 24, 75, 217f
Frederick William, the Great Elec­
tor, 286n
Frederick William IV, 21, 63
Freese, Heinrich, 147f
Fremantle, Anne, 248n, 313n
Friedrich, Carl, 274
Fritzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 41,
175f, 222
Frohme, Karl, 130f, 223, 225
Frölich, Paul, 292n
Gagel, Walter, 30n, 33f, 36n, 38n,
140n, 144n
Gaskell, Peter, 3 In
Gay, Peter, 191n, 324n
Geib, August, 94
Geithner, Otto, 227n
George III, 286n
George, Lloyd, 62n, 1 6 5 ,169n
Gerlach, Hellmuth von, 50n, 186n
Gerschenkron, Alexander, 162n,
295n
Glaser, Ernst, 288n
Godfrey, E. Drexel Jr., 8n
Goethe, 30n, 225n, 234
Göhre, Paul, 195f, 198, 205n, 209,
217f, 225n, 247, 2 7 In
Goldenberg, Boris, 154n, 173n,
189, 232n
Gollwitzer, Heinz, 34n
Gooch, George Peabody, 16n
Gouldner, Alvin, 257n
Gulick, Charles, 179n, 214n, 2 2 If,
241n

Günther, Adolf, 146n
Haase, Hugo, 292
Haeckel, Ernst, 239
Hallgarten, George W. F., 145n
Hänel, Albert, 64, 74
Hänisch, Konrad, 288f
Hansemann, David, 33n
Harbison, Frederick H ., 4n
Harden, Maximilian, 157n
Hardenberg, Karl August Fürst
von, 19
Hasselmann, Wilhelm, 89f, 92, 94,
109f, 178n, 180f, 243f, 262n
Hatzfeldt, Sophie Gräfin von, 42,
47n, 128
Hauptmann, Gerhart, 119, 225
Haym, Rudolf, 32, 139n
Hebbel, Friedrich, 225n
Heffter, Heinrich, 18n
H egel, 239f
Heidegger, Hermann, 262n
Heine, Heinrich, 225n, 234, 323
Heine, W olfgang, 153n
Held, Adolf, 56n, 88, 9 2 -9 5 , 9 9 105, 108
Hellpach, Wilhelm, 199
Hellwig, Fritz, 80n, 146n
Herkner, Heinrich, 147n
Hertling, Georg Freiherr von, 294
Herzfeld, Hans, 145n, 219n
Heuss, Alfred, 158n
Heuss, Theodor, 149n
Heyden, August von, 80n
Heyl zu Herrnsheim, Cornelius,
124
Hilferding, Rudolf, 168ff, 242n
Hintze, Otto, 6 0 -6 3 , 155n, 285f,
299, 302
Hinzpeter, Georg Ernst, 80n

348

Index of Names
Hirsch, Carl, 245
Höchberg, Karl, 56n, 223n
Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst, Fürst
Chlodwig zu, 66n, 8 0 -8 3 , 114f,
117ff, 141, 155f
Holborn, Hajo, 164n
Holek, W enzel, 200, 203, 237f
Holstein, Friedrich von, 80f
Horkheimer, Max, 228n
Hughes, H. Stuart, 12n
Huhn, Willy, 239n
Humboldt, Alexander von, 234
Humboldt, W ilhelm von, 19
Hyndman, Henry M ., 313n
Jagow, Gottlieb von, 156n
Jaurès, Jean, 1 2 2 ,1 3 lf , 168, 273
Joseph II, 15
Kampffmeyer, Paul, 53n, 76n,
l l l n , 119n, 184
Kann, Robert, 313n
Kant, 17
Kantorowicz, Ludwig, 245f
Kardorff, Siegfried von, 80n
Kardorff, W ilhelm von, 73, 80,
1 14n
Kautsky, Benedikt, 177n
Kautsky, Karl, 168, 177ff, 183,
189ff, 228, 242, 273, 292
Kehr, Eckart, 114, 129n, 145n,
214, 260n
Keil, W ilhelm, 237n, 241n
Kerr, Clark, 4n, 320
Klass, Gert von, 3On
Klesl, Melchior Cardinal, 286n
Klopstock, Friedrich Gottlieb, 234
Knoll, Joachim, 36n, 151n
K och, Max, 278n
Kohl, Horst, 70n, 87n, 156n

Kokosky, Samuel, 104n
Kolb, W ilhelm, 153n
Koller, Georg von, 115
Korn, Karl, 266
Korsch, Karl, 58, 167f, 239f
Kruck, Alfred, 162n
Krupp, Alfred, 30n
Krupp, Friedrich, 8 1 ,1 2 4
Kupisch, Karl, 102
Lafargue, Paul, 235
Landauer, Carl, 43n, 271
Langsam, Walter Consuelo, 215n
Lasker, Eduard, 107
Lassalle, Ferdinand, 37n, 4 2 -5 1 ,
58, 89f, 102f, 112, 125, 131n,
163n, 171, 174f, 178, 213, 217,
2 3 5 ,2 3 9 -4 4 , 262n
Laub, Rose, 180n
Legien, Carl, 255, 268, 289f
Lenau, Nikolaus, 234
Lenin, 1 7 1 ,2 2 6 , 239, 293n
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, 230
Liebknecht, Karl, 192, 292
Liebknecht, W ilhelm, 4 8 -5 4 , 9 3 100, 171 f, 175-83, 186, 212f,
217, 220, 222, 225f, 228, 235,
241n, 243, 276, 283
Lipset, Seymour Martin, 4n, 7n,
14n, 221n, 249n, 258n
Lorwin, Val R., 4n
Louis XIV, 286n
Ludendorff, Erich, 294
Lukacs, Georg, 58
Luther, Martin, 4 6 ,4 9
Luxemburg, Rosa, 192, 269, 280,
283, 292
Maehl, William, 160, 280n, 287n
Maerker, Georg, 203n

Index of Names
Man, Hendrik de, 163ff, 190n,

201ff
Mannheim, Karl, 2 8 In
Marat, Jean Paul, 244
Marcuse, Herbert, 228n
Marks, Harry J., 169n
Marshall, Thomas Humphrey, 7n
Marx, 20, 42, 4 8 -5 4 , 57, 99ff, 112,
125, 164n, 166, 172-82, 189f,
199ff, 217, 235, 239f, 262n,
281n
Massing, Paul, 55n, 93n, 162n,
190n, 262n, 276n, 278n
Matthias, Erich, 189n
Mayer, Gustav, 42n, 49ff, 54, 76n,
8 8 n ,1 3 1 n
Mayer, Jacob Peter, 147
Mazarin, 286n
Mehring, Franz, 43n, 49n, 163n,
189, 195, 209f, 221n, 239
Meinecke, Friedrich, 294
Mende, Fritz, 47n
Mengelberg, Kaethe, 36n
Metternich, Klemens Fürst von, 19
Metzner, Theodor, 56n
Meyer, Eduard, 312
Meyer, Karl W ., 292n
Meyer, Rudolf, 157
Michels, Robert, 50n, 186n, 190n,
194f, 199, 2 4 9 -5 7 , 259ff, 264n,
266, 270, 2 7 2 -7 7 , 282f, 288n,
310
Miethke, Franz, 152n
Mill, John Stuart, 140n
Millerand, Alexandre, 277n
Miquel, Johannes von, 145f, 156
Mohl, Robert von, 155
Molkenbuhr, Hermann, 225
Moltke, Helmuth von, 216f
Mommsen, Theodor, 157f

349
Mommsen, W olfgang, 147n, 252ff
Montesquieu, 155
Most, Johann, 89, 91f, 175f, 178n,
180f
Müller, Alexander von, 80n
Müller, Hans, 187n
Müller, Hermann, 186n, 230
Myers, Charles A ., 4n
Napoleon 1 , 16, 18f, 21, 25, 234
Napoleon III, 23, 34f, 115
Naum ann, Friedrich, 74, 86, 103,
147, 149ff, 196n
Neufeld, Maurice E., 8n
N evill, Dorothy, 313n
Nicolai, Walter, 247n
Niebergall, Friedrich, 157
Nom ad, Max, 89n
Noske, Gustav, 280
Nürnberger, Richard, 149n
Oldenburg-Januschau, Elard von,
83n, 216
Oncken, Hermann, 43n, 146n, 163n
Oppenheim, Heinrich Bernhard,
139
Orwell, George, 321
Ostrogorskii, M oisei Iakovlevich,
252, 254
Pack, W olfgang, 73n
Pareto, Vilfredo, 3 I l f , 322
Penzler, Johannes, 142n
Peus, Heinrich, 133
Pinson, Koppel S., 119n, 195n
Pirker, Theo, 258n
Pitt, William the Elder, 286n
Platen, August Graf von, 234
Popp, Adelheid, 206ff, 216, 235,
264n

Index of Names
Posadowsky, Arthur Graf von,
142n
Poschinger, Heinrich Ritter von,
214n
Posse, Ernst H ., 277n
Post, Julius, 146n
Prager, Eugen, 160, 198
Pribram, Karl, 289n
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph, 1 7 2 ,1 7 4 ,
233
Puttkamer, Robert von, 24, 144,
214
Radek, Karl, 242n
Ramm, Thilo, 43n
Ranke, Leopold von, 101 f
Rathenau, Walther, 151 ,3 2 3
Reinhardt, Kurt F., 163n
Reuter, Fritz, 225n
Rheinbaben, Georg von, 125
Ricardo, David, 109
Rich, Norm an, 80n
Richelieu, 286n
Richter, Eugen, 55, 74, 144, 152,
236f
Rickert, Heinrich, 74
Riehl, Wilhelm, 30n
Riesser, Jacob, 152n
Rimlinger, Gaston, 9n
Ritter, Emil, 162n
Ritter, Gerhard, 18n, 78n, 117n
Ritter, Gerhard A ., 1 6 If, 191n,
249n, 273f
Rodbertus, Karl, 109, 178
Roesicke, Richard, 146n
Roggenbach, Franz von, 144n
Roon, Albrecht von, 216
Rosenberg, Arthur, 22n, 58, 71,
74n, 77n, 167, 169, 286n
Rosenberg, Hans, 15n

350
Rostow, Walt W ., 4n, 26, 320
Roth, Günther, 323n
Rothfels, Hans, 35n, 65n, 68, 87n,
142n
Rotteck, Karl von, 155
Rousseau, 250, 321
Ruge, Arnold, 100
Rümelin, Gustav, 144n
Russell, Bertrand, 73n
Saitschick, Robert, 75n
Samuel, Richard H ., 222n
Sartorius von Walthershausen, A u­
gust, 25n
Schäffle, Albert, 105, 106
Scheidemann, Philipp, 280, 294f,
215f, 246n, 323
Scheu, Andreas, 234, 238
Schilfert, Gerhard, 29f
Schiller, 225n, 234
Schippel, Max, 153n
Schlesinger, Arthur M., 170n
Schmoller, Gustav von, 109, 137—
41, 165n, 258n
Schoenlank, Bruno, 225
Schorske, Carl, 16In, 266n, 269n,
278n, 283, 289n, 324n
Schramm, Carl August, 177ff
Schröder, Wilhelm, 55n, 132n,
163n, 182, 222n, 238n, 266n
Schücking, Lothar, 113, 145n
Schulz, Heinrich, 230f
Schulze-Delitzsch, Hermann, 33,
38n, 40, 222n
Schumpeter, Joseph, 113f, 165,
321
Schuster, Richard, 48n, 88-99,
lO lf, 105, 108f, 121, 141n, 239,
243f

Index of Names
Schwarzenberg, Adam Graf von,
286n
Schweitzer, Johann Baptist von,
4 7 -5 1 , 163n, 171, 243n, 262n
Schwenger, Rudolf, 146n
Selznick, Philip, 188, 257
Sender, Toni, 258n
Severing, Carl, 197f, 215f, 225n,
234, 238, 290
Shanahan, William O., 149n
Sheppard, Harold L., 14n
Shils, Edward A ., 312n, 325n
Shuchman, Abraham, 1 5 In
Siemens, Werner von, 147n
Simon, Walter, 18n
Singer, Paul, 186n, 188n, 198
Sismondi, Sismonde, 140n
Sloan, Henry, 153n
Smith, Adam, 109
Sohm, Rudolf, 129n
Solf, Wilhelm, 294n
Sombart, Werner, 101, 13 If, 168n,
230
Sonnemann, Leopold, 55
Sorel, Georges, 251
Sponsel, Friedrich, 149n
Stadelmann, Rudolf, 78n
Stahl, Friedrich Julius, 62f
Steiger, Edgar, 224ff, 228
Stein, August, 156n
Stein, Karl Reichsfreiherr vom, 18
Stein, Lorenz von, 36
Stern, Alfred, 16n
Sternheim, Andries, 222n, 296n
Stoecker, Adolf, 78, 93, 149, 196n
Stolper, Gustav, 25n
Stosch, Albrecht von, 144n
Streckfuss, A dolf, 37n
Stresemann, Gustav, 152n, 323
Strobel, Heinrich, 134n, 263n

351
Stumm-Halberg, Carl Ferdinand
Freiherr von, 80f, 124, 146
Sue, Eugène, 233
Sybel, Heinrich von, 36
Talmon, Jacob Leib, 7n
Thimme, Annelise, 139n, 146n
Thimme, Friedrich, 289n
Thomas, Richard Hinton, 222n
Tocqueville, 39
Tönnies, Ferdinand, 105, 153n,
220n
Treitschke, Heinrich von, 104,139,
141, 146f, 151
Treue, Wilhelm, I62n
Uhland, Ludwig, 195, 234, 238
Ulam, Adam, 4n
Unruh, Hans Viktor von, 1 4 0 ,143f
Vahlteich, Julius, 39ff, 46, 48n, 51,
175f, 178f, 222, 231, 233
Varein, H einz Joseph, 16In, 268n
Viereck, Louis, 178
Virchow, Rudolf, 74, 144
Vogelstein, Julie, 265n
Vogt, August, 48n
Volkmann, Erich, 68n, 297n
Vollmar, Georg von, 185n, 209f,
273
Vorster, Julius, 147n
W achenheim, Hedwig, 153n
Wagener, Hermann, 35f
Wagner, Richard, 204n
W aldeck-Rousseau, Pierre, 277n
Weber, Max, 147ff, 150f, 24 9 -5 6 ,
275, 296f, 299-304, 31 If, 318
Weiguny, Anton, 203f
Weitling, Wilhelm, 233

352

Index of Names
Werner, Lothar, 162n
Wieland, Christoph Martin, 234
W iese, Leopold von, 142n
William I, 21 f, 64, 72, 75, 87, 111,
115f, 118, 181, 2 1 5 -1 8
William II, 24, 66, 70f, 7 8 -8 3 ,1 0 6 ,
1 13-18, 125, 142, 150, 184,
215f, 219, 282, 286, 297

Winnig, August, 262n
Wolff, Hertha, 142n
Wolff, Kurt H ., 323n
Wolff, Theodor, 127n, 156n
Yinger, Milton, 159n
Zeller, Eduard, 280
Zetkin, Clara, 265

